Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: 6 of 2016
Citation: SCC 171, for the proposition that suspicion,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/108045700/

[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Paban Kumar Tarafdar vs The State Of West Bengal on 6 September, 2021
Author:
Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya
Bench:
Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya
In the High Court at Calcutta
                     Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction
                              Appellate Side

The Hon'ble Justice Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya

                            C.R.A. No.407 of 2016

                          Paban Kumar Tarafdar
                                    Vs.
                         The State of West Bengal



For the appellant                    :         Mr. Devojyoti Barman

For the State-respondents            :         Mr. Imran Ali,
Mr. Mirza Firoj Ahmed Begg

Hearing concluded on                 :         01.09.2021

Judgment on                          :         06.09.2021


Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J:-
1.    The instant appeal has been preferred against a judgment and order

      of conviction against the appellant under
Section 8
of the Protection of

      Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as

      'the
POCSO   Act
'),   whereby    the    appellant   was   sentenced   to

      imprisonment for three years and a fine of Rupees Ten Thousand

      (Rs.10,000/-), in default of payment, rigorous imprisonment (R.I.) for

      three months more.
2.    Learned counsel for the appellant argues that there were several

      discrepancies in the prosecution case.       Whereas Mamata Saha, the

      mother of the alleged victim stated in her complaint lodged with the
2
police that the victim went to the house of the accused with one

     Unnati Tarafdar at 7:30 p.m., she stated in her statement recorded

     under
Section 164
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (
Cr.P.C
.) that the

     victim went with Mala Saha, which she corroborated in her deposition.
3.   On the other hand, the victim was silent about such incident in her

     statement under
Section 164
, Cr.P.C. but deposed in evidence that

     she had gone with Pritanshu Tarafdar to the house of the accused.
4.   Further, Mamata Saha (mother of the victim) made contradictory

     statements, by complaining before the police that Unnati Tarafdar had

     told the victim to return home and study, whereas in her statement

     under
Section 164
, Cr.P.C., she stated that the mother of the child

     Pritanshu asked the accused to drop her home. The victim, in her

     statement under
Section 164
, Cr.P.C., was silent on such aspect, but

     stated in her deposition that her aunt, Unnati told her to return to her

     house with the accused, whereas Mamata Saha contradicted such

     statement in her deposition by saying that it was Mala Saha who

     asked her daughter to return home.
5.   That apart, Mamata, in her police complaint, stated that the victim

     told Paban (the accused) to take her home, whereas, in her statement

     under
Section 164
, Cr.P.C., Mamata Saha said that Unnati Tarafdar

     asked Paban to take the victim home.
6.   It is next contended that, whereas the consistent statement of Mamata

     Saha in her complaint and statement under
Section 164
, Cr.P.C.,

     corroborated the stand taken by the victim in her statement under
3
Section 164
, Cr.P.C., and her deposition, Mamata added in her

      deposition that the accused 'forcibly' took the victim to his room.
7.    Even regarding the factual details, it is submitted that there are

      several discrepancies between the statements made by the victim

      child and her mother in their statements made in deposition as well

      as in their statements under Section 164, Cr.P.C.
8.    Learned counsel further argues that the reason for the delay of more

      than 24 hours in lodging the complaint after the alleged incident was

      never explained either by the witnesses or discovered during

      investigation.
9.    Although the immediate neighbours or persons mentioned in the

      sketch map were never arrayed as charge-sheet witnesses, the Trial

      Court convicted the appellant without any material evidence.
10.   Mamata allegedly rushed on the night of the incident to talk to the

      accused. While doing so, she was admittedly not accompanied by any

      member of her family, including her husband, or any person from the

      neighbourhood. That apart, none of the several family members of the

      accused witnessed the alleged incident, which is unusual since, at

      7:30 p.m. in the evening, at least some of the family members of the

      accused ought to have been present in the house of the accused,

      particularly in view of the incident having taken place in a rural area.
11.   The husband of the de facto complainant, who is admittedly the head

      of the family, was neither examined by the police nor produced as a
4
witness in court. Despite there being seven rooms in the house of the

      accused, as extracted in evidence, the exact room where the alleged

      incident occurred was not identified by the police or the witnesses.
12.   Above all, it is argued that the medical examination of the victim girl

      by two doctors ruled out any case of the assault on the victim's private

      parts or anywhere else in her body. The medical examination of the

      accused described him to be devoid of normal erectile function.
13.   Moreover, there was no eye-witness to the alleged incident and the

      evidence of all the prosecution witnesses were at best hearsay and

      could not be said to be supportive or corroborative evidence in favour

      of the prosecution case.
14.   Mala Saha, PW 6, with whom the victim girl allegedly went to the

      house of the accused, denied the incident.
15.   The said Mala Saha also stated about a family feud between the

      families of the accused and the victim.      It has also come out in

      evidence that the illegal activities of the de facto complainant led to

      the neighbourhood people having strained relationship with the

      mother of the victim, which could have led, as an aftermath, to the

      complaint.    Learned counsel highlights the fact that the victim

      admitted in her cross-examination that she had been 'tutored' by her

      mother to give her statements under Section 164, Cr. P.C.
16.   It is further argued that the circumstances of the case do not lead to

      any presumption that the offence was committed by the accused, who
5
is a 74 years old retired school teacher. The wearing apparel of the

      victim girl was handed over to police only after being washed. There is

      no mention of the accused person being sexually potent in Exhibit

      No.8.   Vital witnesses like the child Pritanshu or his mother were

      never produced as witnesses, thereby giving rise to an adverse

      inference against the victim.
17.   Learned counsel for the appellant next relied on certain judgments in

      support of his contentions.
18.   The first of such judgment is
Narender Kumar Vs. State (NCT of Delhi
),

      reported at (2012) 7 SCC 171, for the proposition that suspicion,

      however strong, cannot be the basis of conviction. The prosecution

      has to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt and if the story of

      the prosecution is improbable and not corroborated, the accused is

      entitled to benefit of doubt.
19.   Learned counsel next places reliance on
Harbeer Singh and another

      Vs. Sheeshpal and others
, reported at AIR 2016 SC 4958, for the

      proposition that the burden of proving the case beyond all reasonable

      doubt lies on the prosecution and it never shifts.    If two views are

      possible, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his

      innocence, the view favourable to the accused should be adopted.
20.   Learned counsel next relies upon
Upendra Pradhan Vs. State of

      Orissa
, reported at AIR 2015 (Supp.) SC 1265, in support of the same

      proposition, that the view favouring the accused should be accepted.
6
21.   Learned counsel then relies on
Gulu Santra @ Ghunu Santra Vs. The

      State of West Bengal
, reported at 2020 Supreme (Cal) 491, to

      strengthen his argument that the oral testimony of the victim,

      claiming to have been violated, not being supported by the two doctors

      upon   their   medical    examination,    would      render   her   testimony

      improbable. The credibility of such witness, being thus tainted with

      doubt in view of the medical evidence of two doctors, will hardly pave

      the way for attracting the presumption available under
Section 29
of

      the POCSO Act.
22.   Learned counsel for the appellant then cites
Litan Sarkar Vs. State of

      West Bengal
, reported at 2020 Supreme (Cal) 97, where a Division

      Bench of this Court had recorded the findings of the same Trial Judge,

      against whose judgment the present appeal has been preferred. By

      placing particular reliance on portions of the Paragraph Nos.6 and 7 of

      the report, where the findings of the Trial Judge were quoted, learned

      counsel submits that the language therein was exactly similar to the

      language used in the present judgment. It is argued that the Learned

      Trial Judge is in the habit of relying on such clichés and pre-
conceived   notions,     without   any   objective    consideration   of   the

      materials on record. The said case also involved an offence under the
POCSO Act
.
23.   Learned counsel next relies on
Amol Vs. State of Maharashtra
,

      reported at (2018) Supreme (Mah) 2023, wherein the Nagpur Bench of

      the Bombay High Court held that the statutory presumption under
7
Section 29
of the POCSO Act must be understood and tested on the

      anvil of the golden thread which runs through the web of the criminal

      jurisprudence system in this country that an accused is presumed to

      be innocent till the guilt is conclusively established beyond reasonable

      doubt. It was held that it is trite law that suspicion is not a substitute

      of proof.
24.   Learned counsel next cites the judgment rendered in
Sahid Hossain

      Biswas Vs. State
of west Bengal, reported at (2017) 3 CalLT 243,

      wherein it was observed by the learned Single Judge that a conjoint

      reading of the statutory provisions in the light of the definitions of

      certain expressions as mentioned therein would show that in a

      prosecution under the
POCSO Act
an accused is to prove 'the

      contrary', that is, he has to prove that he has not committed the

      offence and he is innocent. It is, therefore, an essential pre-requisite

      that the foundational facts of the prosecution case must be

      established by leading evidence before the aforesaid statutory

      presumption is triggered in to shift the onus on the accused to prove

      the contrary. The presumption does not take away the essential duty

      of the court, it was held, to analyse the evidence on record in the light

      of the special features of a particular case, e.g. patent absurdities or

      inherent infirmities in the prosecution version or existence of

      entrenched enmity between the accused and victim giving rise to an

      irresistible inference of falsehood in the prosecution case while
8
determining whether the accused has discharged his onus and

      established his innocence in the given facts of a case.
25.   Next relying on an unreported judgment of the Nagpur Bench of

      Bombay High Court, in the case of Sadhu S/O Motilal Turra (In Jail) vs.

      State of Maharashtra Thr. Police, delivered on June 27, 2018 learned

      counsel for the appellant argues that, although a presumption under
Section 29
of the POCSO Act arises, such a presumption cannot be

      absolute. There can be no doubt about the proposition that no

      presumption is absolute and that every presumption is rebuttable, it

      was held in the report.
26.   While controverting such submissions, learned counsel for the State

      contends that it was held in
Harbeer Singh and another
(supra), itself

      that
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. provides that delay in recording the

      statement of a witnesses is not fatal if duly explained, although delay

      would cast a doubt upon the prosecution case if witnesses were

      available but statements were not recorded.
27.   Learned counsel for the State next places reliance on the judgment of
Yogesh Singh vs. Mahabeer Singh & Ors.
, reported at (2017) 11 SCC

      195, in support of his submission that it is well-settled law that

      evidence of a child witness must find adequate corroboration before it

      is relied upon, as the rule of corroboration is of practical wisdom than

      of law. However, it is not the law that if a witness is a child, his

      evidence shall be rejected, even if it is found reliable. The law is that

      the evidence of a child witness must be evaluated more carefully and
9
with greater circumspection because a child is susceptible to be

      swayed by what others tell him and thus a child witness is an easy

      prey to tutoring.
28.   It is submitted by learned counsel for the State that the evidence on

      record and the statement of the victim were sufficient, read in

      conjunction, to indict the convict.
29.   Upon considering the submissions of the parties, it is seen that the

      alleged discrepancies in evidence, relied on by the appellant, are

      minor in nature and cannot be said to have vitiated the credibility of

      the witness of the victim child and her mother.
30.   The statements made by the victim and her mother in their respective

      statements before the police as well as in their depositions do not

      carry contradictions which are mutually destructive. The factum of

      the present case, accompanying the victim to the house of the

      accused, differed only in respect of the victim having stated that she

      visited the house of the accused with her friend, another child, while

      her mother said that she had gone with one Mala Saha.        At other

      places, the name of Unnati was mentioned as one of the persons

      accompanying the victim. There could have been minor lapses in

      memory of the witnesses, which fall within the normal margin of error,

      bringing all the more the credibility of the witnesses, who are but

      humans having imperfect memories, and shows that the witnesses

      were not tutored to corroborate each other's versions.
10
31.   One of the primary arguments of the accused was that the doctors'

      evidence regarding 'sexual assault' having not been established. The

      expression 'sexual assault', as used in
Section 7
of the POCSO Act, is

      wide in nature and includes a touch with sexual intent to the private

      parts of a child or making the child touch the private parts of the

      accused and also encompasses "any other act with sexual intent

      which involves physical contact without penetration".      Hence, the

      medical practitioners, being laymen in law, might very well have used

      the expression 'sexual assault' in the general connotation of the term

      and not in the wider sense as envisaged in
Section 7
of the POCSO

      Act.
32.   The mere statement in the doctors' evidence that the reddish hue on

      the vagina of the victim could have been the result of an itch does not

      absolve the accused from the liability, as cast under
Section 29
of the

      POCSO Act, to dispel any doubt as regards the probability of such

      'itch' having been a result of sexual assault within the purview of
Section 7
of the POCSO Act.
33.   In the present case, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses as well

      as the initial statement given by the victim child under
Section 164
of

      the Cr.P.C. substantially corroborate each other and it cannot, by any

      stretch of imagination, be said that the prosecution case was

      improbable or not credible from the perspective of a prudent person.
34.   Considering the tender age of the victim at the relevant juncture, that

      is, seven years, it would not be improbable that she could not resist

      the indecent attempts of the accused to such an extent so as to leave
11
serious abrasions or injury on the body of the victim. The veracity of

      the prosecution case is further strengthened by the fact that the

      victim and her family were well-acquainted with the accused, thereby

      preempting the scope of prior suspicion in the mind of the victim or

      her parents regarding the accused.
35.   The absence of recent nail scratch marks of the accused over any part

      of the body of the victim, ipso facto, does not vitiate the probability of

      the prosecution case being true, without any specific evidence

      regarding the length of the nail of the accused.
36.   Moreover, the circumstances alleged, coupled with the tender age of

      the minor victim, clearly raise a presumption under
Section 29
of the

      POCSO Act, so as to cast the burden of proving innocence on the

      accused.
37.   The mere argument that it was improbable for the other family

      members of the accused not to be aware of the alleged offences at 7:30

      p.m. is neither here nor there and can only exist in the realm of

      conjecture.   Hence, in the absence of any cogent rebuttal to such

      presumption on the part of the accused, the presumption attains

      finality, justifying conviction.
38.   The number of rooms being seven in the house of the accused is

      totally irrelevant, since the victim child clearly indicated that she went

      to the room of the accused, thereby specifically designating a single

      room out of the available rooms in the house.        Thus, no doubt or

      suspicion can be cast on the prosecution case for non-mention of the
12
exact location of the room to displace the presumption under
Section

      29
of the POCSO Act.
39.   In such view of the matter, the Trial Judge committed no error of law

      and or fact in holding the accused person to be guilty of the offences

      punishable under
Section 8
of the POCSO Act and in convicting the

      accused   as   well   as   subsequently       sentencing    the   accused     to

      imprisonment for three years as well as fine of Rupees Ten Thousand

      (Rs.10,000/-), in default of payment of which the convict will have to

      undergo rigorous imprisonment (R.I.) for three months more.                  The

      Trial Judge, correctly, set off and dove-tailed the period of detention

      already   undergone    by    the    convict    against     the    sentence    of

      imprisonment.
40.   As such, there is no merit whatsoever in the appeal.
41.   Accordingly, C.R.A. No.407 of 2016 is dismissed on contest, thereby

      affirming the conviction and sentence handed over to the appellant

      vide the impugned judgment and order, respectively dated May 5 and

      May 6 of 2016 passed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge,

      Second Court at Krishnagar, District- Nadia in Sessions Trial No.

      V(XII) of 2015, arising out of Sessions Case No. 02(09) of 2015 (Spl).
( Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J. )


      LATER

      On the prayer of learned counsel for the appellant and keeping in view

      the fact that the appellant is an octogenarian and is at present
13
enlarged on bail, the operation of the judgment and order is stayed till

October 5, 2021.
(Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J.)
