Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 7 of 1870
Citation: SCC 660, a three-judge Bench of the Supreme Court
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/109983140/

[Cites
45
, Cited by
0
]
Punjab-Haryana High Court
Mahalovya Gauba vs State Of Punjab And Another on 8 February, 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB & HARYANA
                    AT CHANDIGARH
211
                                                   CRM-M-42269-2020
                                            Date of decision: 08.02.2021

Mahalovya Gauba                                                .....Petitioner

                                  Versus

State of Punjab and another                                 .....Respondents

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUN KUMAR TYAGI

Present :    Mr. Umesh Aggarwal, Advocate
             for the petitioner.

             Mr. P.S. Walia, Asstt. A.G., Punjab
             for respondent No.1-State.

             Mr. Anil Chawla, Advocate
             for respondent No.2.

             None for U.T., Chandigarh.

             Ms. Geeta Sharma, DAG, Haryana.

                                    ****

ARUN KUMAR TYAGI, J (ORAL)
(The case has been taken up for hearing through video

conferencing.)

             The petitioner has filed the present petition under Section

439(2) read with
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

(hereinafter referred to as "the
Cr.P.C
.") for cancellation of anticipatory

bail granted to respondent No.2 vide order dated 19.11.2020 passed by

learned Sessions Judge, Amritsar in case FIR No.0006 dated

13.11.2020 registered under
Sections 406
and
420
of the Indian Penal

Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "the
IPC
") at Police Station NRI

Amritsar.
2.           Vide order dated 19.01.2021, the petitioner and respondent

No.2 were required to appear before this Court in person through video


                                 1 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                         -2-
conferencing. The petitioner and respondent No.2 appeared before this

Court on 25.01.2021 and stated that they have arrived at compromise

but the terms of the compromise are yet to be reduced in writing while

the possession of the cars has been handed over to the police along with

post-dated cheques.
3.            Due to both the offences subject matter of the present case

being compoundable with the permission of the Court, vide order dated

25.01.2021 the matter was ordered to be referred to Lok Adalat,

Amritsar and the petitioner and respondent No.2 were directed to

appear before the Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,

Amritsar, who was directed to place their matter before the Lok Adalat

on 29.01.2021 or any other date convenient to the parties for recording

the terms of amicable settlement between the parties as agreed to by

them and pass appropriate orders on the basis thereof in terms of the

provisions of the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
.
4.            The Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Amritsar

was directed to send a report in this regard along with a copy of the

order passed by the District Legal Services Authority, Amritsar on

reference by the parties.
5.            This Court also observed in its order dated 25.01.2021 that

in number of cases the parties express desire to compromise or

compromises are arrived at between the parties at the time of

proceedings before the police officers during investigation/preliminary

enquiry proceedings but such compromises do not terminate the

proceedings      and    subject      the    parties    to    further   legal

procedures/litigations. More often than not compromises arrived at by



                                  2 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                        -3-
the parties before the police officers are subsequently challenged on the

grounds of coercion/undue influence/undue pressure by the police

officers. Furthermore, such compromises when not complied with do

not provide any remedy of seeking execution and further criminal or

civil litigation starts again. In view of the permissibility of institution

of pre-litigative references and reference of compoundable criminal

cases and disposal thereof on the basis of amicable settlement between

the parties by Lok Adalat under the provisions of the
Legal Services

Authorities Act, 1987
it would be appropriate that such matters are

referred to Secretary of the District Legal Services Authority concerned

for placing the same before the Lok Adalat for recording terms of the

settlement/making efforts for amicable settlement between the parties

and passing appropriate legally executable orders on the basis thereof.

Reference of such matters to Lok Adalat will guard against and rule out

subsequent allegations of coercion/undue influence/undue pressure by

the police officers and disposal of such references by the Lok Adalat

will bind the parties, provide them the remedy of execution in case of

non-compliance and thereby prevent unnecessary litigation.
6.           Accordingly, while ordering notice to State of Haryana and

U.T., Chandigarh as similar cases of compromise between the parties

before the police officers also arose in the State of Haryana and U.T.,

Chandigarh, it was directed that in compoundable cases where the

parties express their desire to settle the matter/arrive at compromise, the

matter may be referred to Secretary, District Legal Services Authority

concerned for placing the same before the Lok Adalat for recording

terms of settlement/making efforts for amicable settlement between the



                                 3 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                      -4-
parties and disposal of the matter on the basis of such amicable

settlement by passing appropriate orders executable in accordance with

law. In cases of non-compoundable offences, which involve civil as

well as criminal cause of action and in which quashing of FIR is

permissible in accordance with law on the basis of compromise, where

the parties express desire of compromising the matter or arrive at

settlement, the matter may be referred to the Secretary, District Legal

Services Authority concerned for placing the same before the Lok

Adalat for recording terms of settlement/making efforts for amicable

settlement between the parties and disposal of the matter on the basis of

such amicable settlement by passing appropriate orders executable in

accordance with law regarding civil cause of action with direction to

the parties to approach this Court for quashing of FIR on the basis of

the compromise.
7.          Ms. Geeta Sharma, DAG, Haryana has appeared for State

of Haryana but none has appeared for U.T., Chandigarh today.
8.          In compliance with order dated 25.01.2021, learned Chief

Judicial Magistrate-cum-Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,

Amritsar has sent report dated 04.02.2021 along with report dated

03.02.2021 of learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Amritsar which is

taken on record.
9.          In his report dated 04.02.2021 learned Chief Judicial

Magistrate-cum-Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Amritsar

has mentioned that Special Lok Adalat Bench was constituted and

report dated 03.02.2021 had been received along with statements of the

parties and compromise. In his report dated 03.02.2021 learned Judicial



                                 4 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                      -5-
Magistrate 1st Class, Amritsar has mentioned that statements of

petitioner-complainant Mahalovya Gauba and respondent No.2-accused

Parminder Singh qua compromise were recorded. As per statements of

the parties, they compromised the matter voluntarily and without any

coercion or undue influence and they admitted the genuineness of the

compromise.
10.         Learned Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that in

view of the compromise, the petitioner does not want to continue with

the present petition for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to

respondent No.2 by learned Sessions Judge, Amritsar and the same

may be dismissed as withdrawn.
11.         In view of the report of learned Judicial Magistrate 1st

Class, Amritsar and submissions made by learned Counsel for the

petitioner, the petition for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to

respondent No.2 by learned Sessions Judge, Amritsar is hereby

dismissed as withdrawn.
12.         However, it may be observed here that even though in

compliance with order dated 25.01.2021 the matter was referred to Lok

Adalat and on reference of the matter the Lok Adalat recorded the

compromise and statements of the parties but the Lok Adalat did not

pass any award/order on the reference. The matter, therefore, requires

detailed examination and also intervention by issuance of appropriate

directions by this Court in exercise of powers under
Section 482
of the

Cr.P.C. for giving effect to its order and also preventing abuse of

process and securing the ends of justice.
13.
The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
was enacted to



                                 5 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                      -6-
give effect to the provisions of
Article 39A
of the Constitution of India

and to constitute legal services authorities to provide free and

competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society to ensure

that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by

reason of economic or other disabilities, and to organise Lok Adalats to

secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice on a basis

of equal opportunity.
14.
Chapter VI of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
deals with Lok Adalats and embodies the provisions from
Section 19
to
22
which read as under:-
"19. Organization of Lok Adalats.-
(1) Every State Authority or District Authority or the
            Supreme Court Legal Services Committee or every High
            Court Legal Services Committee or, as the case may be,
            Taluk Legal Services Committee may organise Lok Adalats
            at such intervals and places and for exercising such
            jurisdiction and for such areas as it thinks fit.
            (2) Every Lok Adalat organised for an area shall consist of
            such number of -
(a) serving or retired judicial officers ; and
(b) other persons, of the area as may be specified by the
            State Authority or the District Authority or the Supreme
            Court Legal Services Committee or the High Court Legal
            Services Committee, or as the case may be, the Taluk
            Legal Services Committee, organising such Lok Adalat.
            (3) The experience and qualification of other persons
            referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) for Lok Adalats
            organised by the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee
            shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
            Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
            (4) The experience and qualifications of other persons
            referred to in clause (b) of Sub-section (2) for Lok Adalats
            other than referred to in sub-section (3) shall be such as
            may be prescribed by the State Government in
            consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
            (5) A Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and
            to arrive at a compromise or settlement between the
            parties to a dispute in respect of -
(i) any case pending before ; or



                                 6 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                   -7-
(ii) any matter which is falling within the jurisdiction of,
         and is not brought before, any Court for which the Lok
         Adalat is organised :
Provided that the Lok Adalat shall have no jurisdiction in
         respect of any case or matter relating to an offence not
         compoundable under any law.
(emphasis supplied)
20. Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats.-
(1) Where in any case referred to in clause (i) of sub-
         section (5) of
section 19
; -
(i) (a) the parties thereof agree ; or
(b) one of the parties thereof makes an application to the
         court, for referring the case to the Lok Adalat for
         settlement and if such court is prima facie satisfied that
         there are chances of such settlement ; or
(ii) the court is satisfied that the matter is an appropriate
         one to be taken cognizance of by the Lok Adalat, the
         court shall refer the case to the Lok Adalat
         Provided that no case shall be referred to the Lok Adalat
         under sub-clause (b) of clause (i) or clause (ii) by such
         court except after giving a reasonable opportunity of being
         heard to the parties.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
         for the time being in force, the Authority or Committee
         organising the Lok Adalat under sub-section (1) of
section 19
may, on receipt of an application from any
         one of the parties to any matter referred to in clause (ii)
         of sub-section (5) of
section 19
that such matter needs to
         be determined by a Lok Adalat, refer such matter to the
         Lok Adalat, for determination :
Provided that no matter shall be referred to the Lok Adalat
         except after giving a reasonable opportunity of being
         heard to the other party.
(3) Where any case is referred to a Lok Adalat under sub-
section (1) or where a reference has been made to it
         under sub-section (2), the Lok Adalat shall proceed to
         dispose of the case or matter and arrive at a compromise
         or settlement between the parties.
(4) Every Lok Adalat shall, while determining any
         reference before it under this Act, act with utmost
         expedition to arrive at a compromise or settlement
         between the parties and shall be guided by the principles
         of justice, equity, fair play and other legal principles.
         (5) Where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the
         ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived
         at between the parties, the record of the case shall be
         returned by it to the court, from which the reference has
         been received under Sub-section (1) for disposal in

                             7 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                   -8-
accordance with law.
(6) Where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the
         ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived
         at between the parties, in a matter referred to in sub-
         section (2), that Lok Adalat shall advice the parties to seek
         remedy in a court.
(7)Where the record of the case is returned under sub-
         section (5) to the Court, such court shall proceed to deal
         with such case from the stage, which was reached before
         such reference under sub-section (1)."
(emphasis supplied)
21. Award of Lok Adalat-
(1) Every award of the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be
         a decree of a civil court or, as the case may be, an order
         of any other court and where a compromise or settlement
         has been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat in a case referred to
         under sub-section (1) of
Section 20
, the court-fee paid in
         such case shall be refunded in the manner provided under
         the
Court Fees Act, 1870
(7 of 1870).
(2)Every award made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and
         binding on all the parties to the dispute, and no appeal
         shall lie to any court against the award.
(emphasis supplied)
22. Powers of Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat-
         (1) The Lok Adalat shall, for the purposes of holding any
         determination under this Act, have the same powers as are
         vested in a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
,
         1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of the
         following matters, namely:-
(a) The summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
         witness and examining him on oath.
(b) The discovery and production of any document.
(c) The reception of evidence on affidavits.
(d) The requisitioning of any public record or document or
         copy of such record or document from any court or office
         and
(e) Such other matters as may be prescribed.
         (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers
         contained in sub-section (1), every Lok Adalat shall have
         the requisite powers to specify its own procedure for the
         determination of any dispute coming before it.
         (3) All proceedings before a Lok Adalat shall be deemed to
         be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
Sections
         193
,
219
and
228
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
         and every Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a civil court
         for the purpose of Section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the


                             8 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                      -9-
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973(2 of 1974).
15.
In
State of Punjab and another Vs. Jalour Singh and

others
: (2008) 2 SCC 660, a three-judge Bench of the Supreme Court

observed that the endeavour and effort of the Lok Adalats should be to

guide and persuade the parties, with reference to principles of justice,

equity and fair play to compromise and settle the dispute by explaining

the pros and cons, strengths and weaknesses, advantages and

disadvantages of their respective claims.
16.         However, in
M.P. State Legal Services Authority Vs.

Prateek Jain and another
: (2014) 10 SCC 690, Hon'ble Supreme

Court cautioned that the Court should not refer even those matters to

the Lok Adalat which have already been settled just to inflate the

figures of decision/settlement before the Lok Adalat for statistical

purposes.
17.         A perusal of
Section 19(5)
of the Legal Services

Authorities Act, 1987 shows that jurisdiction is thereby conferred on

Lok Adalat to determine and to arrive at a compromise or settlement

between the parties to a dispute in respect of (i) any case pending

before the Court; or (ii) any matter which is falling within the

jurisdiction of but is not brought before the Court for which the Lok

Adalat is organised. Therefore, any civil or criminal matter at pre-

litigative stage can be referred to Lok Adalat. The proviso to
Section 19

(5)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 excludes jurisdiction of

the Lok Adalat in respect of any case or matter relating to an offence

not compoundable under any law. It is manifest from the same that Lok

Adalat constituted under
Section 19
of the Legal Services Authorities



                                 9 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                        -10-
Act, 1987 shall have no jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a

compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of

any matter relating to an offence not compoundable under any law. (see

Urmila Masomat Vs. State of Bihar, (Patna) : 2016(4) PLJR 264.)
18.            However, the proviso to
Section 19 (5)
of the Legal

Services Authorities Act, 1987 by necessary implication means that the

Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a

compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of

any matter relating to an offence compoundable under any law.
19.            Criminal cases involving compoundable offences fall into

two categories: (i) criminal cases compoundable under
Section 320(1)
of the Cr.P.C. without permission of the Court and (ii) criminal cases

compoundable under
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C. with permission of

the Court. Since jurisdiction of the Lok Adalat is barred only in respect

of non-compoundable criminal cases, Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction

to deal with compoundable criminal cases of both the categories

compoundable under
Section 320(1)
of the Cr.P.C. without permission

of the Court and compoundable under
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C.

with permission of the Court.
20.            There is no doubt whatsoever that Lok Adalat has

jurisdiction    to   deal   with    criminal   cases    involving   offences

compoundable under
Section 320(1)
of the Cr.P.C. without permission

of the Court and record compromise in such cases and pass orders of

acquittal/award executable as Civil Court decree. However, there is a

serious doubt as to whether Lok Adalat constitutes "the Court" within

the meaning of
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C. and whether Lok Adalat



                                   10 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -11-
can grant permission to compound offences compoundable under
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C. with permission of the Court.
21.         A statute is an edict of the Legislature and the conventional

way of interpreting or construing a statue is to seek the 'intention' of

Legislature. The duty of judicature is to act upon the true intention of

the Legislature--the mens or sententia legis. (See
South Asia

Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. S. Sarup Singh
: AIR 1966 SC 346) If a

statutory provision is open to more than one interpretation the Court

has to choose that interpretation which represents the true intention of

the Legislature. A statute or any enacting provision therein has to be so

construed as to make it effective and operative and the Court must lean

against a construction which reduces it to a futility. The Parliament

would legislate only for the purpose of bringing about an effective

result. The Court has, therefore, to reject that construction which will

defeat the plain intention of the Legislature even though there may be

some inexactitude in the language used. It is incumbent on the Court to

avoid a construction, if reasonably permissible on the language, which

would render a part of the statute devoid of any meaning or application.
(See
Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi Vs. Teja Singh
:
AIR 1959

SC 352 and Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh and another Vs. The State of

Vindhya Pradesh
: AIR 1953 SC 394.) The Parliament conferred on

Lok Adalat the jurisdiction to determine, arrive at compromise and

dispose of on the basis of the compromise dispute between the parties

in respect of any matter relating to an offence compoundable under any

law. The Parliament cannot be said to be unaware of the categorization

of compoundable criminal cases in two categories of offences



                                11 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                          -12-
compoundable       with    permission        of   the   Court   and   offences

compoundable without permission of the Court. However, the

Parliament did not divest Lok Adalat of jurisdiction to deal with and

dispose of dispute in respect of any matter relating to an offence

compoundable with permission of the Court. It is well settled that

power to do a thing includes all incidental powers required to do the

same. Therefore, in the very nature of things, the Parliament cannot be

said to have intended to divest Lok Adalat of the power to grant

permission to compound offences compoundable with permission of the

Court while conferring the jurisdiction to deal with and dispose of

dispute relating to an offence compoundable under any law. The

intention of the Legislature is clear and has to be given full effect

keeping in mind the object of the enactment also and the Court cannot

add/read the words 'compoundable with permission of the Court'

after the words 'not compoundable under any law' in the proviso to
Section 19(5)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.

Consequently, Lok Adalat must be held to have jurisdiction to grant

permission for composition of offences compoundable with permission

of the Court.
22.
Section 20 (3)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987

mandates that where any case is referred to a Lok Adalat under sub-
section 20(1)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or where a

reference has been made to it under sub-
section 20 (2)
of the Legal

Services Authorities Act, 1987, the Lok Adalat shall proceed to dispose

of the case or matter and arrive at a compromise or settlement between

the parties.
Section 20 (5)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987



                                  12 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                       -13-
also mandates the Lok Adalat to return the record of the case to the

court, from which the reference was received,               for disposal in

accordance with law only on the ground that no compromise or

settlement could be arrived at between the parties and no other ground.

It follows that if the parties arrive at compromise/ settlement in a case

compoundable under
Section 320 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. with permission of

the Court, the Lok Adalat can dispose of the same on the basis of

compromise by granting permission to compound and is not bound to

return the case on the ground of the offence being compoundable under
Section 320 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. with permission of the Court.
23.         In view of
Section 21 (1)
of the Legal Services Authorities

Act, 1987 every award of the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a decree

of a civil court or, as the case may be, an order of any other court.
Section 21 (2)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 declares that

every award made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and binding on all the

parties to the dispute, and no appeal shall lie to any court against the

award. Needless to observe here that in case of any fraud exercised on

Lok Adalat such award/order would be liable to set aside.
24.         Even though Lok Adalat is not specifically defined in the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
to be Criminal Court so as to be

treated as the Court as referred to in
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C.,

which deals with the powers of the Court in according permission for

compounding the offence by the persons mentioned in Column No. 3 of

the table appended thereto but in view of provisions of
Section 19(1)
and
21(1)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 Lok Adalat has

to be treated to be the Court for which the same is organized and can



                                13 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                     -14-
pass award/order which is deemed to be decree of Civil Court or an

order of any other court for which the Lok Adalat is organized. It

follows therefrom that under the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
,

criminal cases of compoundable nature can be referred to Lok Adalat

and if the matter is compromised/settled in Lok Adalat, Lok Adalat may

pass order of acquittal under
Section 320(8)
of the Cr.P.C. as if it is a

Criminal Court constituted for that purpose/award executable as Civil

Court decree in view of
Section 21(1)
of the Legal Services Authorities

Act, 1987.
25.          No doubt, in view of proviso to
Section 19 (5)
of the Legal

Services Authorities Act, 1987 there will be a bar to reference of

dispute in respect of any matter relating to an offence not

compoundable under any law, yet there will be no absolute bar in

identifying and referring to the Lok Adalat any matter involved therein

which constitutes a civil dispute between the parties. Similar view has

been taken by Kerala High Court in
Sreedharan Vs. S.I. of Police

(Kerala
) : 2008(24) R.C.R.(Criminal) 449.
26.
In
K. Srinivas Rao Vs. D.A. Deepa
: 2013 (3) SCC 226

Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"35. We, therefore, feel that though offence
             punishable under
Section 498- A
of the IPC is not
             compoundable, in appropriate cases if the parties are
             willing and if it appears to the criminal court that there
             exist elements of settlement, it should direct the parties to
             explore the possibility of settlement through mediation.
             This is, obviously, not to dilute the rigour, efficacy and
             purport of
Section 498-A
of the IPC, but to locate cases
             where the matrimonial dispute can be nipped in bud in an
             equitable manner. The judges, with their expertise, must
             ensure that this exercise does not lead to the erring spouse
             using mediation process to get out of clutches of the law.
             During mediation, the parties can either decide to part
             company on mutually agreed terms or they may decide to


                                14 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -15-
patch up and stay together. In either case for the
            settlement to come through, the complaint will have to be
            quashed. In that event, they can approach the High Court
            and get the complaint quashed. If however they chose not
            to settle, they can proceed with the complaint. In this
            exercise, there is no loss to anyone. If there is settlement,
            the parties will be saved from the trials and tribulations of
            a criminal case and that will reduce the burden on the
            courts which will be in the larger public interest.
            Obviously, the High Court will quash the complaint only if
            after considering all circumstances it finds the settlement
            to be equitable and genuine. Such a course, in our opinion,
            will be beneficial to those who genuinely want to accord a
            quietus to their matrimonial disputes. We would, however,
            like to clarify that reduction of burden of cases on the
            courts will, however, be merely an incidental benefit and
            not the reason for sending the parties for mediation. We
            recognize 'mediation' as an effective method of alternative
            dispute resolution in matrimonial matters and that is the
            reason why we want the parties to explore the possibility
            of settlement through mediation in matrimonial disputes."
27.         The observations in above referred judgment also hold

good in respect of the alternative dispute resolution method of

settlement through Lok Adalat.
28.         Non-compoundable criminal cases may arise out of

property, commercial, family/matrimonial disputes which may involve

civil as well as criminal cause of action. For example criminal case

involving non-compoundable offence of 498-A of the
IPC
arises out of

matrimonial dispute involving questions of restitution of conjugal

rights or dissolution of marriage by decree of divorce, custody of

children and grant of maintenance under
Section 125
of the Cr.P.C. or

the
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956
. Similarly, criminal

cases involving offences punishable under
Section 452
/
326
of the IPC

may      arise      out      of             family   dispute   regarding

inheritance/partition/possession of moveable or immoveable joint

family properties. Cases involving forgery punishable under
Section



                                 15
of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -16-
467 of the
IPC
may involve questions of recovery of money/restitution

of property. In such cases matters involving civil cause of action can

be referred to Lok Adalat which can record compromise between the

parties and pass an award regarding civil cause of action which will be

binding on the parties and executable as Civil Court decree and direct

them to approach the High Court for quashing of the FIR. In the

eventuality of an executory compromise to be complied with by the

parties on quashing of the FIR by the High Court, the Lok Adalat may,

if so considered appropriate, also keep the matter pending till disposal

of the matter regarding quashing of the FIR by the High Court and after

quashing of the FIR by the High Court, pass an award which will be

binding on parties and executable as Civil Court decree.
29.         In cheque dishonour cases more often than not the parties

compromise by stipulating for payment even by issuance of further

cheques in future. Based on such a compromise even the complaint is

withdrawn in some cases where in case of default disputed and

debatable question of restoration of the complaint arises. Generally, the

concerned Judicial Magistrate declines restoration of complaint on the

ground of having no power of review which not only results in apparent

injustice but also increases the work of the Higher Courts for

intervention to prevent miscarriage of justice. Another practice

followed in cases of such compromise is to keep the matter pending till

the entire payment is made which leads to delayed disposal and

attending of the Court on adjourned dates of hearing. In cheque

dishonour cases there can be greater recourse to alternative dispute

resolution mechanism of settlement before Lok Adalat which can on



                                16 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                  -17-
such compromise of the matter pass award executable as Civil Court

decree.
30.
In
K.N. Govindan Kutty Menon Vs. C.D. Shaji
: 2012(1)

R.C.R.(Criminal) 102, a case under
Section 138
of the Negotiable

Instruments Act, 1881 was referred to Lok Adalat constituted under the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
by a Criminal Court where the

parties agreed on terms and provided time for payment of the amount.

The compromise was recorded and accordingly an award was passed by

the Lok Adalat and the criminal case was closed. On default when the

complainant filed an execution petition before the Munsiff''s Court for

realisation of the amount, the Munsiff dismissed the execution petition

on the ground that Criminal Court cannot pass a civil decree even in

Lok Adalat which view was affirmed by Andhra Pradesh High Court.

On appeal the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that if the case under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 is referred to Lok

Adalat by a criminal court and if the matter is settled in Lok Adalat,

then by virtue of the deeming provision contained in
Section 21(1)
of

the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, an award passed by Lok

Adalat based on the compromise has to be treated as a Civil Court

decree capable of execution by a Civil Court. In that case Hon'ble

Supreme Court observed as under:-
"17. From the above discussion, the following
            propositions emerge :
(1) In view of the unambiguous language of
Section
            21
of the Act, every award of the Lok Adalat shall be
            deemed to be a decree of a civil court and as such it is
            executable by that Court.
(2)
The Act
does not make out any such distinction
            between the reference made by a civil court and criminal
            court.
(3) There is no restriction on the power of the Lok


                               17 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -18-
Adalat to pass an award based on the compromise arrived
             at between the parties in respect of cases referred to by
             various Courts (both civil and criminal), Tribunals,
             Family court, Rent Control Court, Consumer Redressal
             Forum, Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal and other
             Forums of similar nature.
(4) Even if a matter is referred by a criminal court
             under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
             and by virtue of the deeming provisions, the award passed
             by the Lok Adalat based on a compromise has to be
             treated as a decree capable of execution by a civil court."
31.          It follows that in cases where the parties arrive at

executory compromises involving payment/performance of contractual/

personal obligation/undertaking in future, passing of award by Lok

Adalat, which will be binding on the parties and executable as Civil

Court decree, will put an end to any further litigation which may arise

in case of non-compliance of such executory compromises.
32.
Section 320 (1)
of the Cr.P.C. does not specifically in so

many words lay down that compounding can be done only after filing

of charge sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. and not before

although use of the expression "with the permission of the Court

before which any prosecution for such offence is pending" in
Section 320(2)
of the Cr.P.C. seems to suggest the same. The question

which arises is whether in compoundable criminal cases offences

involved can be compounded before filing of charge sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. at the stage of investigation.
33.          In Komallaplli Rama Venkata Dandapani Vs. State of

A.P. Through S.H.O. Narsapur Town P.S, 2004 (1) ALT 605 the

Andhra Pradesh High Court has taken the view that in compoundable

criminal cases, the offences can be compounded even before filing of

charge-sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. when the case is still



                                18 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -19-
at the stage of investigation. In that case the Andhra Pradesh High

Court observed as under:-
"When both the complainant and the accused have
            entered into a compromise and are willing to compound
            the offence which is compoundable as per
Section 320
Cr.P.C., 1973 merely because the charge sheet is not filed,
            the Court need not shirk the responsibility to compound
            the offence because there is nothing in
Section 320
Cr.P.C., 1973 to show that compounding can be done only
            after filing of charge sheet. If the offence, which requires
            permission of the Court to do so, is to be compounded, the
            Court can examine the case and decide whether or not to
            accord permission to compound. If it feels that permission
            for compounding can be accorded, it can give the
            permission even when the charge sheet is not filed and the
            case is still under investigation. If the offence intended to
            be compounded does not require permission of the Court
            and if the Court finds that the person with whose consent
            the offence can be compounded has actually given the
            consent for compounding, it can compound the offences
            even when it is at the stage of investigation...."
34.         I am in agreement with the view taken by Andhra Pradesh

High Court. Where the complainant/person concerned and the accused

compromise at the initial stage of investigation, the investigation in

such a case may not be of much use in ascertaining the facts and

circumstances and collecting the evidence due to unwillingness of the

complainant/person concerned and also the accused to cooperate with

the Investigating Officer. In such cases the delay in investigation and

filing of the charge-sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. may not

only cause inconvenience and hardship to the complainant/person

concerned and/or the accused but may also defeat the very purpose of

the compromise. To insist for filing of charge-sheet under
Section 173

(2)
of the Cr.P.C. will not only involve wastage of the time, energy and

resources of the Investigating Agency but will also be an empty

formality for the ritual of acceptance of the composition of the offences



                                19 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                          -20-
by the complainant/person concerned and the accused. Therefore, it will

not only be logical and reasonable but also in furtherance of the

legislative object of the Parliament to hold that              in compoundable

criminal cases, offences involved can be compounded before filing of

charge sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. at the stage of

investigation.
35.         So far as Lok Adalat is concerned, clothing of the same by

the Parliament with jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a

compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of

any matter relating to an offence compoundable under any law which is

falling within the jurisdiction of and is not brought before any Court

for which the Lok Adalat is organized leaves no room for doubt that

offences involved in compoundable criminal cases can be compounded

before Lok Adalat before filing of charge-sheet under
Section 173 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. at the stage of investigation on pre-litigative reference

made to it by the District Legal Services Authority/Taluk Legal

Services Committee organising the Lok Adalat under
Section 20(2)
of

the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
36.         The legal position emerging from analysis of the relevant

statutory provisions and judicial precedents may be summarized as

under:-
(i)   under the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
, Lok

            Adalat organized by the National Legal                    Services

            Authority/State Legal Services Authority/District Legal

            Services Authority/Taluk Legal Services Committee for

            Criminal Courts has jurisdiction to determine and to arrive



                                   20 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                             -21-
at a compromise or settlement between the parties to a

           dispute in respect of any case or matter relating to an

           offence compoundable under any law and arrive at a

           compromise or settlement between the parties and can

           dispose of the case or matter on the basis thereof.
(ii)   In such cases the Lok Adalat has the jurisdiction to

           entertain and allow application for grant of permission to

           compromise and compound offences compoundable with

           permission of the Court.
(iii) In compoundable criminal cases the offences can be

           compounded even before filing of charge-sheet under
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C. when the case is still at the stage

           of investigation.
(iv) Criminal cases involving compoundable offences can be

           referred by the Criminal Court, which has territorial

           jurisdiction to try the compoundable offences involved,

           after registration of the FIR at the stage of investigation

           before filing of the charge sheet or at any stage of the

           proceedings after filing of the charge sheet but before

           judgement    to     Lok        Adalat   and   if   the   matter     is

           compromised/settled in Lok Adalat, Lok Adalat may pass

           award embodying order of acquittal as if it is a Criminal

           Court constituted for that purpose and/or award embodying

           order for payment/performance of contractual/personal

           obligation/undertaking executable as Civil Court decree.
(v)    In compoundable criminal cases where the parties express



                               21 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                 -22-
their desire to settle the matter/arrive at compromise in the

         course of any preliminary enquiry or investigation by the

         Police, the matter may be referred to Secretary, District

         Legal Services Authority concerned for placing the same

         before the Lok Adalat under
Section 20(2)
of the Legal

         Services Authorities Act, 1987 for recording terms of

         settlement/making efforts for amicable settlement between

         the parties and disposal of the matter on the basis of such

         amicable settlement by passing appropriate order/award

         executable in accordance with law.
(vi) In cases of non-compoundable offences arising out of

         matrimonial, family or commercial disputes which involve

         civil as well as criminal causes of action and in which

         quashing of FIR is permissible in accordance with law on

         the basis of compromise, where the parties express desire

         of compromising the matter or arrive at settlement in the

         course of preliminary enquiry or investigation, the matter

         may be referred to the Secretary, District Legal Services

         Authority concerned for placing the same before the Lok

         Adalat under
Section 20(2)
of the Legal Services

         Authorities Act, 1987 and reference can also be made in

         appropriate cases by the concerned Criminal Court to the

         Lok Adalat for making efforts for amicable settlement

         between the parties, recording terms of settlement and

         disposal of the matter on the basis of such amicable

         settlement by passing appropriate order/award executable



                            22 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
CRM-M-42269-2020                                                    -23-
in accordance with law regarding civil cause of action with

             direction to the parties to approach this Court for quashing

             of FIR on the basis of the compromise.
37.          In view of the above referred legal perspective, Lok

Adalat Bench, Amritsar to which the matter was referred was under an

obligation to dispose of the same by passing an order/award executable

as Civil Court decree after giving the parties opportunity to apply for

grant of permission to compound the offences involved and granting

such permission even before filing of the charge-sheet under
Section

173
of the Cr.P.C. while the matter was pending at the stage of

investigation. Accordingly, Lok Adalat Bench, Amritsar would be

bound to take up the matter and dispose of the same in accordance with

law as referred to above.
38.          A copy of this order be supplied to learned State Counsel

representing the States of Punjab and Haryana and be sent to the Public

Prosecutor, U.T., Chandigarh and also to the Director General of

Police, Punjab, Haryana and U.T., Chandigarh respectively for requisite

compliance regarding issuance of appropriate instructions as directed

vide order dated 25.01.2021 and Member Secretaries, State Legal

Services Authorities, Punjab, Haryana and U.T., Chandigarh and to all

District and Sessions Judges in the States of Punjab and Haryana and

U.T., Chandigarh and Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,

Amritsar for information/requisite compliance.
08.02.2021                                    (ARUN KUMAR TYAGI)
Vinay                                                JUDGE
             Whether speaking/reasoned        :   Yes
             Whether reportable               :   Yes



                                23 of 23
::: Downloaded on - 22-08-2021 20:18:29 :::
