Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: AIR 1998 SC 144), and also pointed out that various High
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1113321/

[Cites
20
, Cited by
3
]
Kerala High Court
Samdeep Varghese vs State Of Kerala on 11 June, 2010
Author:
K.Hema
Bench:
K.Hema
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM

Bail Appl..No. 2003 of 2010()


1. SAMDEEP VARGHESE, AGED 38 YEARS,
                      ...  Petitioner

                        Vs



1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY
                       ...       Respondent

2. S.I. OF POLICE, RAJPURA CITY POLICE

3. DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE, RAJPURA

4. DIRECTORATE OF REVENUE INTELLIGENCE,

                For Petitioner  :SRI.GEO PAUL

                For Respondent  :PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

The Hon'ble MRS. Justice K.HEMA

 Dated :11/06/2010

 O R D E R
                                                               C.R.

                             K.HEMA, J.

              ----------------------------------------------

         Bail Application Nos.2003 & 2638 of 2010

           ----------------------------------------------

                     Dated 11th June, 2010.

                              O R D E R
These petitions are filed under section 438 of the

Code of Criminal procedure code (`the Code', for short), for

anticipatory bail.
2. On a complaint filed by the representative of a

Company, which is engaged in the business of trading and

distribution of petrochemicals in India and overseas, a crime

was registered against nine persons, alleging offences under

Sections 65, 66, 66A, C and D of the Information Technology

Act and
Sections 419
and
420
of the Indian Penal Code (`
IPC
'

for short).
3. As per the allegations in the complaint, the company

has    a    web-site      in     the     name       and     and style

`www.jaypolychem.com' but, another web site was set up in

the internet by first accused (Samdeep Varghese @ Sam), who

was dismissed from the company, as under the name and style
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 2
`www.jayplychem.org', in conspiracy with other accused,

including one Preeti and Charanjeet Singh, who are the sister

and brother-in-law of `Sam' and        defamatory and malicious

matters about the company and its directors are made

available in that web site.
4. It is further alleged in the complaint that first accused's

sister and brother-in-law are based in Cochin and they have

been acting in collusion and conspiracy with known and

unknown persons, who have dishonestly and fraudulently

cheated the company and committed acts of forgery,

impersonation etc. In pursuance of the conspiracy, two of the

accused (Amardeep Singh and Rahul) had visited Delhi and

Cochin.
5. The complaint also reveals that first accused and others

sent e-mails from fake e-mail accounts of many of the

customers, suppliers, Bank etc. to malign the name and image

of the Company and its Directors. It is further alleged thus:
"The defamation campaign run by all the said persons named

above has caused immense damage to the name and

reputation of the Company. The Company has also suffered

losses of several crores of Rupees for producers and suppliers,
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                3
and customers were unable to do business".
6. It is also alleged in the complaint thus: "Company has

also learnt that Mr.Varghese, Mr.Amardeed Singh and other

above referred persons in collusion with other known and

unknown persons have impersonated different individuals, real

or imaginary and have made and used forged electronic

records, created false e-mail accounts to send information that

they knew was false and grossly offensive to cause annoyance,

inconvenience,     danger,   obstruction,   injury   etc., to  the

Company, its Directors, employees and other persons with the

further malafide and deliberate intention of causing annoyance

and inconvenience and deceive the addresses and recipients

about the origin of such information/messages."
7. There is also an allegation that first accused, in collusion

with other accused "have been passing on and exchanging

confidential information of the Company to each other and to

third parties". The further allegation is that first accused along

with his sister and brother-in-law and one Rahul had financed a

trip of one of the accused Amardeep and his wife to Cochin and

Munnar although the Company was informed that he was going

to Kulu-Manali for his honeymoon. Those persons parted with
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               4
certain confidential information of the Company which resulted

in great financial loss to the Company, besides loss of business

and reputation.
8. The further allegation against the accused is this: "The

said persons are withholding certain other information of

confidential nature for which they are blackmailing the

Company and its Directors and are seeking extortion money for

not returning the confidential documents and material which

they have unauthorisedly and illegally taken from the Company

records of some of which was handed over to them or they had

access to as employees of the Company."
9. On the above allegations made in the First Information

Statement, a crime was registered against first accused, his

sister and brother-in-law and few others, at Rajpura city police

station, in Punjab. According    to respondents, later,  it was

revealed on investigation that huge amount of money was

brought by first accused and other accused and handed over to

first accused's mother, who is now reportedly, arrayed accused

no.6 (Smt. Mariamma- who is not named in the FIR). She also

allegedly hatched a criminal conspiracy with all the other

accused to commit the various offences.
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               5
10. The first accused and his mother (A6) filed separate

petitions for anticipatory bail. According to them, they are

absolutely innocent of the allegations made. The first accused

was working as General Manager in Reliance India Limited for a

very long time, and he earned a very good reputation. Later, he

joined the company of the complainant and worked as the Vice

President for a period of two years. In the mean time, he came

to know that the company is indulging in illegal activities and

various fraudulent money transactions and committing various

offences and hence, he did not intend to continue in the

company. He resigned from the job.
11. According to petitioners, the company was aware that

first accused was having confidential information about the

shady manner in which the company was run and fearing that

he would leak out relevant informations to authorities, a false

complaint is filed against him, as a shield. First accused, in fact,

made a complaint to the Director of Revenue Intelligence ( who

is shown as 4th respondent in these petitions) regarding the

various illegalities in which the Company is indulged in, and

proceedings are now pending against the company. (Learned

Standing Counsel appearing for 4th respondent submitted that a
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                6
complaint is received raising serious allegations against the

Company and its Directors and enquiry is being conducted).
12. It is also submitted that the only       motive of the

Company is to wreak vengeance against first accused and to

destroy his reputation. His whole family is dragged into criminal

proceedings, without any basis. The first accused's sister and

brother-in-law were implicated in the complaint, as per the FIR.

and much later, first accused's mother who is aged 78 years is

also dragged in as an accused, on flimsy grounds and with

ulterior motive, as a pressure tactics, it is submitted.
13. The first accused's sister and brother-in-law, who are

Doctors, filed application for anticipatory bail and this Court

was pleased to allow the application, as per order dated

1.3.2010 in B.A.1163/2010 [reported in
Koshy v. State of

Kerala
(2010(1) KLT 945], it is submitted. The allegations

against first accused in the said bail application are almost

similar in nature and, as against first accused's mother, those

are   still  lesser  in  substance   and     content.   In  such

circumstances, there is no reason to refuse anticipatory bail to

petitioners, it is submitted.
14. This petition is strongly opposed by the second and
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                7
third respondents, who are represented by Sri. Naresh Kumar

Singhi, and Sri. Jayant K.Sud, learned Additional Advocates

Generals for the State of Punjab and also by Sri. Vineeth

Malhotra, who       was also heard on behalf of the defacto

complainant. It was strenously argued by all of them that this

Court has no jurisdiction to consider or entertain the

anticipatory bail applications. The offences are allegedly

committed within the limits of Rajpura city police station in

Patiala District in the State of Punjab.      Therefore, the only

courts which can grant anticipatory bail are the High Court of

Punjab or the sessions court concerned in Punjab, within whose

jurisdiction the crime is committed, it is strenuously contended.
15. Learned Advocate General cited a decision of

the Supreme Court in
State of Assam v. R.K.Krishna Kumar
(AIR 1998 SC 144), and also pointed out that various High

Courts of this country, followed the dictum
laid down in
the

above decision
and held in same lines that the court which can

grant anticipatory bail is the court within whose jurisdiction, the

offence is committed. The following decisions were cited: Capt.
Satish Kumar Sharma v. Delhi Administration and

others
(ILR 1990(2) Delhi 203), In re : ram Badan (1982
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                8
Crl.L.J. 1961 Calcutta), Kailashpati Kedia v. State of

Maharashtra and others (1996 M.P.L.J. 847(Maharashtra).
16. It was    also pointed out by learned Additional

Advocate General that a petition was filed before the High

Court of Punjab by first accused's sister and brother-in-law, for

quashing the proceedings initiated against them and it is still

pending. No stay is granted in the case. They also moved the

Sessions Court in Punjab for anticipatory bail. The petitioners

herein being their close relatives being brother and mother are

aware of the pendency of the said proceedings and nothing

prevents them from moving the appropriate forum, it is argued.

Petitioners may be directed to approach the courts in Punjab

which alone have jurisdiction to entertain the petitions and if

these petitions are entertained, it will encourage forum

shopping, it is submitted.
17. It is also submitted that though an anticipatory

bail order was passed in favour of first accused's sister and

brother-in-law, by another learned judge of this court, in
Koshy

v. State
of kerala        2010(1) KLT 945, the said order is

challenged by the State of Punjab before the Supreme Court

on various grounds, including jurisdiction and notice has been
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                9
ordered to the accused.     It is also pointed out that as per the

order passed by this Court in the anticipatory bail application,

there is a direction that petitioners therein shall make

themselves available for interrogation by the Investigating

Officer    in the office of the City Police Commissioner,

Ernakulam, on such date and dates, as intimated by the City

Police Commissioner, Ernakulam.
18. The above direction in
Koshy
's case is illegal,

in the light of the dictum
laid down by
the Supreme Court in

D.Benupani, Asst.Director, Enforcement Directorate

(FERA) v. A.K.Bajoria (JT 1997(9) SC 379), wherein it is

clearly laid down that such directions cannot be granted by the

court while granting anticipatory bail, it is strenuously argued.

The fixing of place for interrogation is within the realm of

investigation and the court cannot intrude into it, it is strongly

argued. In such circumstances, the mere fact that an order of

anticipatory bail is granted in favour of two of the co-accused

may not be made a ground to grant anticipatory bail to the

petitioners, it is argued.
19. It is also pointed out that from the arguments

advanced on behalf of petitioners it is clear that first accused is
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               10
not residing at present within Kerala and that he is still in

Singapore. But, his address shown in the cause title is that of

Cochin. He has not subjected himself to the jurisdiction of this

Court; he has not filed even a vakalath, but only a memo is

filed by learned counsel for first accused, on behalf of him

though he is residing abroad, it is pointed out. (Learned counsel

for petitioners clarified that as per the relevant Rules      in

Kerala, a memo filed by counsel is sufficient and vakalath is

not insisted upon in criminal matters. That is why the Registry

has not noted any defect and the petition was admitted by this

court).
20. Learned counsel for petitioners refuted the

above arguments and contended that an anticipatory bail

application can be entertained by any High court within whose

jurisdiction a person apprehends arrest. He placed reliance

upon the decisions reported in
C.I.Mathew v. Govt. of India
(
1984 KLT 942) and Madhusoodan v. Supdt. of Police
(1992

(2) KLT 83). It is further submitted that     first accused is a

permanent resident of Kerala and the address shown in the

cause title is his permanent address. He may come to Kerala

at any time and he is apprehending arrest within Kerala, since
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                  11
a crime was registered and a non-bailable warrant was issued

against him, it is submitted.
21. In this context, another argument is raised by learned

counsel for petitioners that the arrest warrant issued in this

case is not legal or proper.      According to him, it is illegal for

the Magistrate Court to         issue a warrant for securing the

presence of an accused, for the purpose of investigation in the

light of the decision in
State v. Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar

9AIR
1997 SC 2494).         It is based on an illegal warrant that

petitioners are now being sought to be arrested, it is pointed

out. Further, there was no necessity at all to obtain a warrant

from the court,      since police can arrest the accused even

without warrant, as cognizable offences are involved in this

case. The over-enthusiasm of the police in procuring warrant

raises an apprehension that petitioners may be harassed in

case they are arrested under an illegal warrant, it is argued.
22. It is also submitted that two Additional Advocate

Generals and another counsel from the State of Punjab have

come all the way from Punjab to Kerala, to argue a case which

does not even involve any public interest, but it is between two

private individuals only.     In    the  above     circumstances,
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                12
petitioners reasonably apprehend that if they are arrested,

they will be subjected to torture and harassment by police.

They will also suffer irreparable injury and loss, if anticipatory

bail is not granted, it submitted.
23.   Learned Advocate Generals maintained the

strong stand that there is no bar in issuing a non-bailable

warrant for the purpose of investigation.     According to him,

other High Courts in
Neela J.Shah v. State of Gujarat
(1998

CRL.LJ (Guj) 2228) and State of Manipur v. Vikas Yadav

[2000 CRL.LJ 4229 (Guwahati)]       considered the very same

question and following the dictum laid down in
Dawood

Ibrahim
's case, it was held that there is no bar for issuance

of warrant by the Magistrate, for the purpose of investigation.
24. Learned Additional Advocate General also clarified

that it is only because accused's presence could not be

procured by the Investigating Officers that they were forced to

get an order of non-bailable warrant from the Magistrate Court

concerned. It is only legal and no malice can be attributed to

the investigating agency on this count.        Further, merely

because the Additional Advocate Generals have appeared in

this case for the State concerned and argued the case, it
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 13
cannot be contended that there is malice. It is only to assist

this court that they are here, it is submitted.
25. Learned Additional Advocate General also argued that

many important facts can be brought to light only if petitioners

are subjected to custodial interrogation. Though a direction was

issued by this court in
Koshy
's case while granting

anticipatory bail to the co-accused, who are none other than

first accused's sister (she is also daughter of sixth accused) and

her husband       to appear before the Sub Divisional Judicial

Magistrate, Rajpura within two months, they have not complied

with the said direction. The respondents reasonably believe

that petitioners may also follow the same path, in which event,

investigation will be at peril.
The urgency in the case of

application for anticipatory bail has been emphasised by the

Supreme Court in M.R.Vijayakumar v. State of A.P. in 1988

Crl.L.J.14.     Taking   into   account   all  these    facts  and

circumstances, it is submitted that both the petitions deserve

to be dismissed.
26. I also heard Sri.M.S.Breeze and Sri.Tek Chand, learned

Public Prosecutors on behalf of the State of Kerala.         They

limited their arguments to jurisdiction of this Court. According
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                14
to them, whatever is stated by the Supreme Court in
Krishnakumar
's case confines to the facts of said case. It is

also specifically stated therein that it was unnecessary to

consider whether the Bombay High Court has jurisdiction or

not. On the facts of that case, the Supreme Court found that

the cases should be considered by High Court of Guwahati, it is

pointed out.
27. Learned Public Prosecutors for the State of Kerala also

supported the arguments advanced that the            court within

whose jurisdiction the arrest is apprehended also has

jurisdiction to entertain the application for anticipatory bail.

They also cited a decision of the Sikkim High Court reported in
Rama Shankar Prasad v. The State
(1998 Crl.L.J. 1926),

which is in tune with the decisions of this Court in
C.I.Mathew

v. Govt. of India
(
1984 KLT 942) and Madhusoodan v.

Supdt. of Police
(1992(2) KLT 83) on the question of

jurisdiction. It is held therein as follows :
"We are of the view that the place where
            the arrest is threatened should also confer
            jurisdiction for entertainment of a matter
            under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C.       Hence, the
            application is quite in order so far as the
            jurisdiction is concerned."
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 15
28. On hearing both sides, I find that I must first decide

whether this court has           jurisdiction to entertain these

anticipatory bail applications or not.      The Supreme Court in
State of Assam v. R.K.Krishna Kumar
(1998 SC 144) held

as follows:
"We do not think it necessary to decide whether
                  Bombay High Court has jurisdiction to entertain
                  the applications filed by the respondents. All
                  the same, the question of granting anticipatory
                  bail to any person who is allegedly connected
                  with the offences in question must for all
                  practical purposes be considered by the High
                  Court of Guwahati within whose territorial
                  jurisdiction such activities should have been
                  perpetrated. In view of the conceded position
                  that appellants were not heard by the High
                  Court, we set aside the impugned orders on
                  that ground alone. The applications are to be
                  disposed of after hearing the appellants also.
                  For that purpose we order that the applications
                  for anticipatory bail filed by the respondents
                  would stand transferred to the High Court of
                  Guwahati where those applications would be
                  heard by a Division Bench of that High Court
                  and appropriate orders be passed thereon"
(Emphasis supplied)
29.
In
Krishnakumar
's case cited above the offences

were committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the State of

Assam but, anticipatory bail applications were moved before

the Bombay High Court. The Bombay High Court allowed the

applications, without hearing the respondents and hence,
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 16
the Director General of Police filed appeals against the said

orders before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court, while

considering the said appeals held thus: "in view of the

conceded position that appellants were not heard by the High

Court, we set aside the impugned orders on that ground

alone".
30. So, it is clear that the bail orders were set aside

only on the ground that the appellants were not heard and it

was not on the ground that the Bombay High Court has no

jurisdiction. It is also relevant to note that the Supreme Court

held that it was not "necessary to decide whether Bombay High

Court has jurisdiction to entertain the applications filed by the

respondents" though an argument was raised that the Bombay

High Court        had no jurisdiction to entertain the bail

applications, since the offences were committed within State

of Assam.
31. It is true that the Supreme Court also held in
the

above decision
that the question of granting anticipatory bail to

any person, who is allegedly connected with the offences in

question "must for all practical purposes be considered by the

High Court of Guwahati within whose territorial jurisdiction
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                17
such activities should have been perpetrated." It is pertinent

to note that what is referred to by the Supreme Court is, "the

High Court of Guwahati" and not "any High Court". In such

circumstances, it appears to me that the Supreme Court was

not laying down a general proposition but, the appeals were

disposed of on facts holding that the anticipatory bail

applications
in that case
are to be considered by the High Court

of Guwahati within the jurisdiction of which the activities were

perpetrated. Of course, there can be no doubt that anticipatory

bail can be granted by the courts, within whose jurisdiction the

offence is committed.
32. It is also relevant to note that the Supreme

Court did not consider in
Krishnakumar
's case whether the

High Court within whose jurisdiction arrest is apprehended has

jurisdiction to entertain the application or not.
A division bench

of this court held in
Madhusoodan v. Supdt. of Police
(1992(2) KLT 83) that the court within whose jurisdiction the

arrest is apprehended can grant anticipatory bail. The relevant

portion from
the above decision
is extracted as hereunder:
"If release from arrest is necessary, the place where
       arrest is made has some significance for such release. In
       our view the place where a person apprehends arrest is
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               18
a sure test for determining jurisdiction of "the" High
       Court or "the" Court of Session as the case may be. If the
       applicant can satisfy the court that his apprehension that
       he would be arrested at a place within the territorial
       limits of a particular court is based on reasonable
       grounds, we would say that the High Court or the
       Sessions Court having jurisdiction over that place has
       authority to exercise powers under.
S.438
of the Code."
33. I may mention here that the judgments of the

Supreme Court in krishnakumar's case and that of the

Division Bench decision are authored by the same learned

judge. I also find that there is nothing in krishnakumar's

case which runs contrary to what is laid down on jurisdiction in

the decision of the    Division Bench of this Court. No other

decision of the Supreme Court was cited by the respondents

which would over rule the two decisions of this court in
C.I.Mathew v. Govt. of India
(
1984 KLT 942) and

Madhusoodan v. Supdt. of Police
(1992(2) KLT 83) or

render them, not good law. In the above circumstances, I am

bound to follow the decisions of this Court and I hold that the

High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction a person

apprehends arrest also can grant anticipatory bail. There is no

bar for a High Court in entertaining          an application for

anticipatory bail, if a person apprehends arrest       within its
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                19
jurisdiction.
34. Therefore, the next question to be decided is, whether

the petitioners apprehend arrest within the State of Kerala. It

has come out from the arguments advanced by                 learned

counsel for petitioners that first accused is working abroad in

Singapore and he is also residing there. He is not, at present,

residing in Kerala. In such circumstances, I find that there can

be no reasonable apprehension of arrest of petitioner within the

state of kerala.
35. A reading of
section 438
of the code shows that a

person who seeks anticipatory bail shall satisfy the court that

"he has a reason to believe that he may be arrested". It is not

enough if he merely states that he has an apprehension of

arrest. The court must be satisfied that the apprehension of

arrest expressed by him is reasonable and not merely fanciful.

In a case in which non-bailable offence is allegedly committed

outside the jurisdiction of the High Court, before which a person

has moved for anticipatory bail he must also satisfy the court

that he may be arrested within its territorial jurisdiction.
36. According to me, it is also necessary that petitioner

satisfies the court that there is an imminent likelihood of arrest
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                20
within its territorial jurisdiction. A remote possibility of an

arrest, on an indefinite future date, is not what is contemplated

by the provision contained in
section 438
of the code.       It is

relevant to mention here that as per the dictum
laid down by
the Supreme Court, in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of

Punjab
(1980)2 SCC 565, it is the "imminence of a likely

arrest founded on a reasonable belief" which is relevant while

considering an anticipatory bail.
37. The applicant in an anticipatory bail application

has therefore, to satisfy the High Court that there is likelihood

of his imminent arrest within its territorial jurisdiction.  The

apprehended arrest shall not be too remote, in respect of time

factor. Depending on the facts and circumstances of each case,

delay in arrest of an accused may turn out to be detrimental to

the investigation, and the court must bear in mind this fact,

while considering an anticipatory bail application.
38. While considering the case of first accused, I am not

satisfied that there is any imminence of likelihood of his arrest

within State of Kerala, since he is still in Singapore. He has no

case that he is coming to Kerala in the near future. He has also

not    stated     when he is coming        down to Kerala. The
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               21
apprehension expressed by first accused who is in Singapore

that he would be arrested in Kerala is a fanciful apprehension

and    not a reasonable one. In such circumstances, in the

absence of any reasonable apprehension of arrest of first

accused within Kerala, his application for anticipatory bail

cannot be entertained by this court.
39. However, the case of the 6th accused (Smt.

Mariamma) stands on a totally different footing.       She is a

permanent resident of Kerala and, she is residing at Cochin.

There is no dispute on this fact. Admittedly, she is under threat

of arrest and respondents also seek her arrest and custodial

interrogation. But, on the sole ground that 6th accused

apprehends arrest within the State of Kerala, this Court cannot

pass an order of anticipatory bail, even for a restricted period.

The court must "think it fit" to grant the relief, taking into

consideration all the relevant aspects.
40. According to prosecution, 6th accused "conspired" to

commit the various offences and she also received huge

amounts of money and other items from first accused and

thereby, committed the various offences alleged. Learned

counsel for     other 6th accused strenuously argued that 6th
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               22
accused is not an accused as per the First Information Report.

FI statement is totally silent about her role in the offences in

any manner. The complainant had no case that she had any

thing to do with the case. But, much later, she was implicated

in this case. The present case is that she, in conspiracy with

other accused, committed the offences under
sections 120
B,

408, 467, 468, 471, 419, 420 of
IPC
.
41. Learned counsel for petitioners argued that 6th

accused was implicated      only as a pressure tactics, as she

happened to be first accused's mother. She is aged 78 years.

She is a retired professor in a college. She has absolutely no

role in any of the transactions with the company. There is

absolutely no materials or evidence on record to connect her

with the crime, in the light of the above submissions          by

petitioners' counsel and in the light of the strong objection

raised by the opposite side, I am forced to go into the merits of

the case, since it is absolutely essential to take decision

whether I can grant an order in favour of 6th accused under
Section 438
of the Code. The mere apprehension of arrest in a

non-bailable offence is not sufficient for invoking
Section 438
.
42. Hence, I directed the respondents to furnish the
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                  23
details of evidence and materials, if any, which they have

collected during investigation against 6th accused. The copy of

the statements of certain witnesses, who were questioned by

the police, on different dates, in February and March, 2010.,

were produced before me. Learned Additional Advocate

General cautioned this Court that the investigation is at the

initial stage and the materials so far collected have to be kept

confidential, failing which, it is likely to affect the investigation

adversely. I do agree with him and I have to direct the Registry

to keep all the materials which are handed over to this court

during hearing in a sealed cover and I do so.
43. On a reading of the first information statement (the

relevant portions from the FIS are quoted in this order while

narrating the facts), I am satisfied that there are only general

and vague allegations that certain acts are committed by

certain accused. On a reading of the F.I.Statement, I cannot

brush aside the arguments advanced by petitioners' counsel

that none of the ingredients of the alleged offences under
IPC
are made out from the allegations made in the FI Statement.
44.    The materials placed before me consist of

Statements of five witnesses which are translated in English. It
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 24
is very vaguely stated in those statements of the witnesses

that certain named persons (I would avoid mentioning their

names, taking into consideration the stage of investigation),

"put necessary documents and valuable items and gave them

to the mother of" first accused. In another statement, it is

recorded,    "I sent about Rs.5/6 crores through Mr.X ( I am

avoiding the name of the said person) to his mother", referring

to the 6th accused. It is on the basis of such statements that

the 6th accused is now sought to be arrested.
45. The Supreme Court, in
Joginder kumar v. State of

UP and others
in 1994 SCC cri 1172 cautioned            that "no

arrest can be made in a routine manner on a mere allegation of

commission of an offence made against a person. It would be

prudent for a police officer in the interest of protection of the

constitutional rights of a citizen and perhaps in his own interest

that no arrest should be made without a reasonable satisfaction

reached after some investigation as to the genuineness and

bona fides of a complaint and a reasonable belief both as to the

person's complicity and even so as to the need to effect

arrest".
46. The Supreme Court also held in
Joginder
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               25
kumar
's case that denying a person of his liberty is a serious

matter.       A person is not liable to arrest merely on the

suspicion of complicity in an offence. There must be some

reasonable justification in the opinion of the officer effecting

that such arrest is necessary and justified. Except in heinous

offences, an arrest must be avoided if a police officer issues

notice to person to attend the Station House and not to leave

the Station without permission would do."
47. I would also take note of the fact that 6th accused is

willing to be interrogated at any time during pendency of these

cases and that she also submitted through her counsel that her

whole house can be searched. She also volunteered to furnish

all the details of her Bank accounts etc. to the respondents.

She has also expressed her willingness to co-operate with the

investigation.
In the above circumstances, keeping in mind,

what the Supreme Court stated in
Joginder kumar
's case I

have no doubt that if 6th accused is arrested on the vague

allegations revealed from the materials furnished, she will

suffer great hardship and irreparable injuries.      I am also

satisfied that she apprehends arrest within the State of Kerala.

It is true that 6th accused can seek remedy before the Punjab
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                26
High Court also, but the mere fact that she has remedy

elsewhere does not dissuade me from exercising my powers

under
section 438
of the code in this case, especially after

going through the materials made available to this Court.
48.
In this context, learned counsel for petitioners put

forward another contention, placing reliance upon a decision

reported in
State v. Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar
(AIR 1997 SC

2494) that non-bailable warrant cannot be issued by the court

under
Section 73
of the Code for the purpose of aiding

investigation. It will be clear from the dictum
laid down in
the

said decision
that the order passed by learned Magistrate is

illegal and contrary to the dictum
laid down by
the Supreme

Court in
the above decision
, it is strenuously argued.
49. I find some force in the submissions made. It cannot

be disputed that even without a warrant from a court, police

can arrest the accused, if he has committed cognizable

offence. So, a question will arise why the warrant is obtained.

Since malicious intention is attributed to the respondents and

such motive is a relevant factor to decide whether this is a fit

case to grant anticipatory bail or not, I shall proceed to

consider whether the warrant procured in this case is legal or
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                27
not. If the arrest is effected with malicious intention, it is likely

that the accused will be tortured on arrest.
50. Both sides would submit that the warrant issued in

this case is under
Section 73
of the Code. It is pointed out by

learned Additional Advocate General that there is nothing in
Section 73
to indicate that a warrant cannot be issued during

the course of investigation or that it can be issued only in a

proceedings pending before the court.
Section 73
reads as

follows :
"73. Warrant may be directed to any person.--(1)
            The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the
            first class may direct a warrant to any person within
            his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped
            convict, proclaimed offender or of any person who is
            accused of a non-bailable offence and is evading
            arrest.
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the
            receipt of the warrant, and shall execute it if the
            person for whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters
            on, any land or other property under this charge.
(3) When the person against whom such warrant is
            issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the
            warrant to the nearest police officer, who shall cause
            him to be taken before a Magistrate having
            jurisdiction in the case, unless security is taken
            under
Section 71
."
51. A reading of
section 73
shows as per sub-section (1)

of
section 73
, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                  28
the first class may direct a warrant "to any person" within his

local jurisdiction for the arrest of that of any person who is

accused of a non-bailable offence and is evading arrest. As per
section 70
of the code, every warrant of arrest issued by a

Court under the Code shall be in writing, signed by the

presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the

Court. The form of the warrant is available in           Form 2 of

Schedule 11 of the Code. It is clear from the language used in

the Form that when a person is arrested under a warrant, he

shall be produced before the court. The warrant in Form 2 does

not direct production of the arrested person before the

investigating officer or police for investigation.
52. Further, Sub-Section (3) of
Section 73
of the Code lays

down that once a person is arrested on a warrant issued under
Section 73(1)
of the Code, he shall be taken before the

Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, through the nearest

police officer. Therefore, it is evident that if a person is arrested

on the strength of an arrest warrant issued under
Section 73(1)
of the Code, he shall be produced before the Magistrate having

jurisdiction of the case, as stated in
Section 73(3)
. That means,

the purpose of issuing warrant under
Section 73
of the Code is,
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               29
production of accused before the Magistrate having jurisdiction

and not before police, to aid investigation.
53. Thus, it is clear that any person who is sought to be

arrested in execution of a warrant issued under
section 73
shall be produced ultimately, before the Magistrate and not

before the investigating officer. If a warrant under
section 73
is

issued for arrest of any person who evades arrest, such person

shall, on his arrest, be produced before the Magistrate and not

before the investigating officer for the purpose of investigation.

It follows therefore, that a warrant cannot be issued by the

Magistrate       under
Section 73
,       for production before

investigating officer, to aid investigation. There is nothing in
sections 70
to
73
and the Form of warrant to indicate that the

person who is arrested under a warrant under the Code can be

produced before the police for the purpose of investigation.
54. That is what the Supreme Court has held in the

decision reported in
State v. Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar
(AIR

1997 SC 2494). The relevant portion can be extracted as

follows :
"Since warrant is, and can be issued for
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                30
appearance before the court only and
            not    before    the    police   and    since
            authorisation for detention in police custody
            is neither to be given as a matter of courses
            nor on the mere asking of the police, but
            only after exercise of judicial discretion
            based on materials placed before him, it
            cannot be said that warrant of arrest under
Section 73
of the Code could be issued by
            the Courts solely for the production of
            accused    before   the  police  in   aid  of
            investigation".
55. Learned Additional Advocate General strenuously

argued that the Supreme Court has held that
Section 73
can be

invoked for issuance of warrant in the course of investigation

also. He has also referred to the decision of the Delhi High

Court in Mrigendra Jalan v. State and another (2008(4) JCC

2925), wherein it was held that it is only legal to issue warrant

under
Section 73
of the Code for the purpose of investigation,

following
Dawood Ibrahim
's case.
56. On going through the decision of the Supreme Court,

I find that the Supreme Court has considered the various steps

to be taken during investigation like test identification parade,

taking of specimen handwriting etc. and held that warrant is,

and can be issued "for appearance before the court only

and not before the police". It was also noted therein that
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               31
authorisation for detention in police custody is neither to be

given as a matter of course nor on the mere asking of the

police, but only after exercise of judicial discretion based on

materials placed before him. Hence, "it cannot be said that

warrant of arrest under
Section 73
of the Code could be issued

by the Courts solely for the production of accused before the

police in aid of investigation".
57. Thus, a reading of the relevant provisions of the Code

and the decision of the Supreme Court in Dawood Ibrahim's

case would support the contention raised by petitioners.        I

have no doubt to hold          that even though the court is

empowered to issue warrant under
Section 73
, during the

course of investigation also, a warrant shall be issued only for

procuring presence of a person before the court and not before

the Investigating Officer or police, for aiding investigation. In

the light of the relevant provisions contained in
sections 70
to
73
and Form no. 2 of Schedule II of the Code and

pronouncement of law by the Supreme Court in Dawood

Ibrahim, with due respect, I would say, I am not persuaded by

the dictum
laid down in
the decisions of the other High Courts,

referred to by the learned Additional Advocate Generals.
B.A.2003 & 2638/10               32
58. The respondent has no case that warrant is procured

from the court for the arrest of of 6th accused for the purpose of

test identification parade or for getting specimen handwriting

or to get police custody through court. A warrant is obtained

solely for the purpose of investigation. A copy of the warrant

issued in this crime was made available to me by learned

counsel for petitioners for perusal.      On going through the

warrant produced, I find that it can hardly be called a warrant

issued under
Section 73
.
59. The warrant is not in Form no 2. None of the

provisions relating to issuance of warrant under Chapter VI are

followed in issuing the said warrant. No Police Officer or any

other person is authorised to arrest and I am sure that based

on the warrant of this nature produced before me, no Police

Officer can arrest any accused. On the strength of a mere

paper, which is signed by a judicial Magistrate containing the

seal which is not in accordance with form no.2 of Schedule II of

the Code, no Police Officer shall arrest a person, purporting

such paper to be a warrant issued under
Section 73
.
60. In the above circumstances, I am satisfied that if the

6th accused is arrested on the basis of the vague allegations
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                  33
made against her,and on the strength of a warrant issued

under
Section 73
of the Code to aid investigation, it is likely

that she may suffer irreparable injury.         Her apprehension

appears to be reasonable. Taking all the above aspects into

consideration, I think it only fit to grant anticipatory bail to 6th

accused. However, the request of first accused cannot be

entertained, since I am not satisfied that he is likely to be

arrested in Kerala in near future.
61. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that the

accused seeks to move the courts in Punjab for appropriate

reliefs, but the courts are closed for vacation and hence, it will

be difficult to get orders       immediately. Learned Additional

Advocate General submitted that the High Court of Punjab will

be re-opening on 28th of June and that the Sessions Courts and

Magistrate Courts are functioning, even during vacation.

Taking all the facts into consideration, the following order is

passed:
(1) The petition for anticipatory bail by first accused is

           dismissed, as not maintainable.
(2) The 6th accused shall, in the event of her arrest, be

           released on bail, on her executing a bond for
B.A.2003 & 2638/10                 34
Rs.25,000/- with two solvent sureties each for the like

           sum, to the satisfaction of the arresting Officer, on

           the following conditions :
(i) She shall report before the Investigating

                       Officer,  as and when directed, and co-
operate with the investigation.
(ii) She shall not influence or intimidate any

                       witness or tamper with evidence.
(3) The above order of anticipatory bail will be in force

           only for a period of 30 days or till 6th accused is

           arrested, whichever is earlier.
(4) I also make it clear that this order of anticipatory

            bail will take effect only   if, the arrest is   made

            within the State of Kerala.
In the result, B.A.2003/10 is dismissed and B.A.2638/10 is

allowed.
K.HEMA, JUDGE.
tgs
