Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: 25 of 1990
Citation: SCC 579 and applied the principles
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/12099120/

[Cites
38
, Cited by
12
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Sri Sudip Sen vs The State Of West Bengal on 16 September, 2010
Author:
J. N. Patel
Bench:
J. N. Patel
1


                   In the High Court at Calcutta
                Criminal Miscellaneous Jurisdiction


Present:
The Hon'ble Justice J. N. Patel, Chief Justice

And

The Hon'ble Justice Bhaskar Bhattacharya

And

The Hon'ble Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose

And

The Hon'ble Justice Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta

And

The Hon'ble Justice Ashim Kumar Roy

                     C.R.M. No. 5123 of 2010

                          Sri Sudip Sen
                                Vs
                     The State of West Bengal

                               With

                           4559 of 2010

                  Sri Suman Saha @ Kousik Saha
                                Vs
                    State of West Bengal & Ors.

                               With

                           4457 of 2010

                           Jayanta Deb
                                             2


                                            Vs
                                   State of West Bengal

For the petitioner in CRM :         Mr.   Asish Kr. Sanyal
No. 5123 of 2010                    Mr.   S. Nayek,
                                    Mr.   Saibal Mondal
                                    Mr.   Rudradipto Nandy,
                                    Mr.   B. Manna
                                    Mr.   S. Dasgupta,
                                    Mr.   Raja Saha

For the State in CRM       :        Mr. Asimesh Goswami
No.4559 of 2010                     Mr. Achyut Basu
                                    Mr. Kallol Mondal

For the petitioner in      :        Ms. R. Bhattacharjee Roy
CRM No. 4457 of 2010

Heard on                       :    19.08.2010

Judgment on                   :     16.09.2010



   J. N. Patel, C.J. :
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
These matters have come to be placed before this Bench of five Judges

   by reason of an order passed by a three-Judge Bench on 04.08.2010 pursuant

   to a reference made by the Division Bench of this Court while dealing with

   group of applications which felt that the decision of this Court rendered by the

   Full Bench in the case of Maya Rani Guin and etc. vs. State of West Bengal

   [(2003) Cri L.J. 1] needs reconsideration. The Full Bench after examining the

   issue thought it appropriate that the matter is referred to a Bench of five-
Judges by passing the following order :-
3
"We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The Division Bench while dealing with group of applications C.R.M.
   No. 5123 of 2010 Sri Sudip Sen vs. The State of West Bengal with
C.R.M.
   No. 4559 of 2010 Sri Suman Saha @ Kousik Saha vs. State of West
   Bengal & Ors.
with C.R.M. No. 4457 of 2010 Jayanta Deb vs. The State of
   West Bengal, wherein the lead application is that of Sri Sudip Sen,
   seeking pre-arrest bail, are of the view that the decision of this Court
   rendered by the Full Bench in the case of Maya Rani Guin and etc.
vs.
   State of West Bengal (2003) Cri L.J. 1, needs reconsideration and has
   referred the following questions for reconsideration of the Full Bench
   decision in Maya Rani Guin's case (supra) and directed the matter to be
   placed before the Chief Justice for decision by a Larger Bench by framing
   the following questions:-
"(A)    Even though the Full Bench decision of the Jaipur Bench of the
   Rajasthan High Court in
Ganesh Raj v. State of Rajasthan
(supra), is at
   best, of a persuasive value, we feel that since even after taking note of
   Full Bench decision of our Court in Maya Rani Guin and etc.
v. State of
   West Bengal (supra), a contrary decision thereto was arrived at -
altogether, ratio of the Full Bench decision of the Jaipur Bench of the
   Rajasthan High Court in
Ganesh Raj v. State of Rajasthan
(supra) should
   not be frittered away.
(B)The Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin's case (supra), was preliminarily
dealing with a situation where, upon grant of an Order under Section 438,
Cr. P.C., the Petitioner went to submit himself before the Regular Court. But
he was not taken into Custody on the basis of a fiction of Law. He again
chose to seek similar relief.
(C)    Whereas the question before us as to whether in the event there is
some unimpeachable document or some unassailable situation very much
existing at the time the Application was refused at the first instance not
being brought to the notice of the Court. Will the same absolutely forbade the
Applicant from retrieving his lost fortune ?
4
(D) The interpretation of Ansari, J. in Paragraph 21 of the decision of
Maya Rani Guin and etc. v. State of West Bengal (supra) that : "......... We
are of the view that the second application for anticipatory bail, even if new
circumstances develop after rejection or disposal of the earlier application, is
not maintainable" on the premises founded in Paragraph 20 "......... We are
of the view that entertaining a second application for anticipatory bail would
amount to review or reconsideration of the earlier order passed by a Division
Bench       having    co-ordinate   jurisdiction   as   the   accusation   remains
unchanged........." also requires a fresh look as to whether in a given case
there may be a change in the situation and mollification of the accusations
upon submission of the Report in final form at the instance of the
investigating Agency.
(E)      The Division Bench decision of Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Imratlal
Vishwakarma & Ors. v. State of U.P.
reported in 1997(1) Crimes 289 at
Paragraph 13 has held :
'... ... ... However, in our opinion, no such fetters can be put or applied on
      the second petition. Second petition filed under Section 438, Cr. P.C. has
      to be decided on its merits even if the earlier application was rejected on
      its merits.    It shall, however, be open for the Court to reject it even
      summarily on the ground that the said second petition is nothing but a
      repetition of the earlier petition and no new ground has been disclosed in
      the second petition. This may take care of the apprehension that if the
      second applications are held to be tenable, it may lead to misuse of the
      said provision and the Courts would be flooded with such repeated
      petitions.'
      The said Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Imratlal
      Vishwakarma & Ors. v. State of U.P.
(supra) took cue from an earlier
      Authority, which relied on the decision of Supreme Court in
Babu Singh v.
      State of U.P.
, (1978) 1 SCC 579 and applied the principles
laid down in
the said decision
.
5
(F)       Both, the Full Bench decision of Jaipur Bench of the Rajasthan High
Court in
Ganesh Raj v. State of Rajasthan
(supra) as well as the Division
Bench decision of Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Imratlal Vishwakarma &
Ors. v. State of U.P.
(supra)- have read into the Constitution Bench decision
of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.
v. The State of Punjab (supra) and it did not
fall in line with the views expressed by the Ansari, J. for the Full Bench in
Maya Rani Guin's case (supra).
(G)Furthermore,     the question raised by Shri Sanyal that till such time a
person is intercepted, his right to move an Application under Section 438
subsists, which has also not been faulted by the learned Public Prosecutor
for the State, has to be understood in view of the decision of
Imratlal
Vishwakarma & Ors. v. State of U.P
(supra), where the Division Bench of the
Madhya Pradesh High Court held : " ... ... ... there is no statutory prohibition
like the prohibition contained in section 397(3) barring second petition under
section 438, Cr. P.C. ... .. ." and felt that "the Court should avoid reading
words in to said Section which are not to be found therein."
(H)Although, on an absolute different context, the Full Bench in Maya Rani
Guin and etc.
v. State of West Bengal (supra), did not notice the earlier Full
Bench decision in
Diptendu Nayek v. State of West Bengal
reported in (1989)
1 Cal LT (HC) 193, where it was deciding the question with regard to the
concurrent powers of the High Court and the Sessions Court in relation to
exercise of power under Section 438, Cr. P.C.
(I)In the event, the Full Bench had taken note of
Babu Singh & Ors.
(supra)
case where Krishna Iyer, J., writing the Judgment of
the said decision
, while
considering the question of efficacy of bail held in Paragraph 7 :
"... ... ... The whole issue, going by decisional material and legal
      literature, has been relegated to a twilight zone of the criminal justice
      system. Courts have often acted intuitively or reacted traditionally, so
      much so the fate of applicants for bail at the High Court level and in the
      Supreme Court, has largely hinged on the hunch of the bench as an
6
expression of "judicial discretion".       A scientific treatment is the
      desideratum."
In Paragraph 8, Their Lordships further held :
"The Code is cryptic on this topic and the Court prefers to be tacit, be the
      order custodial or not. And yet, the issue is one of liberty, justice, public
      safety and burden on the public treasury, all of which insist that a
      developed jurisprudence of bail is integral to a socially sensitized judicial
      process ... .. ..."
(J)       The Constitution Bench in
Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab
, (1994) 3
SCC 569 and in
State of M.P. & Anr. V. Ram Kishna Balothia & Anr.
reported
in (1995) 3 SCC 221 : 1995 C Cr LR (SC) 222 has held that liberty reserved
under Section 438, Cr. P.C., is a statutory right. It does not flow from the
sanctum sanctorum of
Article 21.
Since it is a statutory right, how the right
is to be exercised ? Is a question, which was not answered by Ansari, J. on
behalf of the Full Bench.
(K)       The Constitution Bench in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc v.
The State of
Punjab
(supra) is not only a Classics Locus, but is, perhaps, the Magna Carta
in the field of pre-arrest bail as understood within the ambit of Section 438,
Cr. P.C of the New Code of 1973.          Ansari, J., Speaking Voice of the Full
Bench in Maya Rani Guin and etc.
v. State of West Bengal (supra), in our
considered view, did not make a wholesome perusal of the Constitution
Bench decision. Particularly, Paragraph 7, 13, 20 and 35 of the Constitution
Bench decision in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.
v.
The State of Punjab
(supra)
was not giving its due regard by Ansari, J. while writing the Judgment for
the Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin's case (supra).
The proposition, which has been rightly argued by Shri Sanyal so
      long as the Applicant has not been arrested and as discussed by the
      Constitution Bench, did not receive its proper appreciation in the hands of
      Ansari, J. for the Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin and etc. v. State of West
      Bengal (supra).
7
(L)         Even though Ravindra Saxena's case (supra) cannot be a obiter
dictum as shown by Shri Sanyal and relied upon by the learned Public
Prosecutor, we have to take care of the fact that the Supreme Court after
noticing that it was a third Application, entertained the Matter on merit and
allowed the Application, which was earlier refused by the high Court.
As
such, in the Twilight of the decision of
Ravindra Saxena v. State of
Rajasthan
(supra) the Full Bench decision in Maya Rani Guin and etc.
v.
State of West Bengal (supra) stands partially eclipsed. It requires to be
pondered as to whether at all, the curt finding arrived at in Paragraph 21 by
Ansari, J. for the Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin and etc. v. State of West
Bengal (supra) should still hold the field ?
(M) Wimpled in the longing shadows of
K. L. Verma v. State
(1998) 9 SCC
348, the Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin and etc.
v. State of West Bengal
(supra) so long it held the Fort.
Since K. L. Verma
's case (supra) was
partially eclipsed by the finding of the Supreme Court in
Sunita Devi v. State
of Bihar & Anr.
, (2005) 1 SCC 608 : (2005) 1 C Cr LR (SC) 239 as per
incuriam obviously, the teeth in the Full Bench decision of Maya Rani Guin
and etc.
v. State of West Bengal (supra) is wilted in the puddle of once upon
a time situation.
(N)      Adhering to the logistics of Full Bench decision in Maya Rani   Guin
and etc. v. State of West Bengal (supra), in view of the changed situation,
would be listening to the old wives tale."
In the case of Maya Rani Guin (supra) the Chief Justice was
      required to constitute a Larger Bench, i.e., three-Judge Bench for
      considering the following questions which have been referred by the
      Division Bench. In Maya Rani Guin's case (supra) it has been held in
      paragraph 6 of the judgment as follows :
"6. The following questions have been framed by the Division
      Bench and referred to the larger Bench for adjudication.
8
(i) Whether second application for anticipatory bail u/S. 438,
Cr. P.C. is totally barred even if new circumstances develop after rejection
or disposal of an earlier application for anticipatory bail ?
(ii) Whether petitioners can file a fresh application u/S. 438
of the Code and whether same will be maintainable in the circumstances
of the case and in view of the following observations/directions of the
Apex Court in
K. L. Verma
's case (supra) :
"As far as the order of 9-10-96 is concerned since it proceeds on a
misreading of Salauddin's case, we modify the order by directing that
anticipatory bail will ensure till the regular Court decides the question of
grant of bail and for a week thereafter, so that if the regular Court refuses
bail, the accused person can, if so advised, move the higher Court ?"
(iii) What is the exact nature of the remedy available to the petitioners in
the circumstances of the case and in view of the last direction given by
the Apex Court in the above-quoted observations, namely : "....... ... the
accused person can, if so advised, move the higher Court" ? What was
the exact remedy contemplated by the Supreme Court in the above-quoted
observations ?
(iv) Whether it was the intention of the Supreme Court in the above-
quoted observations that in the similar circumstances of the instant case,
High Court should invoke its inherent/revisional jurisdiction and examine
the correctness of the order of the Magistrate refusing bail to the
petitioners on merit irrespective of whether such order discloses good
reasons therefor or not and may in an appropriate case remand back the
case again to the Magistrate for consideration of the bail prayer of the
petitioners afresh ? Further can we reject similar application on merit if it
is found that order by which Magistrate rejected the prayer for bail
discloses good reasons therefor particularly when it is our opinion that we
9
cannot grant bail or anticipatory bail under the circumstances of the case
?
(v) Whether this petition is at all maintainable or whether some relief can
still   be   granted     to   the   petitioners   by   suo   motu   invoking   our
inherent/revisional jurisdiction ?"
The reference was answered as under :-
"(a)    The only remedy available to the accused upon rejection of regular
bail is to apply to the superior Court for regular bail and not once again
for anticipatory bail.
(b)Accused who prefers an application for regular bail in compliance with
the conditions stipulated in the order of anticipatory bail and physically
submits to the jurisdiction and order of the Court, before which such
application is filed, the application is required to be disposed of on merits
if the outer limit of the anticipatory bail has not expired and the accused
has appeared in person and placed himself in the control of the Court.
(c) If the application for regular bail is moved within the           duration of
anticipatory bail, but the passing of the order is delayed for any reason
whatsoever and it is likely to come after the expiry of the outer limit of the
duration fixed by the order of anticipatory bail, the Court hearing the
regular bail application can always grant interim regular bail for limited
duration till final orders are passed by the Court.
(d)If the application for regular bail is moved within the duration of
anticipatory bail and the same is rejected/refused but the outer limit
prescribed by the order of anticipatory bail has not expired, then instead
of taking the accused into custody he may be allowed to move the
superior Court for bail within the specified period namely the outer limit
as specified in the order of anticipatory bail.
(e) If the application for regular bail is moved after or the date as on which
the application for regular bail is rejected and in either case the outer limit
prescribed by the order of anticipatory bail has expired, then and in that
10
event on and from that date of expiry of the period fixed by the order of
     anticipatory bail, the accused must surrender and be in the custody of the
     Court before the superior Court can take up for consideration the
     application for regular bail."
Coincidentally, one of their Lordships Amit Talukdar, J. was
     member of the Full Bench which disposed of the reference. His Lordship
     Amit Talukdar, J. sitting with His Lordship Raghunath Ray, J. for the
     reasons stated in the reference and considering the decisions of the High
     Court and Supreme Court of India on the subject came to the conclusion
     that their Lordships are unable to bind themselves with the sweep of the
     Full Bench decision in the case of Maya Rani Guin (supra), felt that the
     decision should be revisited and, therefore, has made a reference.
We have given our anxious consideration and having examined
     the decisions of the Supreme Court rendered in the cases of              (
1)
     Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia vs. The State of Punjab
AIR 1980 Supreme Court
     1632, (2) Salauddin Abdul Samad Shaikh vs. State of Maharashtra, 1996
     C.Cr.LR (Supreme Court) 130, (3) Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh
     Ranjan @ Pappu AIR 2005 Supreme Court 921, (
4) Ravindra Saxena vs.
     The State of Rajasthan
2010(1) SCC (Cri) 884, concur with the views
     expressed by their Lordships while making the reference.
Considering
     that the view taken by the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Maya
     Rani Guin (supra), it will be proper that the reference is placed before a
     Larger Bench of five-Judges, thus, for its consideration and, therefore, the
     matter be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice to place the reference to
     Bench of five learned Judges."
On examining the questions framed by the Division Bench for referring to a

decision by a Larger Bench, we find that all the questions can be answered if we
11
reconsider the decision of the Full Bench in Maya Rani Guin's case(supra) by

examining the extant rights of the accused to avail pre-arrest/anticipatory bail,

(1) whether the applicant/accused can move second application for anticipatory

bail in case his first application is rejected; if yes, in what contingencies before

the same Court or to the superior court? (2) where his first application is granted

but his application for ordinary/regular bail is rejected by the trial Court under

Section 437/439 Cr. P.C.



      Bail, in law, means procurement of release from prison of a person

awaiting trial or an appeal, by the deposit of security to ensure his submission at

the required time to legal authority.
"Bail has been defined in the law lexicon as security for the appearance of

      the accused person on giving which he is released pending trial or

      investigation."
According to Black's Law Dictionary, what is contemplated by bail is to

"procure the release of a person from legal custody, by undertaking that he/she

shall appear at the time and place designated and submit him/herself to the

jurisdiction and judgment of the court.
The object of arrest and detention of the accused person is primarily to

secure his appearance at the trial and to ensure that in case he is found guilty he

is available to receive the sentence. If his presence at the trial could reasonably

be ensured otherwise than by his arrest and detention, it would be unjust and
12
unfair to deprive the accused of his liberty during the pendency of the criminal

proceedings against him.      The provisions regarding the issue of summons or

those relating to the arrest of the accused person under a warrant or without a

warrant or those relating to the release of the accused at his trial but without

unreasonably and unjustifiably interfering with his liberty. Thus, release on bail

is crucial to the accused as the consequences of pre-trial detention are given. If

release on bail is denied to the accused it would mean that though he is

presumed to be innocent till the guilt is proved beyond the reasonable doubt he

would be subjected to the psychological and physical deprivation of jail life. The

jail accused loses his job and is prevented from contributing effectively to the

preparation of his defence.
In the case of
Babu Singh & Ors. vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh
[1978

CRI. L.J. 651] Supreme Court was considering the case of the convicts who

applied for bail during the pendency of their appeal before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court observed as follows :-
"2. .... ... ... in considering the interlocutory relief of bail. Right at the
      beginning, we must mention that, at an earlier stage, their application for
      bail was rejected by this Court on September 7, 1977. But an order
      refusing an application for bail does not necessarily preclude another, on
      a later occasion, giving more materials, further developments and
      different considerations. While we surely must set store by this
      circumstance, we cannot accede to the faint plea that we are barred from
      second consideration at a later stage. An interim direction is not a
      conclusive adjudication, and updated reconsideration is not over-turning
13
an earlier negation. In this view, we entertain the application and
     evaluate the merits pro and con."
In the case of Usmanbhai Dawoodbhai Memon & Ors. etc. vs. State of

Gujarat [AIR 1988 SC 922] Supreme Court observed as follows :-
"24. At the conclusion of the hearing on the legal aspect, Shri Poti,
     Learned Counsel appearing for the State Government contended, on
     instructions, that an order passed by a Designated Court for grant or
     refusal of bail is not an "interlocutory order" within the meaning of Section
     19(1) of the Act and therefore an appeal lies. We have considerable doubt
     and difficulty about the correctness of the proposition. The expression
     "interlocutory order" has been used in Section 19(1) in contradistinction to
     what is known as final order and denotes an order of purely interim or
     temporary nature. The essential test to distinguish one from the other has
     been discussed and formulated in several decisions of the Judicial
     Committee of the Privy Council, Federal Court and this Court. One of the
     tests generally accepted by the English Courts and the Federal Court is to
     see if the order is decided in one way, it may terminate the proceedings
     but if decided in another way, then the proceedings would continue.
In
V.
     C. Shukla v. State
through C.B.I.(1980) Suppl. SCC 92 : (AIR 1980
     Supreme Court 962), Fazal Ali, J. in delivering the majority judgment
     reviewed the entire case law on the subject and deduced therefrom the
     following two principles, namely, (i) that a final order has to be
     interpreted in contradistinction to an interlocutory order; and (ii) that the
     test for determining the finality of an order is whether the judgment or
     order finally disposed of the rights of the parties. It was observed that
     these principles apply to civil as well as to criminal cases. In criminal
     proceedings, the word "judgment" is intended to indicate the final order in
     a trial terminating in the conviction or acquittal of the accused. Applying
     these tests, it was held that an order framing a charge against an
14
accused was not a final order but an interlocutory order within the
      meaning of
Section 11(1)
of the Special Courts Act, 1979 and therefore not
      appealable. It cannot be doubted that the grant or refusal of a bail
      application is essentially an interlocutory order. There is no finality to
      such an order for an application for bail can always be renewed from
      time to time. It is however contended that the refusal of bail by a
      Designated Court due to the non-fulfilment of the conditions
laid down in
Section 20(8) cannot be treated to be a final order for it affects the life or
      liberty of a citizen guaranteed under
Article 21.
While it is true that a
      person arraigned on a charge of having committed an offence punishable
      under the Act faces a prospect of prolonged incarceration in view of the
      provision contained in Section 20(8) which places limitations on the power
      of a Designated Court to grant bail, but that by itself is not decisive of the
      question as to whether an order of this nature is not an interlocutory
      order. The court must interpret the words "not being an interlocutory
      order" used in Section 19(1) in their natural sense in furtherance of the
      object and purpose of the Act to exclude any interference with the
      proceedings before a Designated Court at an intermediate stage. There is
      no finality attached to an order of a Designated Court granting or refusing
      bail. Such an application for bail can always be renewed from time to
      time. That being so, the contention advanced on behalf of the State
      Government that the impugned orders passed by the Designated Courts
      refusing to grant bail were not interlocutory orders and therefore
      appealable under
Section 19(1)
of the Act, cannot be accepted."
Therefore, it can be safely concluded that so far as the law relating to grant

or refusal of bail is concerned, it is an interlocutory order and there is no finality

in the matter and there is no impediment in moving a second application for bail,

anticipatory or regular.
15
In the case of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc. vs. The State of Punjab and

Sarbajit Singh & Anr. vs. State of Punjab [1980 CRI. L.J. 1125] the Supreme

Court observed :-
"7. The facility which Section 438 affords is generally referred to as
      'anticipatory bail', an expression which was used by the Law
      Commission in its 41st Report. Neither the section nor its marginal note so
      describes it but, the expression 'anticipatory bail' is a convenient mode of
      conveying that it is possible to apply for bail in anticipation of arrest. Any
      order of bail can, of course, be effective only from the time of arrest
      because, to grant bail, as stated in Wharton's LAW LEXICON, is to 'set at
      liberty a person arrested or imprisoned, on security being taken for his
      appearance'. Thus, bail is basically release from restraint, more
      particularly, release from the custody of the police. The act of arrest
      directly affects freedom of movement of the person arrested by the police,
      and speaking generally, an order of bail gives back to the accused that
      freedom on condition that he will appear to take his trial. Personal
      recognisance, suretyship bonds and such other modalities are the means
      by which an assurance is secured from the accused that though he has
      been released on bail, he will present himself at the trial of offence or
      offences of which he is charged and for which he was arrested. The
      distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order of anticipatory
      bail is that whereas the former is granted after arrest and therefore
      means release from the custody of the police, the latter is granted in
      anticipation of arrest and is therefore effective at the very moment of
      arrest. Police custody is an inevitable concomitant of arrest for non-
      bailable offences. An order of anticipatory bail constitutes, so to say, an
      insurance against police custody following upon arrest for offence or
16
offences in respect of which the order is issued. In other words, unlike a
      post-arrest order of bail, it is a pre-arrest legal process which directs that
      if the person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter arrested on the
      accusation in respect of which the direction is issued, he shall be released
      on bail.
Section 46(1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure which deals with
      how arrests are to be made, provides that in making the arrest, the police
      officer or other person making the arrest "shall actually touch or confine
      the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the
      custody by word or action". A direction under Section 438 is intended to
      confer conditional immunity from this 'touch' or confinement."
In the aforesaid case the Constitution Bench was required to examine the
justification of imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the scope of
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Supreme Court held as follows :-
"14. Generalisations on matters which rest on discretion and the attempt
   to discover formulae of universal application when facts are bound to differ
   from case to case frustrate the very purpose of conferring discretion. No two
   cases are alike on facts and therefore, courts have to be allowed a little free
   play in the joints if the conferment of discretionary power is to be
   meaningful. There is no risk involved in entrusting a wide discretion to the
   Court of Session and the High Court in granting anticipatory bail because,
   firstly, these are higher courts manned by experienced persons, secondly,
   their orders are not final but are open to appellate or revisional scrutiny and
   above all because, discretion has always to be exercised by courts judicially
   and not according to whim, caprice or fancy. On the other hand, there is a
   risk in foreclosing categories of cases in which anticipatory bail may be
   allowed because life throws up unforeseen possibilities and offers new
   challenges. Judicial discretion has to be free enough to be able to take these
   possibilities in its stride and to meet these challenges. While dealing with the
17
necessity for preserving judicial discretion unhampered by rules of general
application Earl Loreburn, L.C. said in Hyman v. Rose, 1912 AC 623.
"I desire in the first instance to point out that the discretion given by the
section is very wide. . . . Now it seems to me that when the Act is so
expressed to provide a wide discretion, ... it is not advisable to lay down any
rigid rules for guiding that discretion. I do not doubt that the rules enunciated
by the Master of the Rolls in the present case are useful maxims in general,
and that in general they reflect the point of view from which judges would
regard an application for relief. But I think it ought to be distinctly
understood that there may be cases in which any or all of them may be
disregarded. If it were otherwise, the free discretion given by the statute
would be fettered by limitations which have nowhere been enacted. It is one
thing to decide what is the true meaning of the language contained in an Act
of Parliament. It is quite a different thing to place conditions upon a free
discretion entrusted by statute to the court where the conditions are not
based upon statutory enactment at all. It is not safe, I think, to say that the
court must and will always insist upon certain things when the Act does not
require them, and the facts of some unforeseen case may make the court
wish it had kept a free hand."
15. Judges have to decide cases as they come before them, mindful of the
need to keep passions and prejudices out of their decisions. And it will be
strange if, by employing judicial artifices and techniques, we cut down the
discretion so wisely conferred upon the courts, by devising a formula which
will confine the power to grant anticipatory bail within a strait-jacket. While
laying down cast-iron rules in a matter like granting anticipatory bail, as the
High Court has done, it is apt to be overlooked that even judges can have but
an imperfect awareness of the needs of new situations. Life is never static
and every situation has to be assessed in the context of emerging concerns
as and when it arises. Therefore, even if we were to frame a 'Code for the
18
grant of anticipatory bail', which really is the business of the legislature, it
can at best furnish broad guide-lines and cannot compel blind adherence. In
which case to grant bail and in which to refuse it is, in the very nature of
things, a matter of discretion. But apart from the fact that the question is
inherently of a kind which calls for the use of discretion from case to case,
the legislature has, in terms express, relegated the decision of that question
to the discretion of the court, by providing that it may grant bail "if it thinks
fit". The concern of the courts generally is to preserve their discretion without
meaning to abuse it. It will be strange if we exhibit concern to stultify the
discretion conferred upon the courts by law."
While concluding the Supreme Court observed :-
"33. We would, therefore, prefer to leave the High Court and the Court of
Session to exercise their jurisdiction under Section 438 by a wise and careful
use of their discretion which, by their long training and experience, they are
ideally suited to do. The ends of justice will be better served by trusting
these courts to act objectively and in consonance with principles governing
the grant of bail which are recognised over the years, than by divesting them
of their discretion which the legislature has conferred upon them, by laying
down inflexible rules of general application. It is customary, almost chronic,
to take a statute as one finds it on the ground that, after all, "the legislature
in its wisdom" has thought it fit to use a particular expression. A convention
may usefully grow whereby the High Court and the Court of Session may be
trusted to exercise their discretionary powers in their wisdom, especially
when the discretion is entrusted to their care by the legislature in its
wisdom. If they err, they are liable to be corrected.
34. This should be the end of the matter, but it is necessary to clarify a
few points which have given rise to certain misgivings.
19
35. Section 438(1) of the Code lays down a condition which has to
be satisfied before anticipatory bail can be granted. The applicant
must show that he has "reason to believe" that he may be arrested
for a non-bailable offence. The use of the expression "reason to
believe" shows that the belief that the applicant may be so arrested
must be founded on reasonable grounds. Mere 'fear' is not 'belief",
for which reason it is not enough for the applicant to show that he
has some sort of a vague apprehension that some one is going to
make an accusation against him, in pursuance of which he may be
arrested. The grounds on which the belief of the applicant is based
that he may be arrested for a non-bailable offence, must be capable
of being examined by the court objectively, because it is then alone
that the court can determine whether the applicant has reason to
believe that he may be so arrested. Section 438(1), therefore, cannot
be invoked on the basis of vague and general allegations, as if to
arm oneself in perpetuity against a possible arrest. Otherwise, the
number of applications for anticipatory bail will be as large as, at
any rate, the adult populace. Anticipatory bail is a device to secure
the individuals liberty; it is neither a passport to the commission of
crimes nor a shield against any and all kinds of accusations, likely
or unlikely

   Secondly, if an application for anticipatory bail is made to the
High Court or the Court of Session it must apply its own mind to the
question and decide whether a case has been made out for granting
such relief. It cannot leave the question for the decision of the
Magistrate concerned under Section 437 of the Code, as and when an
occasion arises. Such a course will defeat the very object of Section
438.
20
Thirdly, the filing of a first information report is not a condition
precedent to the exercise of the power under Section 438. The
imminence of a likely arrest founded on a reasonable belief can be
shown to exist even if an FIR is not yet filed.
Fourthly, anticipatory bail can be granted even after an FIR is
filed, so long as the applicant has not been arrested.
Fifthly, the provisions of Section 438 cannot be invoked after the
arrest of the accused. The grant of "anticipatory bail" to an accused
who is under arrest involves a contradiction in terms, insofar as the
offence or offences for which he is arrested, are concerned. After
arrest, the accused must seek his remedy under Section 437 or
Section 439 of the Code, if he wants to be released on bail in respect
of the offence or offences for which he is arrested.
(Emphasis is ours)
36.   We have said that there is one proposition formulated by the High
Court with which we are inclined to agree. That is proposition (2). We agree
that a 'blanket order' of anticipatory bail should not generally be passed.
This flows from the very language of the section which, as discussed above,
requires the applicant to show that he has "reason to believe" that he may be
arrested. A belief can be said to be founded on reasonable grounds only if
there is something tangible to go by on the basis of which it can be said that
the applicant's apprehension that he may be arrested is genuine. That is
why, normally, a direction should not issue under Section 438(1) to the effect
that the applicant shall be released on bail "whenever arrested for whichever
offence whatsoever". That is what is meant by a 'blanket order' of
anticipatory bail, an order which serves as a blanket to cover or protect any
and every kind of allegedly unlawful activity, in fact any eventuality, likely
or unlikely regarding which, no concrete information can possibly be had.
21
The rationale of a direction under Section 438(1) is the belief of the
applicant founded on reasonable grounds that he may be arrested
for a non-bailable offence. It is unrealistic to expect the applicant to
draw up his application with the meticulousness of a pleading in a
civil case and such is not requirement of the section. But specific
events and facts must be disclosed by the applicant in order to
enable the court to judge of the reasonableness of his belief, the
existence of which is the sine qua non of the exercise of power
conferred by the section.                                          (Emphasis is
ours)
37. Apart from the fact that the very language of the statute compels this
construction, there is an important principle involved in the insistence that
facts, on the basis of which a direction under Section 438(1) is sought, must
be clear and specific, not vague and general. It is only by the observance of
that principle that a possible conflict between the right of an individual to his
liberty and the right of the police to investigate into crimes reported to them
can be avoided. A blanket order of anticipatory bail is bound to cause
serious interference with both the right and the duty of the police in
the matter of investigation because, regardless of what kind of
offence is alleged to have been committed by the applicant and
when, an order of bail which comprehends allegedly unlawful
activity of any description whatsoever, will prevent the police from
arresting the applicant even if he commits, say, a murder in the
presence of the public. Such an order can then become a charter of
lawlessness and a weapon to stifle prompt investigation into
offences which could not possibly be predicated when the order was
passed. Therefore, the court which grants anticipatory bail must
take care to specify the offence or offences in respect of which alone
22
the order will be effective. The power should not be exercised in a
vacuum.                          (Emphasis is ours)
38. There was some discussion before us on certain minor modalities
regarding the passing of bail orders under Section 438(1). Can an order of
bail be passed under the section without notice to the Public Prosecutor? It
can be. But notice should issue to the Public Prosecutor or the Government
Advocate forthwith and the question of bail should be re-examined in the
light of the respective contentions of the parties. The ad interim order too
must conform to the requirements of the section and suitable conditions
should be imposed on the applicant even at that stage. Should the
operation of an order passed under Section 438(1) be limited in point
of time? Not necessarily. The court may, if there are reasons for
doing so, limit the operation of the order to a short period until after
the filing of an FIR in respect of the matter covered by the order. The
applicant may in such cases be directed to obtain an order of bail
under Section 437 or 439 of the Code within a reasonably short
period after the filing of the FIR as aforesaid. But this need not be
followed as an invariable rule. The normal rule should be not to limit
the operation of the order in relation to a period of time.
(Emphasis is ours)
39. During the last couple of years this Court, while dealing with appeals
against orders passed by various High Courts, has granted anticipatory bail
to many a person by imposing conditions set out in Section 438(2) (i), (ii) and
(iii). The court has, in addition, directed in most of those cases that (a) the
applicant should surrender himself to the police for a brief period if a
discovery is to be made under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act or that he
should be deemed to have surrendered himself if such a discovery is to be
made. In certain exceptional cases, the court has, in view of the material
placed before it, directed that the order of anticipatory bail will remain in
23
operation only for a week or so until after the filing of the FIR in respect of
matters covered by the order. These orders, on the whole, have worked
satisfactorily, causing the least inconvenience to the individuals concerned
and least interference with the investigational rights of the police. The court
has attempted through those orders to strike a balance between the
individual's right to personal freedom and the investigational rights of the
police. The appellants who were refused anticipatory bail by various courts
have long since been released by this Court under Section 438(1) of the
Code."
Section 438 Cr. P.C. reads as under :-
"Section 438 Cr. P.C. : (1) Where any person has reason to believe
that he may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable
offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a
direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be
released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter
alia, the following factors, namely :-
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether
   he has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in
   respect of any cognizable offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring
   or humiliating the applicant by having him so arrested,
    either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the
   grant of anticipatory bail :
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the
    Court of Session, has not passed any interim order under this sub-
24
section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it
 shall be open to an officer in-charge of a police station to arrest, without
 warrant, the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended in
 such application.
(1-A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section
(1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less than seven days notice,
together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public Prosecutor
and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor
a reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be
finally heard by the Court.
(1-B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall
be obligatory at the time of final hearing of the application and passing of
final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by the Public
Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest of
justice]


 (2)   When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction
under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such directions in
the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit, including -
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for
interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly,
make any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with
the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to
the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without
previous permission of the Court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3)
of Section 437, as if the bail were granted under that section;
25
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer-in-
charge of a police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at
the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give
bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of
such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the first instance
against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with
the direction of the Court under sub-section (1).
S. 438 Cr. P.C. [State Amendment - West Bengal] : The following
amendments were made by
West Bengal Act, 1990
No. 25 of 1990 (w.e.f.
1-10-1992]

For sub-section (1) of Section 438 of the principal Act, the following sub-
sections shall be substituted :
(1) (a) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on
an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply
to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section
that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail :
Provided that the mere fact that a person has applied to the High
Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section shall not, in
the absence of any order by that Court, be a bar to the apprehension of
such person, or the detention of such person in custody, by an officer-in-
charge of a police station.
(b) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall
dispose of an application for a direction under this sub-section within
thirty days of the date of application :
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a
term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made on such
26
application without giving the State not less than seven days notice to
     present its case;
(c) If any person is arrested and detained in custody by an officer- in-
charge of a police station before the disposal of the application of such
     person for a direction under this sub-section, the release of such person
     on bail by a Court having jurisdiction, pending such disposal, shall be
     subject to the provisions of Section 437.
(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect notwithstanding
     anything to the contrary contained elsewhere in this Act or in any
     judgment, decree or order of any Court, Tribunal or other authority."
The legislative intent and object of
Section 438
Cr.P.C has been explained

by the Supreme Court in the cases of
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra) and
Bharat Chaudhary vs. State of Bihar
[(2003) 8 SCC 77].
In
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
's case (supra) the Supreme Court observed :-
"12. ...    .... The legislature conferred a wide discretion on the
     High Court and the Court of Session to grant anticipatory bail because it
     evidently felt, firstly, that it would be difficult to enumerate the
     conditions under which anticipatory bail should or should not be
     granted and secondly, because the intention was to allow the higher
     courts in the echelon a somewhat free hand in the grant of relief in the
     nature of anticipatory bail. That is why, departing from the terms of Ss.
     437 and 439, S. 438(1) uses the language that the High Court or the
     Court of Session "may, if it thinks fit" direct that the applicant be
     released on bail.    Sub-section (2) of S. 438 is a further and clearer
     manifestation   of   the   same   legislative   intent to confer   a wide
27
discretionary power to grant anticipatory bail. It provides that the High
Court or the Court of Session, while issuing a direction for the grant of
anticipatory bail, "may include such conditions in such directions in the
light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit", including the
conditions which are set out in Cls. (i) to (v) of sub-sec. (2). The proof of
legislative intent can best be found in the language which the legislature
uses. Ambiguities can undoubtedly be resolved by resort to extraneous
aids but words, as wide and explicit as have been used in Section 438,
must be given their full effect, especially when to refuse to do so will
result in undue impairment of the freedom of the individual and the
presumption of innocence. It has to be borne in mind that anticipatory
bail is sought when there is a mere apprehension of arrest on the
accusation that the applicant has committed a non-bailable offence. A
person who has yet to lose his freedom by being arrested asks for
freedom in the event of arrest.             That is the stage at which it is
imperative to protect his freedom, in so far as one may, and to give full
play to the presumption that he is innocent. In fact, the stage at which
anticipatory   bail   is   generally   sought     brings   about    its   striking
dissimilarity with the situation in which a person who is arrested for the
commission of a non-bailable offence asks for bail.                In the latter
situation, adequate data is available to the Court, or can be called for by
it, in the light of which it can grant or refuse relief and while granting it,
modify it by the imposition of all or any of the conditions mentioned in S.
437.
13. This is not to say that anticipatory bail, if granted, must be
granted without the imposition of any conditions. That will be plainly
contrary to the very terms of S.438. Though sub-sec. (1) of that section
says that the Court "may, if it thinks fit" issue the necessary direction
for bail, sub-sec. (2) confers on the Court the power to include such
conditions in the direction as it may think fit in the light of the facts of
28
the particular case, including the conditions mentioned in Cls. (i) to (iv) of
that sub-section. The controversy therefore is not whether the Court has
the power to impose conditions while granting anticipatory bail.              It
clearly and expressly has that power. The true question is whether by
a process of construction, the amplitude of judicial discretion which is
given to the High Court and the Court of Session, to impose such
conditions as they may think fit while granting anticipatory bail, should
be cut down by reading into the statute conditions which are not to be
found therein, like those evolved by the High Court or canvassed by the
learned     Additional   Solicitor   General.     Our   answer,    clearly   and
emphatically, is in the negative. The High Court and the Court of
Session to whom the application for anticipatory bail is made
ought to be left free in the exercise of their judicial discretion to
grant bail if they consider it fit so to do on the particular facts
and circumstances of the case and on such conditions as the
case may warrant.         Similarly, they must be left free to refuse
bail   if   the   circumstances        of   the    case    so     warrant,   on
considerations similar to those mentioned in S 437 or which are
generally considered to be relevant under S. 439 of the Code."
(Emphasis is ours)



       In
Bharat Chaudhary
's case (supra) the Supreme Court

observed :-
"7. From the perusal of this part of Section 438 of the Crl. P.C.,
we find no restriction in regard to exercise of this power in a suitable
case either by the Court of Sessions, High Court or this Court even when
cognizance is taken or charge sheet is filed. The object of Section 438 is
to prevent undue harassment of the accused persons by pre-trial arrest
and detention. The fact, that a Court has either taken cognizance of the
complaint or the investigating agency has filed a charge-sheet, would
29
not by itself, in our opinion, prevent the concerned Courts from granting
     anticipatory bail in appropriate cases. The gravity of the offence is an
     important factor to be taken into consideration while granting such
     anticipatory bail so also the need for custodial interrogation, but these
     are only factors that must be borne in mind by the concerned Courts
     while entertaining a petition for grant of anticipatory bail and the fact of
     taking cognizance or filing of charge sheet cannot by themselves be
     construed as a prohibition against the grant of anticipatory bail. In our
     opinion, the Courts i.e. the Court of Sessions, High Court or this
     Court has the necessary power vested in them to grant
     anticipatory bail in non-bailable offences under Section 438 of
     the Crl. P.C. even when cognizance is taken or charge sheet is
     filed provided the facts of the case require the Court to do so."
(Emphasis is ours)



     In the case of
Pokar Ram vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors.
[(1985) 2 SCC

597] the Supreme Court observed :-
"5.   Relevant considerations governing the court's decision in
     granting anticipatory bail under Section 438 are materially different
     from those when an application for bail by a person who is arrested in
     the course of investigation as also by a person who is convicted and his
     appeal is pending before the higher court and bail is sought during the
     pendency of the appeal.      Three situations in which the question of
     granting or refusing to grant bail would arise, materially and
     substantially differ from each other and the relevant considerations on
     which the courts would exercise its discretion, one way or the other, are
     substantially different from each other. This is necessary to be stated
     because the learned Judge in the High Court unfortunately fell into an
     error in mixing up all the considerations, as if all the three become
     relevant in the present situation.
30
6.   The decision of the Constitution Bench in
Gurbaksh Singh
Sibbia v. State of Punjab
[(1980) 2 SCC 565] clearly lays down that 'the
distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order of
anticipatory bail is that whereas the former is granted after arrest and
therefore means release from the custody of the police, the latter is
granted in anticipation of arrest and is therefore effective at the very
moment of arrest'. Unlike a post-arrest order of bail, it is a pre-arrest
legal process which directs that if the person in whose favour it is
issued is thereafter arrested on the accusation in respect of which the
direction is issued, he shall be released on bail.      A direction under
Section 438 is intended to confer conditional immunity from the touch as
envisaged by Section 46(1) or confinement. In para 31, Chandrachud,
C.J.   clearly   demarcated   the   distinction   between   the   relevant
considerations while examining an application for anticipatory bail and
an application for bail after arrest in the course of investigation. Says
the learned Chief Justice that 'in regard to anticipatory bail, if the
proposed accusation appears to stem not from motives of furthering the
ends of justice but from some ulterior motive, the object being to injure
and humiliate the applicant by having him arrested, a direction for the
release of the applicant on bail in the event of his arrest would generally
be made. It was observed that 'it cannot be laid down as an inexorable
rule that anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the proposed
accusation appears to be actuated by mala fides; and, equally, that
anticipatory bail must be granted if there is no fear that the applicant
will abscond'. Some of the relevant considerations which govern the
discretion, noticed therein are, "the nature and seriousness of the
proposed charges, the context of the events likely to lead to the making
of the charges, a reasonable possibility of the applicant's presence not
being secured at the trial, a reasonable apprehension that witnesses
will be tampered with and 'the larger interests of the public or the
31
State', are some of the considerations which the court has to keep in
      mind while deciding an application for anticipatory bail". A caution was
      voiced that 'in the evaluation of the consideration whether the applicant
      is likely to abscond, there can be no presumption that the wealthy and
      the mighty will submit themselves to trial and that the humble and the
      poor will run away from the course of justice, any more than there can
      be a presumption that the former are not likely to commit a crime and
      the latter are more likely to commit it'."
On the basis of aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court, we like to

examine the concept of pre-arrest/anticipatory bail though there is no

substantial difference between Sections 438 and 439 of the Cr. P.C. It is well

understood that it operates in different fields as ordinary bail under Sections 437

and 439 Cr. P.C. is available after arrest whereas anticipatory bail under Section

438 is available in anticipation of arrest and is, therefore, effective at the very

moment of arrest and it is well settled that a person cannot resort to Section 438

Cr. P.C. after he has been arrested. Therefore, the only distinction is that in a

case under Section 438 Cr. P.C. a person approaches the Court when he

apprehends that he may be arrested in a non-bailable offence. The exercise of

power under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is dependent upon two conditions; (i) an

accusation (ii) a reasonable apprehension that the accused may be arrested on

the basis of such accusation. This clearly indicates that the power exercisable

under Section 438 Cr. P.C. is somewhat extraordinary and it is only in

exceptional cases where it appears that the person may be falsely implicated or

where there are reasonable grounds for holding that a person accused of an
32
offence is not likely to misuse the liberty, the Court may consider his plea for an

order granting him bail in the event of his arrest. Once a person gets an order in

his favour under Section 438 Cr. P.C. and is directed to be released on bail in the

event of his arrest unless and until he is arrested he remains a free man;
whereas in cases where a person has been arrested by the police as a suspect

and the offence is non-bailable, he is entitled to apply for ordinary/regular bail

under Section 437 or 439 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
as the case may be,

i.e., in cases triable by a Magistrate he can secure bail from a Magistrate or the

Court of Session. Similarly, if a case is triable by a Court of Session he may

apply for bail to the Court of Session or the High Court as the case may be by

seeking such bail under Section 437 or Section 439 Cr. P.C.              In both the

circumstances, i.e., when a person secures an order of bail under Section 438 Cr.
P.C. or Sections 437/439 of the Cr. P.C. he surrenders himself to custody and

released on bail.
In the case of Niranjan Singh and Anr. vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote

and Ors. [AIR 1980 SC 785] the Supreme Court was required to examine the

question as to when a person is in custody within the meaning of Section 439 Cr.
P.c. and in the context where the persons who are accused of offences but who

are not in custody and had applied for bail under Section 439 Cr. P.C. The

Supreme Court observed :-
"6. Here the respondents were accused of offences but were not
      in custody, argues the petitioner. So no bail, since the basic condition of
      being in jail is not fulfilled. This submission has been rightly rejected by
33
the courts below. We agree that, in our view, an outlaw cannot ask for
the benefit of law and he who flees justice cannot claim justice. But here
the position is different.   The accused were not absconding but had
appeared and surrendered before the Sessions Judge. Judicial
jurisdiction arises only when persons are already in custody and seek
the process of the court to be enlarged.       We agree that no person
accused of an offence can move the court for bail under S. 439 Cr. P.C.
unless he is in custody.
7. When is a person in custody, within the meaning of S. 439 Cr.
P.C. ? when he is in duress either because he is held by the
investigating agency or other police or allied authority or is under the
control of the court having been remanded by judicial order, or having
offered himself to the court's jurisdiction and submitted to its orders by
physical presence.    No lexical dexterity nor precedential profusion is
needed to come to the realistic conclusion that he who is under the
control of the court or is in the physical hold of an officer with coercive
power is in custody for the purpose of S. 439. This word is of elastic
semantics but its core meaning is that the law has taken control of the
person.    The equivocatory quibblings and hide-and-seek niceties
sometimes heard in court that the police have taken a man into informal
custody but not arrested him, have detained him for interrogation but
not taken him into formal custody and other like terminological dubiotics
are unfair evasions of the straightforwardness of the law. We need not
dilate on this shady facet here because we are satisfied that the
accused did physically submit before the Sessions Judge and the
jurisdiction to grant bail thus arose.
8. Custody, in the context of S. 439, (we are not, be it noted,
dealing with anticipatory bail under S. 438) is physical control or at
34
least physical presence of the accused in court coupled with submission
to the jurisdiction and orders of the court.
9. He can be in custody not merely when the police arrests
him, produces him before a Magistrate and gets a remand to
judicial or other custody.        He can be stated to be in judicial
custody when he surrenders before the court and submits to its
directions.    In the present case, the police officers applied for
bail before a Magistrate who refused bail and still the accused,
without surrendering before the Magistrate, obtained an order
for stay to move the Sessions Court.             This direction of the
Magistrate was wholly irregular and may be, enabled the
accused persons to circumvent the principle of S. 439 Cr. P.C.
We might have taken a serious view of such a course, indifferent
to mandatory provisions, by the subordinate magistracy but for
the fact that in the present case the accused made up for it by
surrender before the Sessions Court. Thus, the Sessions Court
acquired jurisdiction to consider the bail application. It could
have refused bail and remanded the accused to custody, but, in
the circumstances and for the reasons mentioned by it, exercised
its jurisdiction in favour of grant of bail. The High Court added
to the conditions subject to which bail was to be granted and
mentioned that accused has submitted to the custody of the
court. We, therefore, do not proceed to upset the order on this
ground.    Had the circumstances been different we would have
demolished the order for bail. We may frankly state that had we
been left to ourselves we might not have granted bail but, sitting
under
Art. 136
, do not feel that we should interfere with a
discretion      exercised       by        the   two   courts   below."
(Emphasis is ours)
35
We have no hesitation to hold that if a person applies for pre-
arrest/anticipatory bail he does so with a clear understanding that he is

submitting himself to the custody of the Court, in the event he is arrested and is

released on bail, therefore, he can be stated to be in judicial custody which

necessarily means having furnished security to ensure his submission at the

required time to legal authority, i.e. for his appearance pending trial or

investigation. In most of the cases it is found that persons availing of an order

under Section 438 Cr. P.C. either are not arrested by the police or do not make

themselves available for investigation and, therefore, could not be arrested. This

fact situation cannot be ignored and such persons may enjoy unfettered liberty

though they may be suspected of having committed a non-bailable offence but

cannot be considered to be in custody. It may happen that in such case the

investigating agency may even conclude investigation and file charge-sheet. It is

only when the police file final report under Section 170 Cr. P.C. by way of a

charge-sheet under Section 173 Cr. P.C. and such person/persons are shown to

be accused they must surrender to the Court where charge sheet is filed and can

be released on bail so granted under Section 438 Cr. P.C. by the High Court or

Court of Session. If the earlier order granting them bail in the event of the arrest

was limited to the stage of filing charge sheet, the accused in such a case is left

with no alternative but to apply to the trial Court or the superior Court under

Section 437 or 439 Cr. P.C. for regular bail and in such a contingency second

application for anticipatory bail is not tenable solely on the ground that the

accused is in custody.
36
However, in case earlier application for anticipatory bail was rejected and if

he is not arrested there is no bar against making a fresh application for

anticipatory bail on a later occasion, giving more materials, further developments

and different consideration as held in
Babu Singh
's case (supra).
In case persons who have availed of bail pursuant to an order obtained by

them under Section 438 Cr. P.C. continue to enjoy bail so granted if the Court

does not restrict its order for a limited period which is the normal rule as held by

the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
's case

(supra).     This virtually amounts to grant of ordinary, normal bail after the

accused surrenders to custody and is released on bail.
Their Lordships while making a reference to the Larger Bench primarily

expressed certain doubts about the correctness of the Decision in Maya Rani

Guin's case (supra) without formulating the questions which arise for

consideration due to correct appreciation of law laid down in the judgment of the

Supreme Court prevailing at the time Maya Rani Guin's case (supra) was

decided and subsequent judgments delivered by the Supreme Court clarifying the

correct proposition of law in reference to
K L Verma vs. State & Anr.
[(
1998) 9

SCC 348] and Ravindra Sexena vs. State of Rajasthan
[2010(1) SCC (Cri)

884].
Their Lordships referred to Division Bench decisions of the Madhya

Pradesh High Court, one of them being Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Imratlal

Viswakarma & Ors vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh
[1997(1) Crimes 289].
37
Madhya Pradesh High Court was required to examine whether a second

application for anticipatory bail was maintainable and whether it would make

any difference if earlier application was rejected on merits or dismissed on

account having been withdrawn or not pressed.
In Malla Ramarao vs. State of

Madhya Pradesh [1992 CLJ 2208] learned Single Judge held that a second bail

petition under Section 438 Cr. P.C. would not be tenable and in a subsequent

decision also by other single Judge in
Dharmendra vs. State of M. P.
[1993

J.L.J. 476] it was held that the second petition under Section 438 Cr. P.C. would

be tenable if the earlier petition has been withdrawn and consequently dismissed.
The Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court on reference "Whether a

second application for anticipatory bail is maintainable and whether it would make

any difference if earlier application was dismissed on merits or on account of

having been withdrawn or not pressed?", answering the reference the Court held

that the principle of res judicata would not apply in such a matter and placed

reliance on the case of
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra) and also referred to Full

Bench decision of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in the case of
Mahan Lal vs.

Prem Chand
[AIR 1980 H.P. 36].
The other case referred to while making reference is the decision of the

Rajasthan High Court in the case of
Ganesh Raj vs. The State of Rajasthan &

Ors.
[2005 Cr. LJ 2086] wherein the Rajasthan High Court held that second or

subsequent bail application under Section 438 Cr. P.C. can be filed if there is a

change in the fact situation or in law which requires the earlier view being
38
interfered with or where the earlier finding has become obsolete. It made clear

that there is the limited area in which an accused who has been denied bail

earlier, can move a subsequent application and that second or subsequent

anticipatory bail application shall not be entertained on the ground of new

circumstances, further developments, different considerations, some more

details, new documents or illness of the accused. It further held that under no

circumstances the second or successive anticipatory bail application shall be

entertained by the Sessions Judge/Additional Sessions Judge.
In
Ganesh Raj
case (supra) the Full Bench considered the decision rendered by the Full Bench

of this Court in Maya Rani Guin's case (supra) and after considering the

decision in
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh Ranjan
alias Pappu Yadav

[2005 Cri LJ 944] held that second or subsequent bail application under Section

438 Cr. P.C. can be filed if there is a change in the fact situation or in law which

requires the earlier view being interfered with or where the earlier finding has

become obsolete.
We have given our anxious consideration to the aforesaid decisions and

find that the hesitation on the part of Court in not entertaining the second

application for pre-arrest/anticipatory bail or for that reason ordinary/regular

bail stems out from the proposition that the bail order is a final order and,

therefore, entertaining a second application for bail in either case on the given

facts and circumstances of the case would amount to review of the earlier order

rejecting the bail which is construed as a final order as Section 362 Cr. P.C.
39
clearly mandates that "save or otherwise provided by this Code or any other law

for the time being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order

disposing of a case, shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or

mathematical error."
In
Sunita Jain vs. Pawan Kumar Jain & Ors.
[(2008) 2 SCC 705] the

Supreme Court observed :-
"31. The section makes it clear that a court cannot alter or review
      its judgment or final order after it is signed except to correct clerical or
      arithmetical error. The scheme of the Code, in our judgment, is clear
      that as a general rule, as soon as the judgment is pronounced or order
      is made by a court, it becomes functus officio (ceases to have control
      over the case) and has no power to review, override, alter or interfere
      with it.
32. No doubt, the section starts with the words "save as other
      provided by this Code". Thus, if the Code provides for alteration, such
      power can be exercised. For instance, sub-section (2) of Section 127.
      But in absence of express power, alteration or modification of judgment
      or order is not permissible.
33. It is also well settled that power of review is not an
      inherent power and must be conferred on a court by a specific or
      express provision to that effect. (
Vide Patel Narshi Thakershi v.
      Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji
[(1971) 3 SCC 844]. No power to
      review has been conferred by the Code on a criminal court and it
      cannot review an order passed or judgment pronounced."
(Emphasis is ours)
40
In our earlier part of the judgment we have already referred to the case of
Babu Singh
(supra) wherein it was held that an order refusing an application for

bail does not necessarily preclude another, on a later occasion, giving more

materials, further developments and different considerations and in Usmanbhai

Dawoodbhai Memon (supra) the Supreme Court has held that it cannot be

doubted that the grant or refusal of a bail application is essentially an

interlocutory order. There is no finality to such an order for an application for

bail can always be renewed from time to time. However, a second application in

the same fact situation will not lie on ground of reconsideration or non-
consideration of some impeachable document or some unassailable situation

very much existing at the time application was refused as it will be seeking

review of the earlier order which is not permissible.
In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra) wherein it was held that the High Court and the Court of Session to

whom the application for anticipatory bail is made ought to be left free in the

exercise of their judicial discretion to grant bail if they consider it fit so to do on

the particular facts and circumstances of the case and on such conditions as the

case may warrant.       Similarly, they must be left free to refuse bail if the

circumstances of the case so warrant, on considerations similar to those

mentioned in S 437 or which are generally considered to be relevant under S.

439 of the Code.
41
In the cases of
Sunita Devi vs. State of Bihar & Anr.
[(
2005) 1 SCC 608

and Adri Dharan Das vs. State of W.B.
[(2005) 4 SCC 303], the Supreme Court

concluded the controversy as regards the premise on which application for

anticipatory bail and regular bail can be obtained by holding that the view taken

in the case of
K. L Verma vs. State & Anr.
[(1998) 9 SCC 348] is per incuriam.
In
Sunita Devi
's case (supra) Supreme Court observed :-
"7. Sections 438 and 439 operate in different fields. Section 439
      of the Code reads as follows:
"439. (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct--
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released
      on bail, and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of
      Section 437, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for
      the purposes mentioned in that sub-section;
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any
      person on bail be set aside or modified:"     (Underlined for emphasis)
8. It is clear from a bare reading of the provisions that for making an
      application in terms of Section 439 of the Code, a person has to be in
      custody. Section 438 of the Code deals with "Direction for grant of bail
      to person apprehending arrest".
In
Balchand Jain v. State of M.P
[(1976)
      4SCC 572] it was observed that the expression "anticipatory bail" is
      really a misnomer because what Section 438 contemplates is not an
      anticipatory bail, but merely an order directing the release of an
      accused on bail in the event of his arrest. It is, therefore, manifest that
      there is no question of bail unless a person is arrested in connection
      with a non-bailable offence by the police. The distinction between an
42
order in terms of Section 438 and that in terms of Section 439 is that the
   latter is passed after arrest whereas the former is passed in anticipation
   of arrest and becomes effective at the very moment of arrest.
(See
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab
[(1980) 2 SCC 565])"
9.
In
Salauddin Abdulsamad Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra
[(1996)
   1 SCC 667] it was observed as follows: (SCC p.668, para 2)

   "Anticipatory bail is granted in anticipation of arrest in non-bailable
cases, but that does not mean that the regular court, which is to try the
offender, is sought to be bypassed and that is the reason why the High
Court very rightly fixed the outer date for the continuance of the bail and on
the date of its expiry directed the petitioner to move the regular court for
bail. That is the correct procedure to follow because it must be realised that
when the Court of Session or the High Court is granting anticipatory bail, it
is granted at a stage when the investigation is incomplete and, therefore, it
is not informed about the nature of evidence against the alleged offender. It
is, therefore, necessary that such anticipatory bail orders should be of a
limited duration only and ordinarily on the expiry of that duration or
extended duration the court granting anticipatory bail should leave it to the
regular court to deal with the matter on an appreciation of evidence placed
before it after the investigation has made progress or the charge-sheet is
submitted."                             (emphasis supplied)
10.
In
K.L. Verma
case[(1998) 9 SCC 348] this Court observed as follows:
(SCC pp. 350-51, para 3)

      "This Court further observed that anticipatory bail is granted in
   anticipation of arrest in non-bailable cases, but that does not mean
   that the regular court, which is to try the offender, is sought to be
43
bypassed. It was, therefore, pointed out that it was necessary that
   such anticipatory bail orders should be of a limited duration only and
   ordinarily on the expiry of that duration or extended duration the court
   granting anticipatory bail should leave it to the regular court to deal
   with the matter on an appreciation of evidence placed before it after
   the investigation has made progress or the charge-sheet is submitted.
   By this, what the Court desired to convey was that an order of
   anticipatory bail does not enure till the end of trial but it must be of
   limited duration as the regular court cannot be bypassed. The limited
   duration must be determined having regard to the facts of the case
   and the need to give the accused sufficient time to move the regular
   court for bail and to give the regular court sufficient time to determine
   the bail application. In other words, till the bail application is disposed
   of one way or the other the court may allow the accused to remain on
   anticipatory bail. To put it differently, anticipatory bail may be granted
   for a duration which may extend to the date on which the bail
   application is disposed of or even a few days thereafter to enable the
   accused persons to move the higher court, if they so desire."
   (emphasis supplied)



   The reference to this Court's observation as quoted above was to

   Salauddin case [(1996) 1 SCC 667].
11. The grey area according to us is the following part of the judgment
in
K.L. Verma
case [(1998) 9 SCC 348] "or even a few days thereafter to
enable the accused persons to move the higher court, if they so desire"
(SCC p. 351, para 3).
44
12. Obviously, the requirement of Section 439 of the Code is not wiped
out by the above observations. Section 439 comes into operation only when
a person is "in custody".
In
K.L. Verma
case[(1998) 9 SCC 348 reference
was made to Salauddin case[(1996)1 SCC 667].
In the said case there was
no such indication as given in
K.L. Verma
case [(1998) 9 SCC 348 that a
few days can be granted to the accused to move the higher court if they so
desire. The statutory requirement of Section 439 of the Code cannot be said
to have been rendered totally inoperative by the said observation.
13.
In view of the clear language of Section 439 and in view of the
decision   of   this   Court   in
Niranjan   Singh   v.   Prabhakar   Rajaram
Kharote
[(1980) 2 SCC 559] there cannot be any doubt that unless a person
is in custody, an application for bail under Section 439 of the Code would
not be maintainable. The question when a person can be said to be in
custody within the meaning of Section 439 of the Code came up for
consideration before this Court in the aforesaid decision.
14. The crucial question is when is a person in custody, within the
meaning of Section 439 of the Code? When he is in duress either because
he is held by the investigating agency or other police or allied authority or
is under the control of the court having been remanded by judicial order, or
having offered himself to the court's jurisdiction and submitted to its orders
by physical presence. No lexical dexterity nor precedential profusion is
needed to come to the realistic conclusion that he who is under the control
of the court or is in the physical hold of an officer with coercive power is in
custody for the purpose of Section 439. The word is of elastic semantics but
its core meaning is that the law has taken control of the person. The
equivocatory quibblings and hide-and-seek niceties sometimes heard in
court that the police have taken a man into informal custody but not
arrested him, have detained him for interrogation but not taken him into
45
formal custody and other like terminological dubieties are unfair evasions
of the straightforwardness of the law.
....    ....    ....    ....     ....   ....    ....    ....    ....     .....
16. In Black's Law Dictionary by Henry Campbell Black, MA (6th Edn.),
the expression "custody" has been explained in the following manner:
"The term is very elastic and may mean actual imprisonment or physical
detention.... Within statute requiring that petitioner be 'in custody' to be
entitled to federal habeas corpus relief does not necessarily mean actual
physical detention in jail or prison but rather is synonymous with restraint
of liberty. ... Accordingly, persons on probation or parole or released on bail
or on own recognizance have been held to be 'in custody' for purposes of
habeas corpus proceedings."
17. It is to be noted that in
K.L. Verma
case[((1998) 9 SCC 348] the Court
only indicated that time may be extended to "move" the higher court. In
Black's Law Dictionary the said expression has been explained as follows:
"Move.--To make an application to a court for a rule or order, or to take
action in any matter. The term comprehends all things necessary to be
done by a litigant to obtain an order of the court directing the relief sought."
18. In Salauddin case [(1996) 1 SCC 667] also this Court observed that
the regular court has to be moved for bail. Obviously, an application under
Section 439 of the Code must be in a manner in accordance with law and
the accused seeking remedy under Section 439 must ensure that it would
be lawful for the court to deal with the application. Unless the applicant is
in custody, his making an application only under Section 439 of the Code
will not confer jurisdiction on the court to which the application is made.
46
The view regarding extension of time to "move" the higher court as culled
out from the decision in
K.L. Verma
case[((1998) 9 SCC 348] shall have to
be treated as having been rendered per incuriam, as no reference was
made to the prescription in Section 439 requiring the accused to be in
custody.
In
State v. Ratan Lal Arora
[(2004) 4 SCC 590] it was held that
where in a case the decision has been rendered without reference to
statutory bars, the same cannot have any precedent value and shall have
to be treated as having been rendered per incuriam. The present case
stands on a par, if not, on a better footing.
The provisions of Section 439 do
not appear to have been taken note of.
19. "Incuria" literally means "carelessness". In practice per incuriam is
taken to mean per ignoratium. English courts have developed this principle
in relaxation of the rule of stare decisis. The "quotable in law", as held in
Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd.[(1944) 2 All ER 293] is avoided and
ignored if it is rendered "in ignoratium of a statute or other binding
authority". Same has been accepted, approved and adopted by this Court
while interpreting
Article 141
of the Constitution which embodies the
doctrine of precedents as a matter of law.
The above position was
highlighted in
State of U.P. v. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.
[(1991) 4 SCC
139] To perpetuate an error is no heroism. To rectify it is the compulsion of
the judicial conscience.
20. For making an application under Section 439 the fundamental
requirement is that the accused should be in custody. As observed in
Salauddin case [(1996) 1 SCC 667] the protection in terms of Section 438 is
for a limited duration during which the regular court has to be moved for
bail. Obviously, such bail is bail in terms of Section 439 of the Code,
mandating the applicant to be in custody. Otherwise, the distinction
47
between orders under Sections 438          and 439 shall be rendered
   meaningless and redundant.
21. If the protective umbrella of Section 438 is extended beyond what
   was laid down in Salauddin case [(1996) 1 SCC 667] the result would be
   clear bypassing of what is mandated in Section 439 regarding custody. In
   other words, till the applicant avails remedies up to higher courts, the
   requirements of Section 439 become dead letter. No part of a statute can be
   rendered redundant in that manner.
22. These aspects were recently highlighted in
Nirmal Jeet Kaur v. State
   of M.P.
[(2004) 7 SCC 558] Therefore the order of the High Court granting
   unconditional protection is clearly untenable and is set aside. However, the
   petitioner is granted a month's time from today to apply for regular bail
   after surrendering to custody before the court concerned which shall deal
   with the application in accordance with law. We express no opinion about
   the merits of the case."
In
Adri Dharan Das
's case (supra), the Supreme Court reiterated its

decision in
Sunita Devi
(supra).
In so far as
Ravindra Sexena
's case (supra)

cannot be considered to be an authority in support of the proposition that

rejection of the first application for pre-arrest/anticipatory bail a second

application is maintainable on the same set of facts and circumstances.
In
Ravindra Sexena
's case (supra) the Supreme Court found that the High Court of

Rajasthan did not consider the application for anticipatory bail in proper

perspective and it was rejected without considering the case of the appellant

solely on the ground that the challan had then been presented and, therefore, the
48
Supreme Court by referring to a decision in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra) held

that the High Court erred in not considering the application for pre-
arrest/anticipatory bail in accordance with law and granted anticipatory bail to

the appellant in the case pending on the basis of FIR registered against the

appellant for having committed an offence under
Sections 420
and
120-B
IPC and

directed for investigation and directed the appellant to join investigation as and

when required.
We, therefore, sum up our conclusions thus :-
(1) Whether the applicant/accused can move second application for

anticipatory bail in case his first application is rejected; if yes, in what

contingencies before the same Court or to the superior court?
(a) A person has a right to move either the High Court or the Court of

Session for directions under Section 438 Cr. P.C. at his option. In case a person

chooses to move the Court of Session in the first instance and his application for

grant of anticipatory bail under Section 438 is rejected, he can again move the

High Court for the same reason under Section 438 Cr. P.C. itself.
(b) where a person chooses to straightway move the High Court in the first

instance and his application is rejected on the same set of facts and

circumstances, he will not be entitled to move the Court of Session for the second
49
time, but may invoke the extraordinary powers of the Supreme Court by seeking

special leave to appeal in the Supreme Court.
(c) A person will be entitled to move the High Court or the Court of Session,

as the case may be, for the second time. He can do so only on the ground of

substantial change in the facts and circumstances of the case due to subsequent

events. However, he will not be entitled to move the second application on the

ground that the Court on earlier occasion failed to consider any particular aspect

or material on record or that any point then available to him was not agitated

before the Court.
(2) Where his first application is granted, but his application for

ordinary/regular bail is rejected by the trial Court under Section 437/439 Cr.
P.C.



       If a person has been directed to be released on bail in the event of his

arrest under Section 438 Cr. P.C. for limited duration during which the regular

Court has to be moved for bail, he shall move the trial Court in the first instance

for seeking such bail and the order releasing him on anticipatory bail would come

to an end, and in case his application for ordinary/regular bail is rejected, the

trial Court shall remand him to police/judicial custody, as the case may be.
The reference is answered accordingly, the three applications be placed

before the regular Bench for disposing them in accordance with law.
50
( J. N. Patel, C.J.)

We agree



     (Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J.)



     (Pinaki Chandra Ghose, J.)




     (Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J.)




      (Ashim Kumar Roy, J.)
