Title: Search
Court: High Court in Collector of Customs Dytron India Ltd. (1999 (108)
Date: 54 of 1959
Citation: SCC 454 and [ICICI Bank
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/130554392/

[Cites
58
, Cited by
0
]
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
Central Board Of Indirect Taxes And ... vs Sundaresh Bhatt Liquidator Of Abg ... on 22 November, 2021
NATIONAL COMPANY LAW APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                    PRINCIPAL BENCH, NEW DELHI

             Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021

[Arising out of Impugned Order dated February 25, 2020, passed by the
Adjudicating Authority/National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad
Bench, Ahmedabad in IA No. 474/2019 in Company Petition (IB)
No.53/NCLT/AHM/2017]

 IN THE MATTER OF:
 Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs
 Through
 Office of the Commissioner of Customs,
 JNPT Bonds Section, EPCG Section &
 Disposal Section
 Jawaharlal Nehru Customs House
 Sheva, Taluka Uran, Dist. Raigad
 Maharashtra - 400707                                                       Appellant

 Versus

 Sundaresh Bhatt
 The Liquidator of ABG Shipyard

 1881 Registered address:
 BDO India LLP, Level 9
 The Ruby, North West Wing
 Senapati Bapat Road, Dadar (W)
 Mumbai - 400028, INDIA

 Insolvency Professional Entity:
 BOO Restructuring Advisory LLP
 Level 9, The Ruby, North West Wing
 Senapati Bapat Road, Dadar (W)
 Mumbai - 400028, INDIA                                                Respondent

 Present:
 For Appellant          :    Mr Abhishek           Rana   and   Mr   Ajit    Sharma,
                             Advocates.

 For Respondent         :    Mr Abhishek Sharma, Ms Anjali Sharma and Ms
                             Ashly Cherian, Advocates.

 CORAM:
 Hon'ble Mr Justice M. Venugopal, Member (J)
 Hon'ble Mr V. P. Singh, Member (T)
 Hon'ble Dr Ashok Kumar Mishra, Member (T)

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                                1 of 39
                                 J U D G M E N T
(Virtual Mode)

[Per; V. P. Singh, Member (T)]
1.    The present Appeal emanates from the Order dated February 25, 2020,

passed by the Adjudicating Authority/National Company Law Tribunal,

Ahmedabad Bench, Ahmedabad in IA No. 474 of 2019 in Company Petition

(IB) No.53/NCLT/AHM/2017, whereby the Adjudicating Authority had issued

directions to the Appellant to allow removal of the materials lying in the

Customs Bonded Warehouses without payment of Customs Duty under

Section 60(5) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (in short 'I&B

Code').
2.    The Parties are represented by their original status in the Company

Petition for the sake of convenience.
3.    BRIEF FACTS

      The brief facts of the case are as follows:
3.1   The     Adjudicating      Authority/National   Company     Law     Tribunal,

Ahmedabad Bench had disposed of the Application, being numbered as IA

474 of 2019 in CP (IB) No. 53/NCLT/AHM/2017 filed by Liquidator of the

Corporate Debtor, ABG Shipyard, with the following order directions;
i)      "The Respondents are directed to allow the applicant-
liquidator to remove the Material, which is lying in the
              Customs Bonded Warehouses without any condition,
              demur and/or payment of Customs Duty.
ii)     The Respondents are at liberty to lodge its Claim with the
              Applicant-Liquidator with regard to the Customs Duty
              charges payable on the release of Material, which form

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                            2 of 39
               part of the assets of the Corporate Debtor company in
              Liquidation), before the Liquidator under the provisions
              of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and in
              accordance with law.
iii)    The Customs Department shall allow removal of
              goods/material within two weeks, from the date of
              receipt of an authentic copy of this Order from the
              Liquidator.
iv)     Meanwhile, the Respondents shall not proceed for
              auctioning, selling or appropriating the Materials owned
              by the Corporate Debtor company, for the purpose of
              recovery of its Customs Duty, which may tantamount to
              violation     of    the     I&B      Code   and   put   the
              applicant/liquidator of the Corporate Debtor company
              (under Liquidation) in disadvantageous position."
(verbatim copy)

3.2   The Respondent claims that the Corporate Debtor Company imported

materials presently lying in customs bonded warehouses at specific locations

for construction and building the ships. These ships were further to be

exported after the completion of manufacturing. Hence, the Corporate Debtor

Company availed its benefit under the Export Promotion Capital Goods

Scheme (EPCG Scheme) (the Notification 12/2012 dated March 17, 2012) and

other related schemes/notifications. Consequently, the Corporate Debtor was

provided with a license under the EPCG Scheme concerning the Material.


3.3   Since the Corporate Debtor failed to submit an Export Obligation

Discharge Certificate (EODC) and thereby comply with its obligations in

respect of the EPCG license, the Office of the Commissioner of Customs


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                             3 of 39
 (Export), EPCG (Monitoring Cell), Mumbai (Customs Authority) had issued

various notices (Notices) to the Corporate Debtor, inter-alia, directed the

Corporate Debtor to pay the applicable customs duty concerning the Material.
4.        APPELLANT's SUBMISSIONS

4.1       The impugned Order does not consider the question of the title of

imported warehoused goods, which have been lying in a warehouse from 2005

onwards. It is submitted that the warehoused goods do not belong to the

debtor. Hence Liquidator cannot take control of the same.


4.2       Before commencement of liquidation proceedings, the debtor itself

could not have taken possession of the imported warehoused goods except by

paying the applicable customs duty after an order clearing the goods for

consumption was passed by Customs
u/s 68
&
71
of Customs Act, 1962.

Thus, the Official Liquidator cannot be in a better position than the debtor

itself.
4.3
The Customs Act, 1962
is a complete code in itself, under that it is

provided that goods that are once warehoused cannot be released from the

warehouse unless and until the import duties are paid. Reliance is placed on

Sections 45, 47(2), 68, 71 and 72 of the Customs Act,


4.4       The principle enunciated in the judgement of Division Bench of

Calcutta High Court in Collector of Customs Dytron India Ltd. (1999 (108)

ELT 342 (Cal.)] squarely applies to the present case even though the judgment

was rendered in the context of
Companies Act, 1956
since it interpreted

provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
vis-a-vis claims of the Liquidator.

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          4 of 39
       Based on the above judgement, it is contended that the goods can be

released to the Liquidator only after the customs duty is paid.


4.5   It is settled law that a legal question can be raised even at the appellate

stage, and as such, the issue of whether the debtor has clear and perfect title

over the warehoused goods under
Customs Act, 1962
, being a legal issue, has

been validly raised in the Appeal filed by the Appellant.


4.6   As such, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Tribunal may

be pleased to set aside the impugned Order.
5.    Respondent/Liquidator's Submission

5.1   Respondent submits its reply on every issue raised in the Appeal, which

is as follows;
5.2   CORPORATE DEBTOR IS THE OWNER OF THE GOODS
a)      The Appellant refers to
Sections 48
and
72
of the Customs Act. It

      refuses to release the goods of the Corporate Debtor and asserts its

      right to sell the same, despite the Order of Liquidation passed by the

      NCLT, which would bar such proceedings under the
Customs Act
.

      Thus, the Appellant's case appears to be based on a mixed and

      convoluted Application of
Section 48
and
72
of the Customs Act.
b)
Section 48
of the Customs Act applies only to goods neither

      cleared nor Warehoused by the importer, which is not the case for the

      Appellant as the Notice (issued under
Section 72
of the Customs Act)

      and 'Form C' filed by the Appellant is about Warehoused Goods.


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          5 of 39
       Moreover, it is undisputed and even admitted by the Appellant that the

      goods of the Corporate Debtor have been Warehoused by filing a bill of

      entries for Warehousing. The Appellant itself acknowledged in its 'Form

      C', which identifies 2531 Bills of Entries for Warehousing. Thus, the

      Notice issued by the Appellant under
Section 72
of the Customs Act

      and consequent 'Form C' ("Claim") filed by the Appellant does not

      attract
Section 48
of the Customs Act in any manner whatsoever

      contended by the Appellant.
c)      In addition to the above, it is submitted that the Corporate Debtor

      has not lost ownership of the goods, as alleged by the Appellant. In this

      regard, reference is made to
Section 72
of the Customs Act, which can

      be applied only against the "owner" of the goods. By issuing a Notice

      under
Section 72
of the Customs Act against the Corporate Debtor and

      filing its Claim with the Liquidator, the Appellant acknowledges the

      ownership of the Corporate Debtor about the warehoused goods.

      Neither
Section 48
nor
Section 72
of the Customs Act signifies any

      transfer of title or vesting property in Appellant as alleged in the present

      Appeal.
d)      Relinquishment of title under the
Customs Act
is governed by
Sections 23(2)
of the Act and proviso to
Section 68
of the Act. These

      provisions reinforce that relinquishment is purely the prerogative of the

      owner. The Corporate Debtor has never relinquished title to the goods

      either under
Customs Act
or under the Code. No communications in

      this regard have also been made to the Appellant. The Appellant has

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                           6 of 39
       not produced any shred of evidence to show that the Corporate Debtor

      has actively or consciously relinquished title to the goods. [
CIT, Bombay

      v. Rasiklal Manoklal (HUF) and Ors.
(
1989) 2 SCC 454 and [ICICI Bank

      Ltd. v. SIDCO Leathers and Ors
(2006) 10 SCC 452)].
e)      Even if some of the assets/goods are not in possession of the

      Corporate Debtor, it does not amount to relinquishment of rights over

      the    said    goods     in   any     manner   whatsoever.   (
Encore   Asset

      Reconstruction Company Pvt. Ltd vs Ms Charu Sandeep Desai & Ors.

      (Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.
719 of 2018)].
f)      By submitting a Claim (under
Section 38
of the Code), the

      Appellant has subjected its statutory dues to be governed by the Code's

      provisions and, more specifically, to the priority of distribution provided

      under
Section 53
of the Code. Furthermore, the Claim filed by the

      Appellant is based on the premise of ownership of these goods.

      Therefore it is clear that the Corporate Debtor has not lost the

      ownership rights over the goods.
g)      Assuming without admitting, even the Respondent/Liquidator

      could not have, after the commencement of CIRP and Liquidation

      process, relinquished the title of the goods in favour of the Appellant.

      Such action would cause prejudice to the creditors of the Corporate

      Debtor and would violate his duties under
Section 35
of the Code and

      the common law Anti-Deprivation Rule. (
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd.

      v. Amit Gupta (CA No
9241 of 2019)] and [Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd. v

      BNY Corporate Trustee Services Ltd & Anr. (2009) EWHC 1912 (Ch)].
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                             7 of 39
h)      Further, assuming without admitting that any loss of title occurs

      by deeming fiction under the
Customs Act
, this deeming fiction cannot

      be extended to other statutes, such as the Code. A deeming fiction

      under one statute cannot be extended to other statutes. (
State of

      Maharashtra v Laljit Rajshi Shah
(
2002) 2 SCC 699)] and [Meghraj

      Biscuits Industries Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of C. Ex., UP
(2007 (210)

      ELT 161 (SC)]
i)      Hon'ble Appellate Tribunal in Commissioner of Customs

      (Preventive), West Bengal v. Ram Swarup Industries Ltd. & Ors. (2019

      SCC Online NCLAT 371) has held thatthe Customs Department does

      not have a right to auction the goods of the Corporate Debtor under the

      provisions of the
Customs Act
, specifically under
Section 48
of the

      Customs Act, and must hand over custody of the goods to the

      Resolution Professional/Liquidator.
5.3   BAR       ON      PROCEEDINGS                AFTER   COMMENCEMENT      OF

      CIRP/LIQUIDATION

      a.      The Appellant could not have exercised its right under the
Customs Act
to recover its alleged dues against the Corporate Debtor

      by putting the property of the Corporate Debtor for sale after the Order

      of CIRP (on 01.08.2017), and Liquidation (on 25.04.2019) was passed

      against the Corporate Debtor.
b.      Even otherwise, under
Section 142A
of the Customs Act, the

      statutory charge of the Appellant is expressly subordinate and subject


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          8 of 39
       to the provisions of the Code. Accordingly, it cannot recover any of the

      Appellant's alleged dues against the Corporate Debtor. [
Kaledonia Jute

      & Fibres Pvt. Ltd. v. Axis Nirman & Industries Ltd.
(2021) 2 SCC 403];

      [
Deepak Cochhar v. Indusind Bank Ltd.
2006 SCC OnLine Bom 368)

      and (
Unilever Industries Private Limited & Another v. Kwality Limited
2018 SCC OnLine Cal 5978)].
c.      Further, under
Section 33 (5)
of the Code, which squarely applies

      upon the passing of an order of Liquidation, "no suit or other legal

      proceeding shall be instituted by or against the Corporate Debtor". The

      term "legal proceedings for a moratorium in Liquidation, will include

      proceedings for recovery of taxes. [Governor-General in
Council v.

      Shiromani Sugar Mills Ltd.
1946
SCC OnLine FC 5] and [Ludovico

      Sagrado Govela v. Cirila Rosa Maria Pinto and Ors.
(2016) 9 SCC 615)].


      d.      The Appellant's purported and continued custody of the

      Corporate Debtor's goods violates
Sections 14
and
33
of Code.
Section

      14(1)(a)
of the Code expressly prohibits the institution or continuation

      of proceedings against the Corporate Debtor during the moratorium

      period, i.e., the period between the insolvency commencement date and

      the completion of the Insolvency Resolution Process or until an order

      of Liquidation is passed under
Section 33
of the Code, whichever is

      earlier. Further,
Section 14(1)(c)
of the Code also expressly prohibits

      any action for the foreclosure, recovery or enforcement of any security

      interest against the Corporate Debtor in respect of its property.
[
CIT v.

      Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd.
(2018 SCC OnLine SC 3465)], [National

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                         9 of 39
        Plywood Industries Ltd. v. Union of India (
2020 (3) GLT 345)) and

       Dishnet Wireless Limited & Another v. The Deputy Commissioner of

       Income Tax & Anr.
(2013 SCC OnLine Mad 3701].
5.4    APPELLANT SEEKING PRIORITY IN SETTLEMENT OF DUES
a)      Distribution of all debts, including alleged claims of Appellant,

       are to be governed by the Code alone, being a special law enacted for

       this purpose. In Liquidation, the priority of debts shall be governed by

       the law relating to the liquidation process and not the law under which

       such debt is claimed to have arisen. Accordingly, Appellant cannot

       invoke the powers under
Sections 48
,
72
,
142
,
142A
or any other

       provisions of
Customs Act
to recover its alleged dues in priority to other

       dues.
b)
Section 53 (1)
of the Code begins with a non-obstante clause and

       thus prevails over any other law of debt recovery, including the one

       sought by Appellant
Section 53 (1)
of the Code overrides
Section 142A
of the Customs Act in the entirety. Further, post the amendment to
Section 142A
, any charge under the
Customs Act
is subject to the

       Code's provisions and distribution of dues under
Section 53
of the

       Code. Government dues are covered under
Section 53 (1) (e)
of the

       Code. Therefore, they are placed in the 5th position in priority while

       distributing the proceeds in Liquidation. Thus, there can be no question

       of the Appellant having a first charge or priority over the Corporate

       Debtor's assets. [
Leo Edibles & Fats Ltd. v. The Tax Recovery Officer

       (Central) Income Tax Department, Hyderabad and Ors.
(2018 SSC

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          10 of 39
        Online Hyd 193)] and [Technology Development Board v. Mr Anil Goel

       and Ors. (Company Appeal (AT) Insolvency No. 731 of 2020)].
c)     Allowing customs dues to be recovered in priority over all other

       creditors shall be arbitrary, unlawful, and breach settled principles of

       natural justice and
Article 14
of the Constitution. Any artificial

       classification attempted by Appellant to distinguish itself from all other

       creditors, including other tax authorities, will be arbitrary and place it

       in an unequal position. Moreover, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

       case of Swiss Ribbons specifically held that the Liquidator is the sole

       adjudicator of claims of all creditors, which can be challenged before

       the Adjudicating Authority. Therefore, the Appellant cannot decide its

       claims in the overreach of the Liquidator and place itself above other

       creditors.
5.5    CODE TO SUPERSEDE AND OVERRIDES THE CUSTOMS ACT

       a.     Section 238 of the Code provides that its provisions shall have a

       superseding effect notwithstanding any law inconsistent with the Code.

       The Hon'ble Supreme Court has also affirmed the overriding effect of

       the Code in the cases of
CIT v. Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd.
(
2018)

       SCC Online SC 3465, Duncans Industries Ltd. v. A.J. Agrochem
(2019)

       9 SCC 725, wherein it was held that by Section 238, the provisions of

       the Code would override anything inconsistent contained in any other

       law.
A similar observation has been made by this Hon'ble Appellate

       Tribunal in the case of
Om Prakash Agrawal v. CIT (TDS)(Company

       Appeal (AT) Insolvency No.
624 of 2020).
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          11 of 39
        b.     For argument sake, if it is considered that the Appellant has a

       right to proceed under
Sections 48
,
72
,
142
and
142A
of the Customs

       Act, then also it will not be applicable because of the overriding effect

       of Sec 238 of the I&B Code. There is an apparent inconsistency between

       the provisions of the
Customs Act
and the I&B Code.
Because the

       Customs Act
allow the Appellant to initiate recovery proceedings

       against the Corporate Debtor by putting to sale the assets of the

       Corporate Debtor in the custody of the Appellant. This is in

       contravention to the Code as it expressly bars initiation or continuation

       of any such proceedings under
Sections 14
and
33
and does not provide

       any priority to the Appellant's debt under
Section 53
of the Code.


       c.     When two special statutes contain non-obstante provisions, the

       later statute must prevail. Thus, the Appellant cannot bypass the

       mandatory requirements of the Code by unlawfully resorting to

       provisions of the
Customs Act
. (
Solidaire India Ltd. v. Fairgrowth

       Financial Services Ltd. & Ors.
(
2001) 3 SCC 71] [Maruti Udyog Ltd. v.

       Ram Lal & Ors.
((2005) 2 SCC 638) and (
Union of India v. India

       Fisheries (P) Ltd.
(1965 3 SCR 679)]
6.     ADDITIONAL WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE

       RESPONDENT


6.1    JURISDICTION OF NCLT
a)     The Appellant neither raised the issue of jurisdiction before the

       NCLT nor made ground in the present Appeal.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                         12 of 39
b)     The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in its decision in M/S Embassy

       Properties vs the State of Karnataka - Civil Appeal No. 9170 of 2019

       decided on 03.12.2019 examined the extent to which the NCLT can

       exercise its powers under
Section 60(5)
of the Code. The judgment in

       Embassy Properties must be examined in the specific context of the

       facts and the question of law decided, which are culled out as under. -
c)     The RP sought to include 'a mining lease right within the meaning

       of the word "property as per 5.3(27) of the Code. [Para 37]
d)     Considering those above, Hon'ble, the Supreme Court concluded

       that the mining lease right does not fall within the context of "property

       and that the correctness of the said decision can be called into question

       only in a superior court which is vested with the power of review over

       administrative action. [Para 28]. The Supreme Court accordingly held

       'wherever the Corporate Debtor has to exercise a right that falls outside

       the purview of the IBC, 2106, especially in the realm of public law, they

       cannot, through the Resolution Professional, take a bypass and go

       before the NCLT for the enforcement of such a right". [Para 40).
e)     In the instant case, the goods of the Cororate Debtor (in short

       'CD') are Warehoused at the Customs Bonded Warehouse (admitted by

       the Appellant at Para 7(1) of the Appeal) and as such is the "property of

       the CD in terms of
S.3(27)
. Moreover, the Appellant does not deny that

       the CD has imported these goods. The Respondent thus has a right over

       the Goods (even if they are not in possession of the CD) as per
S.18(f)(ii)
r/w
S.36 (3)(b)
of the Code. Consequently, the NCLT has the jurisdiction

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                           13 of 39
        to entertain the Application of the Liquidator under
S.60(5)
, since the

       right sought to be exercised is over the "property of the CD and the right

       sought to be enforced is not a "new right" but the "right to be not

       exercised" as per the case of Embassy Properties (supra) specifically in

       Para 44.
f)     Appellant has not taken any steps since 2014 to take into

       possession and confiscate the Goods under the
Customs Act
. They have

       sought to enforce this right after the Order of Liquidation was passed

       in July 2019, which cannot be permitted since the Appellant has

       already filed its Claim for the duty payable by the CD. Any payment

       received by the Appellant from the removal/ sale of the goods of the CD

       would amount to a preference being given to the Appellant over the

       other creditors and breach of the waterfall for payment of dues provided

       under
S.53
of the Code. The Appellant will be paid twice - first, by

       selling the assets of the CD and second, when they receive the amounts

       in terms of
S.53
.If this is permitted, the Appellant will receive more than

       the FC's, whose dues are around 21,000 crores, compared to the dues

       of the Appellant, which is about 769 crores.
g)     Hon'ble Supreme Court in Embassy Properties at Para 36

       recognises the exception that once the dues of the Government

       Authority is crystallised, they have to be paid as per the Code.

       Accordingly, the government dues have been finalised in the present

       case, and 'Form C' duly filed.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                           14 of 39
h)     The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam vs Mr

       Amit Gupta & Ors
- Civil Appeal No. 9241 of 2019 decided on

       08.03.2021 considered the judgment of Embassy Properties on the

       issue of jurisdiction of NCLT and upheld the interference by the NCLT

       in restraining Gujarat Urja (the DISCOM) from terminating the PPA

       with the Corporate Debtor, even though the termination of the PPA was

       governed by a contract which vested exclusive jurisdiction under the
Electricity Act
to the Electricity Commission.
i)     The judgment in both Embassy Properties (supra) and
Gujarat

       Urja
(supra) arose out of a contractual dispute (i.e., PPA and mining

       lease). However, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gujarat Urja (Para - 39 (iii),

       71-72, 87, 173) upheld the Order and jurisdiction exercised by the

       NCLT, despite the decision of the Embassy Properties adjudicating on

       a similar issue arising out of a contractual right. The dispute in the

       present case has arisen out of Goods that form part of the Liquidation

       Estate, and therefore solely arising out of the insolvency/liquidation of

       the Corporate Debtor- hence, NCLT is empowered to adjudicate under
S.60(5)
.
6.2    OWNERSHIP OF THE GOODS
i)     Determination of Ownership of Goods must be seen in terms of

       the Code and not under the
Customs Act
, and as per
S.18(f)(ii)
r/w,

       S.(3)(b) of the Code. Therefore, the RP/Liquidator can even take those

       assets that did not have the CD. In a similar case having almost

       identical facts, this Appellate Tribunal, in Commissioner of Customs

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                         15 of 39
        (Preventive), West Bengal v. Ram Swarup Industries Ltd. & Ors. 2019

       SCC Online NCLAT 371 [Para 3-9 and 15-24] restrained the Customs

       Authorities from selling the assets of that CD and had directed the

       officers to hand over the assets to the RP, after referring to the

       provisions of the
Customs Act
and the decision of the Calcutta High

       Court in
Collector of Customs v. Dytron (India) Ltd
(also relied upon by

       the Appellant in the present case). The Appellant has failed to plead

       how the decision of Ram Swarup does not apply to this Appeal.
ii)    Similarly, the Hon'ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case

       of
Leo Edibles & Fats Ltd. v. The Tax Recovery Officer (Central) Income

       Tax Department, Hyderabad and Ors.
2018 SSC Online Hyd 193 (Para
- 1, 13-19, 24 & 31) directed the Income Tax Authorities to file its Claim

       with the Liquidator and further directed the IT authorities to lift the

       Order of attachment over the goods of the CD.
iii)   The Appellant does not dispute the CD's ownership of these

       Goods in various warehouses and CFSs in any manner whatsoever. The

       Appellant's claims were made before the Respondent on the

       assumption that the Goods belonged to the CD. Assuming without

       admitting that any loss of title occurs by deeming fiction under the
Customs Act
, this deeming fiction cannot be extended to other statutes,

       such as the I & B Code. A deeming fiction under one statute cannot be

       extended to other statutes. [
Para - 6 State of Maharashtra v Laljit Rajshi

       Shah
(2002) 2 SCC 699)] and (
Para - 18, Meghraj Biscuits Industries

       Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of C. Ex., UP
(2007 (210) ELT 161 (SC)].

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          16 of 39
iv)    Even the Customs Act recognises the primacy of the Code.

       Accordingly, as per
S.142A
(non-obstante Clause) of the Customs Act,

       the statutory charge of the Appellant is expressly subordinate and

       subject to the provisions of the Code (see S.238 of the Code) and cannot

       be resorted to for the recovery of any of the Appellant's alleged dues

       against the Corporate Debtor.
v)     The Appellant has not relied on a single decision to bolster its

       argument that the Customs Authorities can sell the Assets of the CD

       after CIRP/Liquidation has been initiated even though it has the goods

       despite filing its Claim with the Liquidator and subjecting itself to the

       jurisdiction of the Code. The Code does not permit creditor (including a

       statutory authority) who is in possession of an asset of the CD to sell

       such asset to realise its statutory dues, particularly when FC's who

       might also similarly be in possession over the assets of the CD is

       otherwise restrained from selling the assets in their possession having

       subjected themselves to the jurisdiction of the Code.
vi)
The Customs Act
, the I&B Code, and the decisions of the Hon'ble

       Supreme Court, various Hon'ble High Courts and even the decision of

       this Hon'ble Appellate Tribunal are squarely in favour of the

       Respondent and against the Appellant.
7.     ANALYSIS

7.1    The learned Adjudicating Authority has passed the impugned Order on

the premise that Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 is a special law that


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                         17 of 39
 provides a non-obstante clause under Section 238 of the Code with overriding

effect over other prevailing law and statute, time being in force. Further,

relying on the case-law of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Solitaire India

Private Limited versus Fairgrowth Financial Services
(2001) 3 SCC 71, it is

argued that if there are two special statutes, which contain non-obstante

provisions, the later statute must prevail. Therefore, by virtue of Section 238

of the Code being a subsequent law, the proceeding contained therein shall

have an overriding effect on the other proceedings of the Customs and Central

Excise Act.
7.2    Based on the above, the Adjudicating Authority held that provisions of
Section 53
of the Code prescribe the Order of priority for distribution of

proceeds from the sale of liquidation assets, which shall prevail over the

provisions of
Section 11(e)
of the Central Excise Act and other provisions of

the
Customs Act
.
7.3    Therefore, the Respondent Department cannot legally withhold the

releasing of the material/goods, which are the property of the Corporate

Debtor Company (in Liquidation) and impose a prerequisite condition for

making payment of the customs duty by the Liquidator of the Corporate

Debtor Company (under Liquidation) because the claims of the Respondent's

Department have to be treated as a Government Dues and needs to be dealt

with under the waterfall mechanism provided under
Section 53
of the

Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
7.4    It is essential to mention that the goods lying in the Customs bonded

warehouses are not the Corporate Debtor's assets since it never claimed them

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                        18 of 39
 after importing them. Although the containers were imported between 2012

to 2015, the Corporate Debtor entered the liquidation process on April 25

2019. In this long span of about four years, the Corporate Debtor never

cleared the bills of entry for some of the said goods.


7.5    Given the definition of 'imported goods' under
Section 1 (25)
of the

Customs Act, 1962', goods brought into India from a place outside India but

do not include goods cleared for home consumption. In the present case, the

goods lying in various CFS imported by Corporate Debtors are not cleared for

home consumption.
The Customs Act
1962 provides a procedure to import

goods into India. However,
Section 45
states that all imported goods shall

remain in the port area unless cleared for import.


7.6    Admittedly, in the instant case, the containers were not cleared after

import.
Section 46 (3)
mandates the importer to present a bill of entry within

30 days of the arrival of the goods at the Port. Admittedly, for 15 containers,

no bill of entry has been filed to date.
Section 48
provides that imported goods

for which no bill of entry has been filed or cleared for import can be sold by

the custodian of those goods. Therefore, the importer has relinquished his

title to the imported goods by not filing a bill of entry for several years and not

removing the imported goods.
7.7    It is essential to mention that
Section 35 (1) (b)
of the Insolvency and

Bankruptcy Code, 2016 empowers the Liquidator to take control of the

Corporate Debtor's assets and properties. Therefore, the Liquidator has first




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                            19 of 39
 to ascertain that the assets for which custody has been sought belong to the

Corporate Debtor.
7.8    By not filing the bill of entry for several years and not paying the

Customs Duty and other charges, and taking clearance for home

consumption about the imported goods, the importer deemed to have lost his

title to the imported goods, in terms of
Section 48
&
Section 72
of the Customs

Act. Thus the Custom Authorities are empowered to sell the goods and to

recover the government dues. But, on the other hand, the Liquidator had no

power to take into possession of those goods in respect of which the Corporate

Debtor itself had relinquished its Claim and left it abundant without taking

any steps for clearance of the goods for home consumption by paying the

customs duty and other applicable charges.
7.9    The Liquidator intends to possess the uncleared goods from the

customs warehouses without upfront payment of custom duty is flawed. In

the context of identifying the goods or properties of the Company, 'imported

goods', subject to levy of Customs, stand on a different footing. The customs

duty is more a consequence of importing the goods than the importer's

liability to pay it. Even before initiating the Corporate Insolvency Resolution

Process, the Corporate Debtor Company could not have secured the

possession of the imported goods except by paying the Customs duty. The

Resolution Professional/Liquidator who virtually represents the Company

cannot stand better than the Corporate Debtor.
7.10 The Liquidator could take possession of only the Company's assets,

which the Company itself could have obtained. The liquidation proceedings

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                        20 of 39
 do not change the rights in this regard, and Customs Duty needs to be paid

for the release of the goods by the importer. In the circumstances as stated

above, the materials lying in the customs bonded warehouses can not be

treated as 'Assets of the Corporate Debtor'. Thus, the Liquidator cannot claim

goods without payment of Customs dues to settle claims of the secured

creditors.
Section 142
of the Customs Act deals with the provision to settle

the   claims    of   Customs      by    proceeding     against   the   materials    lying

uncleared/unclaimed in the warehouses since liabilities under the
Customs

Act
are the first charge under
Section 142 A
of the Customs Act.


7.11 Before taking a decision, it is also necessary to go through the relevant

provisions of
Customs Act
1962, which are given below for ready reference;
Clearance of Imported Goods
45.     Restrictions on custody and removal of imported
       goods.--
(1)     Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being
       in force, all imported goods unloaded in a customs area shall
       remain in the custody of such person as may be approved by
       the Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of
       Customs until they are cleared for home consumption or are
       warehoused or are transhipped in accordance with the
       provisions of Chapter VIII.
(2)     The person having custody of any imported goods in a
       customs area, whether under the provisions of sub-section (1)
       or under any law for the time being in force,--
(a)    shall keep a record of such goods and send a copy
                      thereof to the proper officer;
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                                   21 of 39
(b)     shall not permit such goods to be removed from the
                      customs area or otherwise dealt with, except
                      under and in accordance with the permission in
                      writing of the proper officer    230[or   in such manner
                      as may be prescribed].
[(3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
       time being in force, if any imported goods are pilfered after
       unloading thereof in a customs area while in the custody of a
       person referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be liable
       to pay duty on such goods at the rate prevailing on the date of
       delivery of an [arrival manifest or import manifest] or, as the
       case may be, an import report to the proper officer under
Section
       30
for the arrival of the conveyance in which the said goods
       were carried.]
46.    Entry of goods on importation.--(1) The importer of
       any goods, other          than goods        intended for transit or
       transhipment,         shall       make       entry        thereof   by
       presenting 2[electronically] [on the customs automated system]
       to the proper officer a bill of entry for home consumption or
       Warehousing [in such form and manner as may be prescribed]:
[Provided that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or
       Commissioner of Customs may, in cases where it is not feasible
       to make entry by presenting electronically [on the customs
       automated system], allow an entry to be presented in any other
       manner:
Provided further that] if the importer makes and
       subscribes to a declaration before the proper officer, to the effect
       that he is unable for want of full information to furnish all the
       particulars of the goods required under this sub-section, the
       proper officer may, pending the production of such information,


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                                 22 of 39
        permit him, previous to the entry thereof: (a) to examine the
       goods in the presence of an officer of customs, or (b) to deposit
       the goods in a public warehouse appointed under
Section 57
without warehousing the same.
(2)    Save as otherwise permitted by the proper officer, a bill
       of entry shall include all the goods mentioned in the bill of
       lading or other receipt given by the carrier to the consignor.
[(3)  The importer shall present the bill of entry under
       sub-section (1) [before the end of the day (including
       holidays) preceding the day] on which the aircraft or
       vessel or vehicle carrying the goods arrives at a customs
       station at which such goods are to be cleared for home
       consumption or Warehousing:
[Provided that the Board may, in such cases as it may deem fit,
       prescribe different time limits for presentation of the bill of
       entry, which shall not be later than the end of the day of such
       arrival:
Provided further that] a bill of entry may be presented [at
       any time not exceeding thirty days prior to] the expected
       arrival of the aircraft or vessel or vehicle by which the
       goods have been shipped for importation into India:
[Provided also that] where the bill of entry is not presented
       within the time so specified and the proper officer is satisfied
       that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the importer
       shall pay such charges for late presentation of the bill of entry
       as may be prescribed.]

       (4)    The importer while presenting a bill of entry shall [* * *]
       make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of the
       contents of such bill of entry and shall, in support of such
       declaration, produce to the proper officer the invoice, if
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                            23 of 39
        any, [and such other documents relating to the imported goods
       as may be prescribed].
[(4-A) The importer who presents a bill of entry shall ensure the
       following, namely--
(a)     the accuracy and completeness of the information
                      given therein;
(b)     the authenticity and validity of any document
                      supporting it; and
(c)     compliance with the restriction or prohibition, if
                      any, relating to the goods under this Act or under
                      any other law for the time being in force.]

       (5)    If the proper officer is satisfied that the interests
       of revenue are not prejudicially affected and that there
       was no fraudulent intention, he may permit substitution
       of a bill of entry for home consumption for a bill of entry
       for Warehousing or vice versa.
47.    Clearance of goods for home consumption.--[(1)]
       Where the proper officer is satisfied that any goods
       entered for home consumption are not prohibited goods
       and the importer has paid the import duty, if any,
       assessed thereon and any charges payable under this Act
       in respect of the same, the proper officer may make an
       order permitting clearance of the goods for home
       consumption.
[Provided that such Order may also be made electronically
       through the customs automated system on the basis of risk
       evaluation through appropriate selection criteria:
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                           24 of 39
        Provided further that] the Central Government may, by
       notification in the Official Gazette, permit certain class of
       importers to make deferred payment of said duty or any
       charges in such manner as may be provided by rules.]


       [(2)   [The importer shall pay the import duty--
(a)     on the date of presentation of the bill of entry
              in the case of self-assessment; or
(b)     within one day (excluding holidays) from the
              date on which the bill of entry is returned to him
              by the proper officer for payment of duty in the case
              of    assessment,         reassessment   or   provisional
              assessment; or
(c)     in the case of deferred payment under the
              proviso to sub-section (1), from such due date as
              may be specified by rules made in this behalf, and
              if he fails to pay the duty within the time so
              specified, he shall pay interest on the duty not paid
              or short-paid till the date of its payment, at such
              rate, not less than ten per cent but not exceeding
              thirty-six per cent per annum, as may be fixed by
              the Central Government, by notification in the
              Official Gazette.]

       [Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in
       the Official Gazette, specify the class or classes of importers
       who shall pay such duty electronically:
Provided further that] where the bill of entry is returned for
       payment of duty before the commencement of the Customs
       (Amendment) Act, 1991 and the importer has not paid such
       duty before such commencement, the date of return of such bill

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          25 of 39
        of entry to him shall be deemed to be the date of such
       commencement for the purpose of this section:]

       [Provided also that] if the Board is satisfied that it is necessary
       in the public interest so to do, it may, by Order for reasons to
       be recorded, waive the whole or part of any interest payable
       under this section.]
48.       Procedure      in   case     of   goods    not   cleared,
       warehoused,         or     transhipped      within   [thirty   days]
       255 after unloading.--If any goods brought into India
       from a place outside India are not cleared for home
       consumption           or      warehoused        or    transhipped
       within [thirty days] from the date of the unloading
       thereof at a customs station or within such further time
       as the proper officer may allow or if the title to any
       imported goods is relinquished, such goods may, after
       Notice to the importer and with the permission of the
       proper officer, be sold by the person having the custody
       thereof:
Provided that--
(a)       animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods, may,
       with the permission of the proper officer, be sold at any time;
(b)       arms and ammunition may be sold at such time and
       place and in such manner as the Central Government may
       direct.
Explanation.--In this section, "arms" and "ammunition" have
       the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Arms Act,
       1959
(54 of 1959).
[49.      Storage of imported goods in warehouse pending
       clearance or removal.--Where,--
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                              26 of 39
(a)     in the case of any imported goods, whether dutiable or
       not, entered for home consumption, the Assistant Commissioner
       of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs is satisfied on
       the application of the importer that the goods cannot be cleared
       within a reasonable time;
(b)     in the case of any imported dutiable goods, entered for
       Warehousing, the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or
       Deputy Commissioner of Customs is satisfied on the application
       of the importer that the goods cannot be removed for deposit in
       a warehouse within a reasonable time, the goods may pending
       clearance or removal, as the case may be, be permitted to be
       stored in a public warehouse for a period not exceeding thirty
       days:
Provided that the provisions of Chapter IX shall not apply to
       goods permitted to be stored in a public warehouse under this
       section:
Provided further that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or
       Commissioner of Customs may extend the period of storage for
       a further period not exceeding thirty days at a time.]
68.     Clearance       of    warehoused    goods    for   home
       consumption. - Any warehoused goods may be cleared from
       the warehouse] for home consumption, if--
(a)    a bill of entry for home consumption in respect of
               such goods has been presented in the prescribed form;

               [(b) the import duty, interest, fine and penalties payable
               in respect of such goods have been paid; and]
(c)    an order for clearance of such goods for home
               consumption has been made by the proper officer:
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                            27 of 39
        [Provided that the Order referred to in Clause (c) may also be
       made electronically through the customs automated system on
       the basis of risk evaluation through appropriate selection
       criteria:
Provided further that] the owner of any warehoused goods
       may, at any time before an order for clearance of goods for
       home consumption has been made in respect of such goods,
       relinquish his title to the goods upon payment of       295[*   * *]
       penalties that may be payable in respect of the goods and upon
       such relinquishment, he shall not be liable to pay duty thereon:]

       [Provided also that] the owner of any such warehoused goods
       shall not be allowed to relinquish his title to such goods
       regarding which an offence appears to have been committed
       under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.]
71. Goods not to be taken out of warehouse except as
       provided by this Act.--No warehoused goods shall be taken
       out of a warehouse except on clearance for home consumption
       or [export], or for removal to another warehouse, or as
       otherwise, provided by this Act.
72. Goods improperly removed from warehouse, etc.--(1)
       In any of the following cases, that is to say,--
(a)    where any warehoused goods are removed from a
              warehouse in contravention of
Section 71
;
(b)    where any warehoused goods have not been
              removed from a warehouse at the expiration of the
              period during which such goods are permitted
              under
Section 61
to remain in a warehouse;
(c)    [* * *]



Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                              28 of 39
        (d)    where any goods in respect of which a bond has been
executed under [
Section 59
[* * *]] and which have not
              been cleared for home consumption or [export or] are not
              duly accounted for to the satisfaction of the proper officer,
              the proper officer may demand, and the owner of
              such goods shall forthwith pay, the full amount of
              duty chargeable on account of such goods together
              with [interest, fine and penalties] payable in
              respect of such goods.
(2)    If any owner fails to pay any amount demanded
       under sub-section (1), the proper officer may, without
       prejudice to any other remedy, cause to be detained and
       sold, after Notice to the owner (any transfer of the goods
       notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of his goods, if
       any, in the warehouse, as the said officer may [deem fit]."

7.12 It is pertinent to mention that the
Customs Act
1962 is a complete Code

in itself. It provides that goods that are once warehoused cannot be released

from the warehouse unless and until the import duties are paid. Hon'ble High

Court of Calcutta in case of
Collector of Customs v Dytron (India) Ltd
,

(05.11.1998 - MANU/WB/0334/1998) has held that:
"23.   The Customs Authorities are correct in their submission
       that until and unless their duties and statutory dues are paid
       under the provisions noted above, the chemicals were not
       available legally for sale to the purchasers at all. That is to say
       the assets would form a part of the assets of the Company
       available for distribution by virtue of Liquidation subject to
       payment of the Customs Duties and interest etc. The provisions
       of
Sections 529
and
530A
of the Companies Act, 1956 apply to
       situations where the Claim of creditors in respect of the sale
       proceeds of the assets of the Company sold in Liquidation are

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                              29 of 39
        to be determined. The Customs Authorities claim to the
       chemicals in question, in which the Customs Authorities had a
       statutory right of detention and confiscation, had to be met
       before the chemicals could be validly sold as assets of the
       Company in Liquidation. The Claim of the Customs Authorities
       would, therefore, stand outside proceedings under Sections
       529, 529A and 530 of the 1956 Act."
7.13 Further,
Section 45
of the Customs Act lays down restrictions on

custody and removal of imported goods. It provides that all imported goods

unloaded in the customs area shall remain in the custody of such person as

the Commissioner of Customs may approve until they are cleared for home

consumption or warehoused or transhipped.
Section 47
of the Customs Act

provides that if any goods are entered for home consumption and the importer

has paid the import duty, if any assessed thereon and any charges payable in

respect of the same, then only the proper officer may make an order permitting

clearance of the goods for home consumption.
Section 48
of the Customs Act

lays down the provision if goods are not cleared, warehoused, or transhipped

within 30 days after unloading. It provides that if goods are not cleared for

home consumption or warehoused or transhipped within 30 days from the

date of unloading thereof at the customs station, or within such other time,

as the proper officer may allow, such goods may after notice to the importer

and with the permission of the proper officer, be sold by the person having

the custody thereof. Finally,
section 71
of the Act lays down the restriction

that no good shall be taken out of the warehouse except provided under the

Act.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                       30 of 39
 7.14 Based on the statutory provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
, it is clear

that the goods imported for home consumption cannot be removed from the

custody of the customs without paying the import duty and the charges

thereon under the provisions of the Act.
7.15 Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Amit

Gupta
, (2021) 7 SCC 209: 2021 SCC OnLine SC 194 at page 262 has held

that;
"69. The institutional framework under IBC contemplated the
        establishment of a single forum to deal with matters of
        insolvency, which were distributed earlier across multiple fora.
        In the absence of a court exercising exclusive jurisdiction over
        matters relating to insolvency, the corporate debtor would have
        to file and/or defend multiple proceedings in different fora.
        These proceedings may cause undue delay in the insolvency
        resolution process due to multiple proceedings in trial courts
        and courts of Appeal. A delay in completion of the insolvency
        proceedings would diminish the value of the debtor's assets
        and hamper the prospects of a successful reorganisation or
        Liquidation. For the success of an insolvency regime, it is
        necessary that insolvency proceedings are dealt with in a
        timely, effective and efficient manner. Pursuing this theme
        in
Innoventive [Innoventive Industries Ltd. v. ICICI Bank
, (2018)
        1 SCC 407 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 356] this Court observed that :
(SCC p. 422, para 13)

              "13.    One of the important objectives of the Code is to
              bring the insolvency law in India under a single unified
              umbrella with the object of speeding up of the insolvency
              process."
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                            31 of 39
        The principle was reiterated in
ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal
       (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta
, (2019) 2 SCC 1] where
       this Court held that : (SCC p. 88, para 84)

              "84.    The non obstante Clause in
Section 60(5)
is
              designed for a different purpose : to ensure that NCLT
              alone has jurisdiction when it comes to applications and
              proceedings by or against a corporate debtor covered by
              the Code, making it clear that no other forum has
              jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of such applications or
              proceedings."
Therefore, considering the text of
Section 60(5)(c)
and the
       interpretation of similar provisions in other insolvency
       related statutes, NCLT has jurisdiction to adjudicate
       disputes, which arise solely from or which relate to the
       insolvency of the corporate debtor. However, in doing so,
       we issue a note of caution to NCLT and NCLAT to ensure
       that they do not usurp the legitimate jurisdiction of other
       courts, tribunals and fora when the dispute is one which
       does not arise solely from or relate to the insolvency of
       the corporate debtor. The nexus with the insolvency of
       the corporate debtor must exist.
****
77.    Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of this
       Court in
Embassy Property [Embassy Property Developments
       (P) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka
, (2020) 13 SCC 308] , where this
       Court held that NCLT and NCLAT did not have jurisdiction over
       a dispute arising under the
Mines and Minerals (Development
       and Regulation) Act, 1957
, in relation to the refusal of the State
       of Karnataka to extend a mining lease. The primary
       consideration which weighed with this Court while coming to
       its decision was that NCLT cannot have jurisdiction on matters
       of public law. This Court held: (SCC p. 331, para 37)
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                             32 of 39
               "37.    Clause (c) of sub-section (5) of
Section 60
is very
              broad in its sweep, in that it speaks about any question
              of law or fact, arising out of or in relation to insolvency
              resolution. But a decision taken by the Government or a
              statutory authority in relation to a matter which is in the
              realm of public law, cannot, by any stretch of
              imagination, be brought within the fold of the phrase
              "arising out of or in relation to the insolvency resolution"
appearing in Clause (c) of sub-section (5)."
(emphasis in original)

       In the present case the decision to terminate PPA has not been
       taken by any governmental or statutory authority acting within
       the domain of its public law functions. The decision has been
       simply taken by a contracting party solely on account of the
       initiation of insolvency proceedings against the corporate
       debtor in terms of an agreement between the parties."

7.16 Thus, it is clear that NCLT and NCLAT cannot usurp the legitimate

jurisdiction of other Courts, Tribunals and fora when the dispute does not

arise solely from or relating to the Insolvency of the Corporate Debtor. In the

instant case, the Corporate Debtor had abandoned the imported goods in the

Customs warehouses for several years and failed to pay the import duty and

other charges and had not taken any steps to take possession of those goods

for several years. Therefore, the importer had lost his right to the imported

goods. Consequently, the Customs Authorities are fully empowered under
Section 72
of the Act to sell those goods to recover the government dues. The

Liquidator has no right to take into possession over those goods for which the

Corporate Debtor's title is deemed relinquished by implication of law. Even

before initiating the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, the Corporate


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                             33 of 39
 Debtor Company could not have secured the possession of the imported goods

except by paying the customs duty. The Resolution Professional/Liquidator,

who virtually represents the Company, cannot stand on a better footing than

the Corporate Debtor itself.
7.17 The learned Counsel for the Respondent Liquidator has placed reliance

on the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Gujarat Urja

Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Amit Gupta
, (2021) 7 SCC 209: 2021 SCC OnLine SC

194 at page 262, wherein it is held that;
"176.      Given that the terms used in
Section 60(5)(c)
are of
       wide import, as recognised in a consistent line of authority, we
       hold that NCLT was empowered to restrain the Appellant from
       terminating PPA. However, our decision is premised upon a
       recognition of the centrality of PPA in the present case to the
       success of CIRP, in the factual matrix of this case, since it is the
       sole contract for the sale of electricity which was entered into
       by the corporate debtor. In doing so, we reiterate that NCLT
       would have been empowered to set aside the termination of
       PPA in this case because the termination took place solely on
       the ground of insolvency. The jurisdiction of NCLT under
Section
       60(5)(c)
of IBC cannot be invoked in matters where a
       termination may take place on grounds unrelated to the
       insolvency of the corporate debtor. Even more crucially, it
       cannot even be invoked in the event of a legitimate termination
       of a contract based on an ipso facto clause like Article 9.2.1(e)
       herein, if such termination will not have the effect of making
       certain the death of the corporate debtor. As such, in all future
       cases, NCLT would have to be wary of setting aside valid
       contractual terminations which would merely dilute the value
       of the corporate debtor, and not push it to its corporate death

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                              34 of 39
        by virtue of it being the corporate debtor's sole contract (as was
       the case in this matter's unique factual matrix).
177.      The terms of our intervention in the present case are
       limited. Judicial intervention should not create a fertile ground
       for the revival of the regime under
Section 22
of SICA which
       provided for suspension of wide-ranging contracts.
Section 22
of the SICA cannot be brought in through the back door. The
       basis of our intervention in this case arises from the fact that if
       we allow the termination of PPA which is the sole contract of
       the corporate debtor, governing the supply of electricity which
       it generates, it will pull the rug out from under CIRP, making the
       corporate death of the corporate debtor a foregone conclusion."
7.18 The learned counsel for the Respondent Liquidator submits that 'Form

C' filed by the Appellant is about the Corporate Debtor's warehoused goods,

which were warehoused by filing bills of entries for Warehousing. Claim Form

C itself identifies 2531 bills of entries for Warehousing. It is further argued

that the Corporate Debtor has not lost ownership of the goods is also evident

from the fact that the Appellant has filed its Claim about the Warehoused

goods in 'Form C' before the Liquidator. It is also said that by filing the Claim

before the Liquidator, the Appellant admits the ownership of the Corporate

Debtor and accepts the authority of the Liquidator to decide the Claim about

the Government Dues, which shall be decided in terms of Sec 53 of the Code.


7.19 It is essential to mention that by filing the Claim before the Liquidator,

it cannot be said that the Appellant had relinquished its right over the

warehoused goods and submitted it to the jurisdiction of the Liquidator.

Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
ICICI Bank Ltd. v. SIDCO Leathers Ltd.,


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.
236 of 2021                             35 of 39
 (2006) 10 SCC 452: 2006 SCC OnLine SC 498 at page 469 clarified the

position of law regarding relinquishment of right which is as under;
"53. The expression "relinquish" has a different connotation.
       In P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon at p. 4047, it
       is stated:
"Relinquish.--To give over possession or control of; to leave
       off."
It envisages a conscious act i.e. an act where a person
       was aware of his right and then relinquishes the same.
       The same must be for the general benefit of the creditors.
       His action must lead to a conclusion that he, for one
       reason or the other, intended to stand in the queue for
       receiving money owed to him. It, however, does not stand
       obliterated only by the filing of an affidavit or proof of
       Claim with the Official Liquidator. Such a claim had
       been filed pursuant to a notice issued by the Official
       Liquidator. If the creditor does not respond to the said
       Notice, he would not be in a position to bring to the Notice
       of the Official Liquidator, the existence of his right."

7.20 In the instant case, the Appellant has filed its Claim before the

Liquidator in response to the Notice issued by the Liquidator. Given the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above-mentioned case, it is

clear that by submission of Claim in response to the Notice issued by the

Liquidator, it can not be presumed that the Appellant had relinquished its

right over the property and submitted to the jurisdiction of the Liquidator.

The Claim is filed in an effort to realise its dues. Still, it will not amount to

relinquishment of its right over the Warehoused goods under its custody for

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                          36 of 39
 which Appellant has every right to sell those goods for the realisation of the

Government dues.
7.21 The learned Counsel for the Respondent further emphasised Section

238 of the Code, which provides that it shall have an overriding effect

notwithstanding any law inconsistent with the Code. The Appellant's

contention is not sustainable on the ground that
Sections 48
,
72
,
142
and
142 A
of the Customs Act is inconsistent with
Sections 14
and
33
of the I&B

Code. Because it allows the Appellant to initiate recovery proceedings against

the Corporate Debtor by selling the assets of the Corporate Debtor in the

custody of the Appellant, it is in contravention of the provisions of the Code,

which bars initiation or continuation of any such proceeding under
Sections

14
and
33
of the Code, which does not provide any priority to the Appellant

under
Section 53
of the Code.
7.22 It is further said that when two special statutes contain non-obstante

provisions, the later statute must prevail. Thus the Appellant cannot bypass

the mandatory and special provisions of the Code by unlawfully resorting to

provisions of the
Customs Act
.
7.23 We are not convinced with the argument advanced by the Respondent

because the goods imported by the Corporate Debtor were imported much

before the initiation of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, and the

Corporate Debtor never claimed them after import. Undisputedly the

containers were imported between 2012 to 2015. The CIRP was initiated




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                        37 of 39
 against the Corporate Debtor in 2017, and the liquidation order was passed

on April 25 2019.
7.24 Therefore, the Corporate Debtor's assets because the Corporate Debtor

never made any effort for clearing the goods by paying Customs Duty and

other applicable charges before the initiation of Liquidation proceeding after

importing them. Undisputedly the containers were imported between 2012 to

2015. The CIRP was initiated against the Corporate Debtor in 2017, and the

liquidation order was passed in April 25, 2019. Therefore the assets lying in

the Customs bonded warehouses cannot be considered assets of the

Corporate Debtor. The Liquidator intends to possess the uncleared goods from

the customs warehouses without upfront payment of Customs duty, which is

against the statutory provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
. Therefore, the

imported goods subject to levy of Customs stand on a different footing than

the goods /assets, not in the Corporate Debtor's possession. Therefore the

assets lying in the Customs bonded warehouses cannot be considered assets

of the Corporate Debtor.
7.25 Based on the above discussion, we believe that the Adjudicating

Authority committed an error in directing the release of goods without paying

customs duty and other applicable charges. Thus Appeal deserves to be

allowed.
ORDER

       The Appeal is allowed - no Order as to costs. Impugned Order dated

February 25, 2020, passed by the Adjudicating Authority/National Company

Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad Bench, Ahmedabad in IA No. 474 of 2019 in
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                       38 of 39
 Company Petition (IB) No.53/NCLT/AHM/2017, whereby the Adjudicating

Authority had directed removal of the materials lying in the Customs Bonded

Warehouses without payment of Customs Duty under
Section 60(5)
of the

Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 is modified to the extent that goods

can be released or disposed of as per Applicable Provisions of Customs Act by

the Proper Officer.
[Justice M. Venugopal]
                                                           Member (Judicial)


                                                            [Mr. V. P. Singh]
                                                          Member (Technical)


                                                   [Dr. Ashok Kumar Mishra]
                                                          Member (Technical)
NEW DELHI
22nd November, 2021

pks




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 236 of 2021                      39 of 39
