Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 2 of 1974
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2021 DEL 331
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/138130881/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
7
]
Delhi High Court
Mohit Aggarwal vs Narcotics Control Bureau on 16 March, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 DEL 331
Author:
Suresh Kumar Kait
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
$~
*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                                            Reserved on: 04.03.2021
                                         Pronounced on: 16.03.2021
+     BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020 & Crl.M.(B) 8044/2020
      MOHIT AGGARWAL                           ..... Petitioner
              Through: Mr. Ramesh Gupta, Senior Advocate
                       with Mr.S.P.Singh Rathore &
                       Mr. Shailendera Singh, Advocates

                          Versus
      NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU                ..... Respondent
              Through: Mr. Rajesh Manchanda, Standing Counsel
                        for NCB with Mr. Rajat Manchanda,
                        Advocate
      CORAM:
      HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT

                          JUDGMENT
1.    In case SC No. SC/1334/2020, titled as NCB Vs. Gaurav Aggarwal &

Ors, petitioner is facing trial for the offences under
Sections 8
/
22
&
29
of

Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. Petitioner was

arrested by the officials of Narcotic Control Bureau („NCB‟) on 11.01.2020

and is in judicial custody since 11.01.2020. Vide present petition, petitioner

is seeking bail while claiming to be innocent and of having been falsely

implicated in the present case.
2.    The present petition has been filed on the ground that petitioner is a
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 1 of 23
law abiding citizen and is running business in the name of Madhav Pharma

for sale, purchase and transport of various medicines while holding valid

drug license under Form 20B & 21
B of Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1945
.

Petitioner has pleaded that he has maintained all records complying with all

the terms and conditions of the license. Petitioner has further pleaded that no

contraband was recovered from his possession and he has been falsely

implicated in this case.
3.    The crux of the prosecution case, as per complaint dated 09.01.2020,

is that upon receipt of secret information by Chetan Sharma, Intelligence

Officer (IO) that one parcel bearing Airway Bill No. D90471207, booked by

one Gaurav Kumar from Agra for delivery to one Manoj Kumar, at

Ludhiana, Punjab is lying at DTDC, Khasra No. 16/06, Smalakha,

Kapasehra, New Delhi is suspected of containing NRX tablets and if

captured, huge quantity of narcotic tablets can be recovered. This

information was reduced into writing and was placed before Amit Kumar

Tiwary, Superintendent, who directed Manoj Kumar, Junior Intelligence

Officer, to constitute a team and take further action as per law. Thereafter,

Manoj Kumar, Junior Intelligence Officer along with other members of the

constituted raiding team, namely, Raj Kumar Maurya, Intelligence Officer,
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                             Page 2 of 23
Ajay Kumar, Speoy and N.P. Singh, Driver, collected the DD kit, weighing

machine I.O. kit and other related seizing material and seal of Narcotic

Control Bureau DZU-2. The team left the Delhi office and reached at above

mentioned address and met Durgesh Prasad, Vigilance Senior Executive of

DTDC. After introducing themselves by showing their identify cards,

informed about their purpose of coming       and requested him and his

colleague, one Aas Mohd. Khan, to become independent witnesses for the

search and seizure proceedings, to which they accepted. Manoj Kumar,

Junior Intelligence Officer, offered these independent witnesses to search

him and his team members, to which they declined. Thereafter, the

suspected article was opened in the presence of these two independent

witnesses. On opening the said parcel, it was found to be jute bag, on which

and on the bill, the name of the consignor was written as Gaurav Kumar,

Agra (U.P.) and consignee was written as Manoj Kumar, Campa Cola

Chowk, Ludhiana-141003.
4.    When the said jute bag was opened, a brown card box was found

which contained 50,000 tablets of Tramadol weighing 20 kg. Since these

were being sent as mis-declared item without bill and were in contravention

of the
NDPS Act
, therefore, seizure proceedings were initiated after due
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                          Page 3 of 23
procedure. A notice under
Section 67
of NDPS was issued to independent

witnesses-Durgesh Prasad and Aas Mohd. Khan. Thereafter, Manoj Kumar,

Intelligence Officer, collected relevant information about Gaurav Kumar of

Agra and Manoj Kumar of Ludhiana from DTDC office and as mentioned

on Airway Bill and prepared disclosure to this effect. The disclosure

statement of Manoj Kumar Yadav, Intelligence Officer was placed before

Amit Kumar Tiwary, Superintendent, who directed Sh. Sachin Kumar,

Intelligence Officer to take action against Gaurav Kumar of Agra and Manoj

Kumar of Ludhiana as per law.
5.    On the next day, i.e. 10.01.2020, after making relevant entries in the

test memo form, the samples seized from the office of DTDC on 09.01.2020

were sent to Chemical Engineer, CRCL Pusa Road, New Delhi through Sh.

Yogesh Kumar Sharma, Sepoy. On the same day i.e. 10.01.2020 Manoj

Kumar Yadav, Junior Intelligence Officer, gave his seizure report to Amit

Kumar Tiwary, Superintendent. Consequent upon marking of aforesaid

disclosure, Manoj Kumar Yadav, Junior Intelligence Officer on 10.01.2020

along with members of his fresh constituted raiding team reached at the

office of DTDC, Mathura Road, Agra and Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal was

called at the DTDC office by their staff members and there he was served
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                          Page 4 of 23
with notice under
Section 67
of NDPS Act.
6.    On the same day, i.e. 10.01.2020, Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal, in the

office of DTDC office, gave his voluntary statement under
Section 67
of

NDPS Act before Anand Kumar, Intelligence Officer. He was fully apprised

of the procedure prescribed under
Section 67
of NDPS Act, however,

Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal, accepted his guilt and stated that on 06.01.2020,

he had booked a parcel in the name of Manoj Kumar, Campa Cola Chowk,

Ludhiana, Punjab with DTDC courier, Sikandra Road, Agra, containing

50,000 tablets of Tramadol which was purchased by him from Mohit

Aggarwal (petitioner herein) without bill. He admitted that the said parcel

contained 50,000 tablets of Tramadol, which fall under contraband narcotic

drugs, were without prescription and bill, therefore, on the parcel it was

mentioned "surgical items".
7.    The said Gaurav Kumar Agarwal, further stated that Mohit Aggarwal

purchased these medicines from Pramod Jaipuri @ Davinder Khandelwal

and gave their mobile numbers. He further disclosed that Pramod Jaipuria,

lives in Jaipur but his son in law, Gaurav Khandelwal, used to look after his

business in Agra and he had a godown of drugs in Agra and that whenever

Pramod Jaipuria visited Agra, he lived in Hotel Chanderlok, Raja Mandi. He
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 5 of 23
further disclosed that he knew house and shop of Mohit Aggarwal and can

identify them and their places if NCB officials ask him to accompany.

Thereafter, Gaurav Kumar took the raiding team to Mohit Kumar Aggarwal,

on whose disclosure raiding team reached the house of Doji Ram, where

Pramod Kumar Jaipuria @ Davinder Khandelwal was running his godown,

there the raiding team met one Rambir, the watchman, who disclosed that

the godown belonged to Pramod Kumar Jaipuria @ Davinder Khandelwal,

who was doing business of medicines and he called him up on his mobile

and informed that the NCB team has come to his godown and after hearing

this, Pramod Kumar Jaipuria @ Davinder Khandelwal disconnected the

phone and switched off his mobile. Thereafter, upon following the due

procedure as per law, the search was conducted at the godown and huge

quantity of drugs covered under the
NDPS Act
was seized. On the said day

itself, notice under
Section 67
of the NDPS Act was served upon Mohit

Aggarwal. Both, Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal and Mohit Aggarwal voluntarily

agreed to accompany the raiding team to Delhi.
8.    On 10.01.2020, Sachin Kumar, Intelligence Officer, along with his

raiding team, headed towards office of DTDC at Ludhiana. When Manoj

Kumar reached at DTDC office and asked for his parcel, Sachin Kumar,
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                       Page 6 of 23
Intelligence Officer, spoke to him and told him their purpose of coming

there and on asking about the parcel, Manoj Kumar stated that he is a whole

seller of medicines and is involved in the sale and purchase of medicines

and he accepted to have placed an order for 50,000 tablets of Taramol from

Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal and that he had come to collect the parcel and also

that he had all the relevant documents at his shop Tredwell Health Care and

if the NCB officials accompany him to the shop, he can show the entire

documents. The NCB team members along with local police officials visited

his shop and Manoj Kumar showed certain documents, which were found to

be not relating to narcotics. On verification of those documents, it revealed

that Manoj Kumar did not have any document with regard to sale and

purchase of narcotic drugs. Upon further inspection of stock available at his

shop, it was further revealed that a huge quantity of different narcotic drugs

were available at his shop, without any relevant document in that regard and

Manoj Kumar admitted to have sold a few without any prescription and bill

and so, the medicine stock was sealed under the provisions of
NDPS Act
.

On that day i.e. 10.01.2020, Manoj Kumar was served with Notice under
Section 67
of NDPS Act and he gave his voluntary statement before Sachin

Kumar, Intelligence Officer.
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 7 of 23
9.      On the next day i.e. 11.01.2020 petitioner-Mohit Kumar Aggarwal

gave his voluntary statement under
Section 67
of NDPS Act, before Sh.R.K.

Maurya, Intelligence Officer, wherein he admitted his guilt and complicity

for the commission of offence of this case. He stated that two-three years

ago he took a shop on rent and started business of medicines and Gaurav

Kumar Aggarwal used to buy medicines from his shop. He further stated

that Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal had purchased five boxes of Tramodol, out of

which one box of 50,000 tablets was bought from Pramod Jaipuria. He also

admitted that he can identify Pramod Jaipuria and his godown situated in

Agra.
10.     For the recovered narcotic substances i.e. 50,000 tablets of Tramadol

from DTDC courier weighing 20 kgs, 6,64,940 tablets/ capsules weighing

328.82kg, 1400 injections amounting to 1.4 ltrs and 80 corex amounting to 8

ltrs syrup seized from Agra & 9,900 tablets weighing 990 gms, the seizure

memos were prepared by the Intelligence Officers concerned and sent for

examination.
11.     Consequent upon recovery of contraband and on the basis of

voluntary statements, Mohit Kumar Aggarwal was arrested on 11.01.2020

for the offences under
Sections 8
,
22
and
29
NDPS Act as per procedure
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 8 of 23
prescribed. On 12.01.2020, Shri R.K.Maurya, Intelligence Officer gave the

arrest report of Mohit Kumar Aggarwal under
Section 57
of the NDPS Act

to Amit Kumar Tiwary, Superintendent, NCB-DZU.
12.   Petitioner‟s application for bail was dismissed by the learned trial

court vide order dated 21.07.2020, while observing as under:-
"In present case also, the present accused is found
      connected as per the statement of co-accused, he
      purchased the said recovered drugs from the present
      accused and thereafter, at the instance of both the accused,
      huge recovery of contraband was effected. The accused
      persons were also found connected through mobile
      phones. The twin conditions envisaged
u/S 37
are required
      to be satisfied before granting the bail to the accused. At
      this stage, it cannot be held that there are no reasonable
      grounds exist that accused is not guilty of the offence
      alleged. The reasonable ground mean something more
      than prima facie ground. Merely the factum that there is
      no documentary evidence is no ground that no prima facie
      case is made out. The judgment of Surender Khanna as
      relied by the Ld. Counsel for accused, is not applicable at
      this stage. Apex Court in case titled as Mohd. Fasrin Vs.
      State Crl. Appeal No. 296/2014 dated 04.09.2019 held that
      even if confession made to the investigating officers are
      held to be admissible under
Section 67
of Narcotic Drugs
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 9 of 23
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, the Court has to
      be satisfied that it is a voluntary statement, free from any
      pressure and also that the accused was apprised of his
      rights before recording the confession. Thus, it cannot be
      held that at this stage, statement
u/S 67
of NDPS Act
      cannot be looked to see the prima facie case. At this stage,
      this Court is not supposed to appreciate the probative
      value of the material on record however, only has to see
      the prima facie case. The recovered contraband is
      commercial in nature thus, there is definite bar
u/S 37
NDPS Act over the release of accused on bail however, it
      cannot be held at this stage there are reasonable grounds
      to believe that accused is not guilty of the offence and is
      not likely to commit any offence while on bail. Considering
      the material on record and in view of the above discussion,
      I found no ground to release the applicant/accused Mohit
      Aggarwal on bail. Hence, the present application is
      dismissed."
13.   At the hearing, learned senior counsel for petitioner submitted that the

rejection of bail by the trial court is without application of mind, as the

learned trial court has failed to appreciate that name of petitioner popped up

in this case when accused Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal in his voluntary

statement took petitioner‟s name and the said voluntary statement was partly
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 10 of 23
recorded in Agra and partly in Delhi and accused Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal

has retracted from his statement at the first available opportunity itself.

Learned senior counsel pointed out that accused Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal

had taken the NCB team to the shop of petitioner and the shop was searched

by the NCB team but nothing incriminating was recovered from the shop.
14.   It is next contended by learned senior counsel for petitioner that

petitioner was served with notice under
Section 67
of NDPS Act and his

statement was recorded by R.K.Maurya, Intelligence Officer and the

petitioner had retracted from the said statement on the first available

opportunity.
15.   Learned senior counsel also submitted that in the statement of Manoj

Kumar of Ludhiana, recorded under
Section 67
of NDPS Act, he has not

named petitioner herein and he has retracted from his statement. It has also

been pointed out that the tablets and material seized on 09.01.2020 is

different from the description of medical tablets, details of which have been

sought by prosecution vide summon dated 27.04.2020 under
Section 67
of

NDPS Act and also that details of batch number and manufacturer are not

mentioned therein.
16.   Leaned senior counsel for petitioner vehemently submitted that apart
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 11 of 23
from retracted statements of co-accused involved in this case, no other

material evidence has been placed on record to establish petitioner‟s

involvement in the offence in question.
17.
In support of petitioner‟s case, reliance has been placed upon

decisions of Constitution Bench of Supreme Court in
Hari Charan Kurmi

& Anr. Vs. State of Bihar
(1964) 6 SCR 623;
Kashmira Singh Vs. State of

Madhya Pradesh
AIR 1952 SC 159;
Mohd. Fasrin Vs. State
2019 (
8) SCC

811 and Surinder Kumar Khanna Vs. Intelligence Officer Directorate of

Revenue Intelligence
(2018) 8 SCC 271.
Reliance has also been placed

upon recent decision of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in
Tofan Singh Vs. State of

Tamil Nadu
2020 SCC OnLine SC 882.
18.    On the other hand, learned Special Public Prosecutor appearing for

respondent /NCB supported the impugned order dated 21.07.2020 rejecting

petitioner‟s bail application and submitted that the offence committed by the

petitioner comes under the category of recovery of commercial quantity and

since there is an embargo of
Section 37
of NDPS Act, the present petition

deserves to be dismissed. Reliance was placed upon decision of Hon‟ble

Supreme Court in State of Kerala & Ors. Vs. Rajesh & Ors. (2020) 12 SCC
122.
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 12 of 23
19.   Learned Special Public Prosecutor appearing for respondent /NCB

further submitted that petitioner has tendered his voluntary statement under
Section 67
of NDPS Act before the competent officer, wherein he has

admitted his guilt. He further submitted that the analysis of call detail

records of petitioner and other co-accused in this case shows criminal

conspiracy for their involvement in illicit trafficking of drugs.
20.   It was next submitted that statement tendered by petitioner under
Section 67
of NDPS Act is admissible in evidence and has evidentiary value

as per
NDPS Act
.        Learned Special Public Prosecutor submitted that

reliance placed upon various afore-noted decision is of no help to the case of

petitioner as in those cases the aspect of statement of accused recorded, has

not been dealt with. Thus, dismissal of the present petition is sought by

Special Public Prosecutor appearing for respondent /NCB.
21.   The rival contentions raised by both the sides have been considered.
22.   As per the prosecution case, 50,000 tablets of Tramadol weighing 20

kgs, 6,64,940 tablets/ Capsules weighing 328.82kg, 1400 injections

amounting to 1.4 ltrs and 80 corex amounting to 8 ltrs syrup & 9,900 tablets

weighing 990 gms were recovered in this case.
23.   It is an admitted case of both the sides that name of petitioner popped
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                               Page 13 of 23
up in this case in the statement made by co-accused Gaurav Kumar

Aggarwal. It is also an admitted case that at the behest of Gaurav Kumar

Aggarwal, the NCB team visited the shop of petitioner and upon search,

nothing incriminating was recovered. The solitary ground to involve

petitioner in the present case is his statement made under
Section 67
of

NDPS Act, which he had retracted at the first opportunity available to him.
24.   Pertinently,
Section 67
of NDPS Act reads as under:-
"67.      Power to call for information, etc.---Any
         officer referred to in
section 42
who is authorised in
         this behalf by the Central Government or a State
         Government may, during the course of any enquiry in
         connection with the contravention of any provisions of
         this Act,---
(a) call for information from any person for the purpose
         of satisfying himself whether there has been any
         contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rule
         or order made thereunder;
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any
         document or thing useful or relevant to the enquiry;
(c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and
         circumstances of the case."
25.   A perusal of petitioner‟s statement recorded under
Section 67
of

NDPS Act on 09.01.2020 reveals that Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal used to buy

medicines from his shop and on the said day i.e. 09.01.2020, he along with
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 14 of 23
NCB team came to his shop and introduced him to them and they told him

that they had come to inquire about 50,000 tramadol tablets which were sent

by Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal to Manoj in Ludhiana and he admitted that a

few days ago he had purchased 05 boxes of tramadol tablets from Pradeep

Jaipuria illegally, which were bought by Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal, out of

which he had returned 03 boxes due to money crisis and those 03 boxes he

had returned to Pradeep Japuria. In his statement, petitioner admitted that he

along with Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal had escorted the NCB team to the

godown of Pradeep Jaipuria. Besides petitioner has admitted that on two-

three occasions,   he had sold narcotic tablets purchased from Pradeep

Jaipuria to Gaurav Kumar Aggarwal for extra amount of Rs.2,000/-.
26.   The petitioner‟s statement was recorded for the second time on

10.01.2020 at the NCB office, however, its copy has not been placed on

record. Petitioner had retracted from his statements on the first available

opportunity made available to him.
27.   Recently, the Hon‟ble      Supreme Court, by majority view while

answering to a reference with regard to the evidentiary value of
Section 67
of NDPS Act in
Tofan Singh
(Supra) has held as under:-
"158. We answer the reference by stating:
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 15 of 23
(i) That the officers who are invested with powers under
section 53
of the NDPS Act are "police officers" within
       the meaning of
section 25
of the Evidence Act, as a result
       of which any confessional statement made to them would
       be barred under the provisions of
section 25
of the
       Evidence Act, and cannot be taken into account in order
       to convict an accused under the
NDPS Act
.
(ii) That a statement recorded under
section 67
of the
       NDPS Act cannot be used as a confessional statement in
       the trial of an offence under the
NDPS Act
."
28.   In the aforesaid view of the matter, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court sent

back the appeals and special leave petitions to the Division Benches of the

Hon‟ble Supreme Court to hear them in the light of aforesaid view.
29.   Reciting a dissenting view in
Tofan Singh
(Supra), Hon‟ble Ms.

Justice Indira Banerjee observed that any statement made or document or

other thing given to an authorised officer referred to in
Section 42
of the

NDPS Act or an officer invested under
Section 53
with the powers of an

Officer in Charge for the purpose of investigation of an offence under the

said Act, in the course of any inquiry, investigation or other proceeding,

may be tendered in evidence in the trial of an offence under the said Act and

proved in accordance with law. The Hon‟ble Judge also observed that she
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 16 of 23
was unable to agree that a statement recorded under
Section 67
of the NDPS

Act cannot be used against an accused offender in the trial of an offence

under the
NDPS Act
. On this aspect, the aforesaid Bench of the Hon‟ble

Supreme Court observed as under:-
"262. An officer empowered under
Section 53
with the
      powers of an Officer in Charge of a Police Station for the
      investigation of an offence, also has the power to make an
      inquiry. This is clear from the language used in
Section 53A(1)
of the NDPS Act. The words "A statement made and signed by
      a person before any officer empowered under
Section 53
for
      the investigation of offences, during the course of any inquiry
      or proceedings by such officer" clinches the issue. The officer
      empowered under
Section 53
, with the power of an Officer in
      Charge of a Police Station, can obviously make an inquiry
      within the meaning of
Section 67
to find out whether there has
      been any contravention of the
NDPS Act
. A statement made
      before such an officer in course of any inquiry or other
      proceeding, which is taken down in writing and signed by the
      person making it, may in certain circumstances, be relevant
      for the purpose of proving, in any prosecution for an offence
      under the
NDPS Act
, the truth of the facts it contains."
30.    Further, on the value of a confession made by a person, Hon‟ble

Ms.Justice Indira Banerjee held as under:-
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 17 of 23
"308. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant
    in a criminal proceeding, if it appears to the Court that the
    confessions may have been elicited by any inducement,
    threat or promise from a person in authority and sufficient,
    in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person
    reasonable grounds, for supposing that by making the
    confession, he would gain any advantage or avoid any
    disadvantage in respect of proceedings against him.
309. As   observed    by   this   Court    in   the
State   of
    Rajasthan v. Raja Ram
"confessions may be divided into
    two classes i.e. judicial and extra-judicial. Judicial
    confessions are those which are made before a Magistrate
    or a Court in the course of judicial proceedings. Extra-
    judicial confessions are those which are made by the party
    elsewhere than before a Magistrate or Court. Extra-judicial
    confessions are generally those that are made by a party to
    or before a private individual which includes even a judicial
    officer in his private capacity. It also includes a Magistrate
    who is not especially empowered to record confessions
    under Section 164 of the Code or a Magistrate so
    empowered but receiving the confession at a stage when
    Section 164 does not apply. As to extra-judicial confessions,
    two questions arise : (i) were they made voluntarily and (ii)
    are they true?".
xxx xxx xxx
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 18 of 23
"An extra-judicial confession, if voluntary and true and
      made in a fit state of mind, can be relied upon by the Court.
      The confession will have to be proved like any other fact.
      The value of the evidence as to confession, like any other
      evidence, depends upon the veracity of the witness to whom
      it has been made. The value of the evidence as to the
      confession depends on the reliability of the witness who
      gives the evidence. It is not open to any court to start with a
      presumption that extra-judicial confession is a weak type of
      evidence. It would depend on the nature of the
      circumstances, the time when the confession was made and
      the credibility of the witnesses who speak to such a
      confession."
xxx xxx xxx

      "If the evidence relating to extra-judicial confession is
      found credible after being tested on the touchstone of
      credibility and acceptability, it can solely form the basis of
      conviction. The requirement of corroboration as rightly
      submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent-
      accused, is a matter of prudence and not an invariable rule
      of law."
31.    With afore-noted pertinent observations, Hon‟ble Ms. Justice Indira

Banerjee, held that provisions of
Cr.P.C
. do not apply to an inquiry /

investigation under the
NDPS Act
except to the limited extent provided in
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                              Page 19 of 23
Section 50(5)
and
51
of the Act. It was further held that "the decision of

Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Raj Kumar Karwal
(supra), which has reaffirmed

the verdict of three Constitution Benches, does not require reconsideration

and nor does Kanhaiyalal (supra) require reconsideration."
32.   Keeping in mind the observations made in
Tofan Singh
(Supra) and

upon a bare reading of petitioner‟s statement recorded on 09.01.2020, it is

apparent that petitioner has not admitted that he was a party to the

transaction or in possession of recovered and seized contraband substance.

Though he has admitted in custody to have illegally traded the tablets under

the NDPS (which is now inadmissible, unless proved otherwise) but since no

recovery has been affected from his person or shop in this case, prosecution

can only attempt to prove its case on the basis of circumstantial evidence,

that is to say, by corroborating the call detail record or other material

available and reliance cannot be solely placed upon disclosure statement of

co-accused to keep him behind bars, especially when the recoveries of the

instance were before the arrest of the petitioner and the statement given by

co-accused has been retracted at the first available opportunity.
33.   Respondent/NCB has
placed reliance upon
Hon‟ble Supreme Court‟s

decision in State of Kerala Vs. Rajesh (Supra). In the said decision, the
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                               Page 20 of 23
Hon‟ble Supreme Court dealt with a case where the post arrest bail of

accused was dismissed by the trial court holding that there was prima facie

material to presume that the accused had committed offence punishable

under
Section 20(b) (ii) (c)
and
Section 29
of NDPS Act and the High Court

without noticing
Section 37
of the NDPS Act granted bail to the accused on

parity basis with other co-accused in that case, who were already on bail.

The Hon‟ble Supreme Court observed that "the High Court had failed to

record a finding under
Section 37
of the NDPS, which is a sine qua non for

granting bail to the accused under the
NDPS Act
". Appeal preferred by the

prosecution was allowed and order of the High Court was set aside and bail

granted to the accused was cancelled.
34.    Pertinently, the provisions of
Section 37
of NDPS Act read as under:-
"37.   Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable---
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal
       Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) ---
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be
             cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for
             2[offences under
section 19
or
section 24
or
section 27A
and also for offences involving commercial quantity]
             shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless---
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an
                     opportunity to oppose the application for such
                     release, and
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                           Page 21 of 23
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the
                     application, the court is satisfied that there are
                     reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
                     guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
                     commit any offence while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of
       sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations under the
Code
       of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for
       the time being in force, on granting of bail.]"
35.    In the case in hand, investigation is said to be complete. As per

impugned order dated 21.07.2020 complaint/charge sheet has already been

filed, however, besides confessional statement recorded under
Section 67
of

NDPS Act, no other material is forthcoming.          Since no incriminating

material was recovered at the instance of petitioner, this strengthens the

view of this Court that petitioner is not likely to commit offence if released

on bail. Moreover, nothing stops the prosecution to prove its case on merits

during trial. In the aforesaid view of the case, requirements under
Section 37
of NDPS Act are fulfilled.
36.    In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, without

commenting on the merits, petitioner is directed to be released forthwith on

his furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.25,000/-, and one surety in the

like amount to the satisfaction of trial court/duty magistrate subject to the

condition that:-
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                            Page 22 of 23
(i)    Petitioner shall not directly or indirectly tamper with the
             evidence or influence the witnesses of the case;
(ii)   Petitioner shall provide his mobile number to the IO and ensure
             that he is reachable.
37.   The petition is allowed in aforesaid terms. Pending application also

stands disposed of.
38.   A copy of this order be transmitted to the Jail Superintendent

concerned and trial court for information and necessary compliance.
(SURESH KUMAR KAIT)
                                                    JUDGE
MARCH 16, 2021
r
BAIL APPLN. 2585/2020                                          Page 23 of 23
