Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 03 of 2019
Citation: SCC 565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/138227421/

[Cites
48
, Cited by
3
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Satinder Kumar vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 4 August, 2020
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                   Cr.MP(M) No. 391 of 2020
                                   Reserved on: 21.07.2020




                                                                        .
Date of Decision: 04.08.2020





    Satinder Kumar                                                        ...Petitioner.

                                   Versus





    State of Himachal Pradesh                                             ...Respondent.

    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 YES.
For the petitioner:           Mr. Naresh Kumar Tomar Advocate.
For the respondent:           Mr. Nand Lal Thakur Additional Advocate General.
Amicus Curiae:                Mr. Lovneesh Kanwar Advocate.
COURT PROCEEDINGS CONVENED THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE


    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
An under-trial prisoner, in custody for being part of the chain for selling,




    and transporting 3.934 kilograms of charas (Cannabis), since Aug 2, 2019,
    has come up before this Court under
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal





    Procedure, 1973 (
CrPC
), seeking bail, under
Section 20
of Narcotics Drugs
    and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(NDPS Act
).
2.      The police arrested the petitioner, in FIR No. 03 of 2019, dated
    12.07.2019, registered under
Sections 20
,
29
of the NDPS Act, and
S. 177
of
    Motor Vehicle Act, in Police Station SV & ACB Mandi, District Mandi,
    Himachal Pradesh, disclosing cognizable and non-bailable offenses.
3.      The co-accused Ram Lal (A-1) had filed a bail petition before this Court.
    Vide order dated 5-12-2019, passed in CrMPM 2060 of 2019, a co-ordinate
    bench of this Court dismissed it having been withdrawn. The petitioner had
    also filed a similar petition, CrMPM No. 190 of 2020, which met the similar
    fate.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:44 :::HCHP
2
4.   I have read the status report(s) and heard counsel for the parties as
    well as Ld. Amicus Curiae.
FACTS:
.
5.   The gist of the Prosecution's case is that on 12 th July 2019, the
    Inspector of Police received secret information about transportation of charas





    through a Motorcycle. After that, the Investigator complied with the
    procedural requirements of the
NDPS Act
and associated independent
    witnesses. The Police set up a trap on the route of the bike and spotted it.
    The pillion rider had a bag on his lap, and he tried to throw it, but the Police





    were able to grab it. After that, both the riders of the bike scuffled with the
    Police party. On inquiry, the motorcycle driver revealed his name as Narain
    Dass (A-3), and the pillion rider as Hem Raj (A-2). The search of the bag led

    to the recovery of 3.934-kilo grams of charas. On interrogation, the Police

    came to know about the involvement of its seller Ram Lal alias Raju (A-1). In
    the meantime, when the accused were scuffling with the Police, passersby
    made a video recording of the incident, which became viral on social media.
One Manish saw such video and informed the Police that the accused
    persons had also transported particular articles, including the bag containing
    charas, in his taxi. He recognized the accused as the persons. On this, the




    Police produced Manish before Ld. Judicial Magistrate, where he made a





    statement under
S. 164
CrPC, implicating the accused. The Police traced
    calls on 9th July 2019, between the accused Ram Lal (A-1) and the bail
    petitioner Satinder, and arraigned him as an accused with the aid of
S. 29
of





    NDPS Act.
PREVIOUS CRIMINAL HISTORY
6.   The counsel for the petitioner states that the accused has no criminal
    history, except one similar case, where he was acquitted.
SUBMISSIONS:
7.   The learned counsel for the bail petitioner submits that the evidence
    collected against the petitioner is legally inadmissible. He also places
    reliance upon the decisions of this Court in
Budhi Singh v. State of H.P.,
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
3
CrMPM
595 of 2020;
Rehmat Ali v. State of Himachal Pradesh
, Cr.MP(M)
    No.203 of 2019, Naveen Bura v. State of HP, 2018 Law Suit (HP) 478,
    Thakur Dass v. State of H.P., CrMPM 167 of 2010; Stynder Singh v. State of




                                                                      .
Himachal Pradesh, 2010(1) SimLC 490, and Nisar Ahmed Thakkar v. State of





    H.P., CrMPM 672 of 2008.
8.    On the contrary, Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Additional Advocate General,





    submitted that the Police have collected sufficient evidence by tracing
    frequent calls made by the bail petitioner, the main accused, and the seller of
    charas, which prima facie points out towards his involvement. He also relies





    upon the decision of this Court in CrMPM 126 of 2018, Manohar Lal v. State
    of H.P.; CrMPM 1084 of 2020, Om Parkash v. State of H.P.; and
Cr.MP(M)
    No. 469 of 2020, Sandeep Kumar v. State of HP. He
also contended that the

    accused has yet not discharged the presumption under
S. 35
of NDPS Act,

    and further that the quantity involved is commercial, and restrictions of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act do not entitle the accused for bail.
9.    Ld. Amicus Curiae, Mr. Lovneesh Kanwar Advocate has drawn the


    attention of this Court to the provisions of
S. 35
&
37
of NDPS Act, while
    considering bails involving the commercial quantity of substance.
ANALYSIS AND REASONING:
Pre-trial incarceration needs justification depending upon the statutory
10.

    restrictions, heinous nature of the offence, terms of the sentence prescribed
    in the statute for such a crime, probability of the accused fleeing from justice,





    hampering the investigation, and doing away with the victim(s) and
    witnesses. The Court is under an obligation to maintain a balance between
    all stakeholders and safeguard the interests of the victim, accused, society,
    and State.
11.
In
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab
, 1980 (2)
    SCC 565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as
    follows,
                 It is thus clear that the question whether to grant bail or
                 not depends for its answer upon a variety of
                 circumstances, the cumulative effect of which must enter
                 into the judicial verdict. Any one single circumstance
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
4
cannot be treated as of universal validity or as necessarily
              justifying the grant or refusal of bail.
12.
In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav
, 2005




                                                                      .
(2) SCC 42, a three-member bench of Supreme Court holds,
18. It is trite law that personal liberty cannot be taken away
              except in accordance with the procedure established by
              law. Personal liberty is a constitutional guarantee.
However,
Article 21
which guarantees the above right also
              contemplates deprivation of personal liberty by procedure
              established by law. Under the criminal laws of this country,
              a person accused of offences which are non-bailable is
              liable to be detained in custody during the pendency of





              trial unless he is enlarged on bail in accordance with law.
              Such detention cannot be questioned as being violative of
Article 21
since the same is authorised by law. But even
              persons accused of non-bailable offences are entitled for

              bail if the court concerned comes to the conclusion that
              the prosecution has failed to establish a prima facie case

              against him and/or if the court is satisfied for reasons to be
              recorded that in spite of the existence of prima facie case
              there is a need to release such persons on bail where fact
              situations require it to do so. In that process a person
              whose application for enlargement on bail is once rejected



              is not precluded from filing a subsequent application for
              grant of bail if there is a change in the fact situation. In
              such cases if the circumstances then prevailing requires




              that such persons to be released on bail, in spite of his
              earlier applications being rejected, the courts can do so.
13.
In
State of Rajasthan, Jaipur v. Balchand
, AIR 1977 SC 2447,
    Supreme Court holds,
2. The basic rule may perhaps be tersely put as bail, not
              jail, except where there are circumstances suggestive of
              fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or
              creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences
              or intimidating witnesses and the like by the petitioner who
              seeks enlargement on bail from the court. We do not
              intend to be exhaustive but only illustrative.
3. It is true that the gravity of the offence involved is likely
              to induce the petitioner to avoid the course of justice and
              must weigh with us when considering the question of jail.
              So also the heinousness of the crime.
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
5
14.
In
Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public Prosecutor, High
Court of
    Andhra Pradesh, (1978) 1 SCC 240, Supreme Court in Para 16, holds,

               The delicate light of the law favours release unless




                                                                      .
countered by the negative criteria necessitating that





               course.
15.
In
Dataram Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
, (2018) 3 SCC 22,





    Supreme Court holds,
1. A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the
               presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a person
               is believed to be innocent until found guilty. However,





               there are instances in our criminal law where a reverse
               onus has been placed on an accused with regard to some
               specific offences but that is another matter and does not
               detract from the fundamental postulate in respect of other
               offences. Yet another important facet of our criminal

               jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is the general rule

               and putting a person in jail or in a prison or in a correction
               home (whichever expression one may wish to use) is an
               exception.
6. However, we should not be understood to mean that
               bail should be granted in every case. The grant or refusal


               of bail is entirely within the discretion of the judge hearing
               the matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it must
               be exercised judiciously and in a humane manner and
               compassionately. Also, conditions for the grant of bail




               ought not to be so strict as to be incapable of compliance,
               thereby making the grant of bail illusory.
S. 35
OF NDPS ACT IS NOT APPLICABLE IN BAILS:
16.
S. 35
of NDPS Act reads as follows:
35. Presumption of culpable mental state .(1) In any
               prosecution for an offence under this Act which requires a
               culpable mental state of the accused, the Court shall
               presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be
               a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no
               such mental state with respect to the act charged as an
               offence in that prosecution.
Explanation. In this section culpable mental state
               includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and belief
               in, or reason to believe, a fact.
(2) For the purpose of this section, a fact is said to be
               proved only when the Court believes it to exist beyond a
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
6
reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is
                  established by a preponderance of probability.
.
17.
Section 35
opens restrictively with the usage of specific words, 'In





    any prosecution for an offence...'. Thus, it applies only after the launch of
    prosecution, which impliedly starts when the Court takes cognizance of the





    offence under the
NDPS Act
.
18.   Black's Law Dictionary, 6th edition, St. Paul, MN, USA, (1990), defines
    prosecution as, "Prosecution. A criminal action; a proceeding instituted and





    carried on by due course of law, before a competent tribunal, for the purpose
    of determining the guilt or innocence of a person charged with crime. U.S. v.
    Reisinger, 128 U.S. 398,
9
S.Ct. 99, 32 L.Ed.480. The continuous following

    up, through instrumentalities created by law, of a person accused of a public

    offence with a steady and fixed purpose of reaching a judicial determination
    of the guilt or innocence of the accused. By an extension of its meaning
    "prosecution" is also used to designate the government (state or federal) as
    the party proceeding in a criminal action, or the prosecutor, or counsel; as



    when we speak of 'the evidence adduced by the prosecution'."
19.   Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 6th Edition, defines prosecution,




    having originated from Old French, as 1. "The following up, continuation, or





    pursuit of a course of action etc. with a view to its completion." 5. LAW "The
    institution and conducting of legal proceedings in respect of a criminal charge
    in a court; the institution and conducting of legal proceedings against a





    person or in pursuit of a claim; an instance of this. Also, the prosecuting party
    in a case."
20.   The New Lexicon Webster's Dictionary of the English Language, New
    York, (1988), defines prosecution as, "prosecuting or being prosecuted; the
    prosecuting party or his legal representatives; the bringing of formal criminal
    charges against an offender in court."
21.
In
Thomas Dana v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1959 SC 375, A
    Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
7
9. It was vehemently argued on behalf of the petitioners
     that the prosecution of the petitioners under the
     provisions of the Acts aforesaid, and their convictions
     and imposition of sentences by the courts below,




                                                              .
infringe the protection against double jeopardy





     enshrined in
Article 20(2)
of the Constitution, which is in
     these terms :-
"No person shall be prosecuted and
            punished for the same offence more than





            once."
It is manifest that in order to bring the petitioners' case
     within the prohibition of
Article 20(2)
, it must be shown
     that they had been "prosecuted" before the Collector of
     Customs, and "punished" by him for the "same offence"
for which they have been convicted and punished as a
     result of the judgment and orders of the courts below,
     now impugned. If any one of these three essential
     conditions is not fulfilled, that is to say, if it is not shown
     that the petitioners had been "prosecuted" before the

     Collector of Customs, or that they, had been "punished"
by him in the proceedings before him, resulting in the
     confiscation of the properties aforesaid, and the
     imposition of a heavy penalty of Rs. 25,00,000, each, or
     that they had been convicted and "sentenced" for the
     "same offence", the petitioners will have failed to bring


     their case within the prohibition of
Article 20(2).
It has
     been argued, in the first instance, on behalf of the
     petitioners that they had been "prosecuted" within the
     meaning of the article. On the other hand, the learned




     Additional Solicitor-General has countered that
     argument by the contention that the previous





     adjudication by the Collector of Customs, was by an
     administrative body which has to act judicially, as held
     by this Court in
F.N. Roy v. Collector of Customs,
     Calcutta
, AIR 1957 Supreme Court 648, and reiterated





     in, AIR 1958 Supreme Court 119; but the Collector was
     not a criminal court which could, in law, be said to have
     tried the petitioner for an offence under the
Indian Penal
     Code
, or under the penal provisions of the other Acts
     mentioned above.
10. It is, therefore, necessary first to consider whether
     the petitioners had really been prosecuted before the
     Collector of Customs, within the meaning of
Article
     20(2).
To "prosecute", in the special sense of law,
     means, according to Webster's Dictionary,
            "(a) to seek to obtain, enforce, or the like by
            legal process; as, to prosecute a right or a
            claim in a court of law. (b) to, pursue (a
            person) by legal proceedings for redress or
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
8
punishment; to proceed against judicially;
                    esp., to accuse of some crime or breach of
                    law, or to pursue for redress or punishment
                    of a crime or violation of law, in due legal




                                                                      .
form before a legal tribunal ; as to prosecute





                    a man for trespass, or for a riot."
According to "Wharton's Law Lexicon", 14th edn., p.
               810, "prosecution" means "a proceeding either by way
               of indictment or information, in the criminal courts, in





               order to put an offender upon his trial. In all criminal
               prosecutions the King is nominally the prosecutor". This
               very question was discussed by this Court in the case
               of
Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay
, 1953 SCR 730
               at pp. 738, 739, 743, with reference to the context in





               which the word "prosecution" occurred in
Article 20.
In
               the course of the judgment, the following observations,
               which apply with full force to the present case, were
               made :
".........and the prosecution in this context

                    would mean an initiation or starting of

                    proceedings of a criminal nature before a
                    court of law or a judicial tribunal in
                    accordance with the procedure prescribed in
                    the statute which creates the offence and
                    regulates the procedure."
ANALYSIS OF THE RIGORS OF
S. 37
OF NDPS ACT:
22.
Section 2
(vii-a) of the
NDPS Act
defines commercial quantity as the




    quantity greater than the quantity specified in its schedule, and
S. 2
(xxiii-a),





    defines a small quantity as the quantity lesser than the quantity specified in
    the schedule. The remaining quantity falls in an undefined category, which is
    now generally called as intermediate quantity.
All Sections in the NDPS Act
,





    which specify an offence, also mention the minimum and maximum
    sentence, depending upon the quantity of the substance. When the
    substance falls under commercial quantity, the statute mandates minimum
    sentence of ten years of imprisonment and a minimum fine of INR One Lac,
    and bail is subject to the riders mandated in
S. 37
of NDPS Act.
23.   In the present case, as per the contentions of the State, the quantity of
    substance seized is commercial quantity. Given the legislative mandate of
S.
    37
of NDPS Act, the Court can release a person, accused of an offence
    punishable under the
NDPS Act
for possessing a commercial quantity of
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
9
contraband only after passing its rigors.
Section 37
of the Act is extracted as
    under: -
"37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
.
(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of





               Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974)
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be
               cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for





               2[offences under
section 19
or
section 24
or
section 27A
and also for offences involving commercial quantity] shall
               be released on bail or on his own bond unless
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to
               oppose the application for such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application,
               the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
               believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is
               not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations

               under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) or
               any other law for the time being in force, on granting of
               bail."
24.   A reading of
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
mandates that two conditions are to be
    satisfied before a person/accused of possessing a commercial quantity of
    drugs or psychotropic substance, is to be released on bail.
25.   The first condition is to provide an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor,





    enabling her to take stand on the bail application. The second stipulation is
    that the Court must be satisfied that reasonable grounds exist for believing





    that the accused is not guilty of such offence, and is not likely to commit any
    offence while on bail. If either of these two conditions is not met, the ban on
    granting bail operates. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
    something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates substantial
    probable causes for believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
    offence. Be that as it may, if such a finding is arrived at by the Court, it is
    equivalent to giving a certificate of discharge to the accused. Even on
    fulfilling one of the conditions, the reasonable grounds for believing that
    during the bail period, the accused is not guilty of such an offence, the Court
    still cannot give a finding or assurance that the accused is not likely to
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
10
commit any such crime.       Thus, the grant of bail or denial of bail for
    possessing commercial quantity would depend on facts of each case.
26.   JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON
S. 37
OF NDPS ACT:
.
a)    In
Union of India v. Merajuddin
, (1999) 6 SCC 43, a three Judges
    Bench of Supreme Court while cancelling the bail, observed in Para 3, as





    follows,
               The High Court appears to have completely ignored the
               mandate of
Sec. 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and
               Psychotropic Substances Act while granting him bail. The
               High Court overlooked the prescribed procedure."
b)



          In
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, a
    three Judges Bench of Supreme Court holds,
7. The limitations on granting of bail come in only when
               the question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from

               the grant of opportunity to the public prosecutor, the other
               twin conditions which really have relevance so far the
               present accused-respondent is concerned, are (1) the
               satisfaction of the Court that there are reasonable grounds


               for believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
               offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
               while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
               alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the




               accused being not guilty has to be based for reasonable
               grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
               something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates





               substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
               is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
               contemplated in the provision requires existence of such





               facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to
               justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
               alleged offence.
c)    In
Union of India v. Sanjeev
v. Deshpande, (2014) 13 SCC 1, a three-
    judges bench of Supreme Court holds,
5. ...In other words,
Section 37
departs from the long
               established principle of presumption of innocence in
               favour of an accused person until proved otherwise.
d)    In
Satpal Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2018) 13 SCC 813, a bench of
    three judges of Supreme Court directed that since the quantity involved was
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
11
commercial, as such High Court could not have and should not have passed
    the order under sections 438 or 439
CrPC
, without reference to
Section 37
of
    the NDPS Act.
.
e)   In
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705,
    Supreme Court holds,
6.
Section 37
as amended starts with a non-obstante
              clause stating that notwithstanding anything contained in
              the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 no person accused
              of an offence prescribed therein shall be released on bail
              unless the conditions contained therein were satisfied.
The





              Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act
is a
              special enactment as already noted it was enacted with a
              view to make stringent provision for the control and
              regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and
              psychotropic substances. That being the underlying object

              and particularly when the provisions of
Section 37
of

              Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act are in
              negative terms limiting the scope of the applicability of the
              provisions of
Criminal Procedure Code
regarding bail, in
              our view, it cannot be held that the High Court's powers to
              grant bail under
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code are


              not subject to the limitation mentioned under
Section 37
of
              Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act. The
              non-obstante clause with which the Section starts should
              be given its due meaning and clearly it is intended to




              restrict the powers to grant bail. In case of inconsistency
              between
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code and
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
              Substances Act, 1985
Section 37
prevails.
f)   In
Babua v. State of Orissa
, (2001) 2 SCC 566, Supreme Court holds,
              [3] In view of
Section 37(1)(b)
of the Act unless there are
              reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not
              guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit
              any offence while on bail alone will entitle him to a bail. In
              the present case, the petitioner attempted to secure bail
              on various grounds but failed. But those reasons would be
              insignificant if we bear in mind the scope of
Section 37(1)
(b) of the Act. At this stage of the case all that could be
              seen is whether the statements made on behalf of the
              prosecution witnesses, if believable, would result in
              conviction of the petitioner or not. At this juncture, we
              cannot say that the accused is not guilty of the offence if
              the allegations made in the charge are established. Nor
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
12
can we say that the evidence having not been completely
             adduced before the Court that there are no grounds to
             hold that he is not guilty of such offence. The other aspect
             to be borne in mind is that the liberty of a citizen has got to




                                                                    .
be balanced with the interest of the society. In cases





             where narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances are
             involved, the accused would indulge in activities which are
             lethal to the society. Therefore, it would certainly be in the
             interest of the society to keep such persons behind bars





             during the pendency of the proceedings before the Court,
             and the validity of
Section 37(1)(b)
having been upheld,
             we cannot take any other view.
In Bijando Singh v. Md. Ibocha, 2004(10) SCC 151, Supreme Court
g)

    holds,
3. Being aggrieved by the order of the Special Court
             (NDPS), releasing the accused on bail, the appellant

             moved the Guwahati High Court against the said order on
             the ground that the order granting bail is contrary to the

             provisions of law and the appropriate authority never
             noticed the provisions of
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs
             And Psychotropic Substances Act. The High Court,
             however, being of the opinion that if the attendance of the


             accused is secured by means of bail bonds, then he is
             entitled to be released on bail. The High Court, thus, in our
             opinion, did not consider the provisions of
Section 37
of
             the Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act.
h)   In N.C.B.Trivandrarum v. Jalaluddin, 2004 Law Suit (SC) 1598,





    Supreme Court observed,
3. ...Be that as it may another mandatory requirement of
Section 37
of the Act is that where Public Prosecutor





             opposes the bail application, the court should be satisfied
             that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
             accused is not guilty of such offence and he is not likely to
             commit any offence while on bail. In the impugned order
             we do not find any such satisfaction recorded by the High
             Court while granting bail nor there is any material available
             to show that the High Court applied its mind to these
             mandatory requirements of the Act.
i)   In
Union of India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798,
    Supreme Court holds,
6. As the provision itself provides no person shall be
             granted bail unless the two conditions are satisfied. They
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
13
are; the satisfaction of the Court that there are reasonable
     grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty and.
     that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
     Both the conditions have to be satisfied. If either of these




                                                            .
two conditions is not satisfied, the bar operates and the





     accused cannot be released on bail.
7. The expression used in
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
is
     "reasonable grounds". The expression means something
     more than prima facie grounds. It connotes substantial





     probable causes for believing that the accused is not guilty
     of the offence charged and this reasonable belief
     contemplated in turn points to existence of such facts and
     circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to justify
     recording of satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of





     the offence charged.
8. The word "reasonable" has in law the prima facie
     meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances
     of which the actor, called on to act reasonably, knows or
     ought to know. It is difficult to give an exact definition of

     the word 'reasonable'. Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, Fourth

     Edition, page 2258 states that it would be unreasonable to
     expect an exact definition of the word "reasonable'.
     Reason varies it, its conclusions according to the
     idiosyncrasy of the individual, and the times and
     circumstances in which he thinks. The reasoning which


     built up the old scholastic logic sounds now like the jingling
     of a child's toy. (See : Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
     M/s Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar and another, (1987)4 SCC
     497 and Gujarat Water Supplies and Sewerage Board v.
Unique Erectors (Gujarat) Pvt Ltd and another [(1989)1
     SCC 532].
9. It is often said "an attempt to give a specific meaning to
     the word 'reasonable' is trying to count what is not number
     and measure what is not space". The author of 'Words and
     Phrases' (Permanent Edition) has quoted from in re Nice





     &., Schreiber 123 F. 987, 988 to give a plausible meaning
     for the said word. He says, "the expression 'reasonable' is
     a relative term, and the facts of the particular controversy
     must be considered before the question as to what
     constitutes reasonable can be determined". It is not meant
     to be expedient or convenient but certainly something
     more than that.
10. The word 'reasonable' signifies "in accordance with
     reason". In the ultimate analysis it is a question of fact,
     whether a particular act is reasonable or not depends on
     the circumstances in a given situation. (See :
Municipal
     Corporation of Greater Mumbai and another v. Kamla Mills
     Ltd.
, 2003(4) RCR(Civil) 265 : (2003)6 SCC 315)."
11. The Court while considering the application for bail
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
14
with reference to
Section 37
of the Act is not called upon
             to record a finding of not guilty. It is for the limited purpose
             essentially confined to the question of releasing the
             accused on bail that the Court is called upon to see if




                                                                     .
there are reasonable grounds for believing that the





             accused is not guilty and records its satisfaction about the
             existence of such grounds. But the Court has not to
             consider the matter as if it is pronouncing a judgment of
             acquittal and recording a finding of not guilty.
12. Additionally, the Court has to record a finding that
             while on bail the accused is not likely to commit any
             offence and there should also exist some materials to
             come to such a conclusion.
j)   In
N.R. Mon v. Md. Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721, Supreme Court
    holds,
9. ...The limitations on granting of bail come in only when

             the question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from
             the grant opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other

             twin conditions which really have relevance so far as the
             present accused-respondent is concerned, are: the
             satisfaction of the court that there are reasonable grounds
             for believing, that the accused is not guilty of the alleged


             offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
             while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
             alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the
             accused being not guilty has to be based on reasonable




             grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
             something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
             substantial probable causes for believing that the accused





             is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
             contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
             facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to





             justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
             alleged offence. In the case hand the High Court seems to
             have completely overlooked underlying object of Section
37.
k)   In
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009) 2 SCC 624,
    Supreme Court holds,
14. We may, however, hasten to add that while
             considering an application for bail with reference to
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
             Substances Act, the Court is not called upon to record a
             finding of 'not guilty'. At this stage, it is neither necessary
             nor desirable to weigh the evidence meticulously to arrive
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
15
at a positive finding as to whether or not the accused has
              committed offence under the
Narcotic Drugs And
              Psychotropic Substances Act
. What is to be seen is
              whether there is reasonable ground for believing that the




                                                                     .
accused is not guilty of the offence(s) he is charged with





              and further that he is not likely to commit an offence under
              the said Act while on bail. The satisfaction of the Court
              about the existence of the said twin conditions is for a
              limited purpose and is confined to the question of





              releasing the accused on bail.
l)   In
Union of India v. Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738, Supreme
    Court holds,
7. ...
Section 37
of the NDPS Act contains special
              provisions with regard to grant of bail in respect of certain
              offences enumerated under the said Section. They are :-
(1) In the case of a person accused of an offence

              punishable under
Section 19
, (2) Under
Section 24
, (3)
              Under
Section 27A
and (4) Of offences involving

              commercial quantity. The accusation in the present case is
              with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial
              quantity. Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor
              opposes the application for bail to a person accused of the


              enumerated offences under
Section 37
of the NDPS Act,
              in case, the court proposes to grant bail to such a person,
              two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to
              the normal requirements under the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
. or any other enactment. (1) The court must be
              satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
              that the person is not guilty of such offence; (2) that





              person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
8. There is no such consideration with regard to the
              mandatory requirements, while releasing the respondents





              on bail.
9. Hence, we are satisfied that the matter needs to be
              considered afresh by the High Court. The impugned order
              is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for
              fresh consideration. It will be open to the parties to take all
              available contentions before the High Court.
m)   In
State of Kerala v. Rajesh
, AIR 2020 SC 721, Supreme Court holds,
              [21] The expression "reasonable grounds" means
              something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
              substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
              is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
              contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
              facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
16
justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
              alleged offence. In the case on hand, the High Court
              seems to have completely overlooked the underlying
              object of
Section 37
that in addition to the limitations




                                                                     .
provided under the
CrPC
, or any other law for the time





              being in force, regulating the grant of bail, its liberal
              approach in the matter of bail under the
NDPS Act
is
              indeed uncalled for.
n)   In
Sujit Tiwari v. State of Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84, in the
    given facts, Supreme Court granted bail, by observing,
10. The prosecution story is that the appellant was aware
              of what his brother was doing and was actively helping his





              brother. At this stage we would not like to comment on the
              merits of the allegations levelled against the present
              appellant. But other than the few WhatsApp messages
              and his own statement which he has resiled from, there is
              very little other evidence. At this stage it appears that the

              appellant may not have even been aware of the entire

              conspiracy because even the prosecution story is that the
              brother himself did not know what was loaded on the ship
              till he was informed by the owner of the vessel. Even when
              the heroin was loaded in the ship it was supposed to go
              towards Egypt and that would not have been a crime


              under the
NDPS Act
. It seems that Suprit Tiwari and other
              7 crew members then decided to make much more money
              by bringing the ship to India with the intention of disposing
              of the drugs in India. During this period the Master Suprit




              Tiwari took the help of Vishal Kumar Yadav and Irfan
              Sheikh who had to deliver the consignment to Suleman





              who had to arrange the money after delivery. The main
              allegation made against the appellant is that he sent the
              list of the crew members after deleting the names of 4
              Iranians and Esthekhar Alam to Vishal Kumar Yadav and





              Irfan Sheikh through WhatsApp with a view to make their
              disembarkation process easier. Even if we take the
              prosecution case at the highest, the appellant was aware
              that his brother was indulging in some illegal activity
              because obviously such huge amount of money could not
              be made otherwise. However, at this stage it cannot be
              said with certainty whether he was aware that drugs were
              being smuggled on the ship or not, though the allegation is
              that he made such a statement to the NCB under
Section
              67
of the NDPS Act.
11. At this stage, without going into the merits, we feel that
              the case of the appellant herein is totally different from the
              other accused. Reasonable possibility is there that he may
              be acquitted. He has been behind bars since his arrest on
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
17
04.08.2017 i.e. for more than 2 years and he is a young
                 man aged about 25 years. He is a B.Tech Graduate.
                 Therefore, under facts and circumstances of this case we
                 feel that this is a fit case where the appellant is entitled to




                                                                        .
bail because there is a possibility that he was unaware of





                 the illegal activities of his brother and the other crew
                 members. The case of the appellant is different from that
                 of all the other accused, whether it be the Master of the
                 ship, the crew members or the persons who introduced





                 the Master to the prospective buyers and the prospective
                 buyers.
12. We, however, feel that some stringent conditions
                 will have to be imposed upon the appellant.
SUM UP:
24.     From the summary of the law relating to rigors of
S.37
of NDPS Act,
    while granting bail involving commercial quantities, the following fundamental
    principles emerge:
i.    The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the question
            of granting bail arises on merits. [
Customs, New Delhi v.
            Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, Para 7].
ii.    In case the Court proposes to grant bail, two conditions are to be
            mandatorily satisfied in addition to the standard requirements
            under the provisions of the
CrPC
or any other enactment. [
Union of
            India v. Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738, Para 7].
iii.   Apart from granting opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other





            twin conditions which really have relevance are the Court's
            satisfaction that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
            the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. [
N.R. Mon v. Md.
            Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721, Para 9].
iv.    The satisfaction contemplated regarding the accused being not
            guilty has to be more than prima facie grounds, considering
            substantial probable causes for believing and justifying that the
            accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. [
Customs, New Delhi v.
            Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, Para 7].
v.    The reasonable belief contemplated in the provision requires
            existence of such facts and circumstances as are sufficient in
            themselves to justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of
            the alleged offence. [
State of Kerala v. Rajesh
, AIR 2020 SC 721, Para
            21].
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
18
vi.    Twin conditions of
S. 37
are cumulative and not alternative.
[
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, Para
            7].
.
vii.    At this stage, it is neither necessary nor desirable to weigh the





            evidence meticulously to arrive at a positive finding as to whether
            or not the accused has committed an offence under the
NDPS Act
and further that he is not likely to commit an offence under the
            said Act while on bail. [
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009)





            2 SCC 624, Para 14].
viii.   If the statements of the prosecution witnesses are believed, then
            they would not result in a conviction. [
Babua v. State of Orissa
,
            (2001) 2 SCC 566, Para 3].
ix.    While considering the application for bail concerning
Section 37
,
            the Court is not called upon to record a finding of not guilty. [
Union
            of India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798, Para 11].
x.
Section 37
departs from the long-established principle of

            presumption of innocence in favour of an accused person until
            proved otherwise. [
Union of India v. Sanjeev
v. Deshpande, (2014) 13
            SCC 1, Para 5].
xi.    In case of inconsistency,
S. 37
of the NDPS Act prevails over
S.


            439
CrPC. [
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705,
            Para 6].
xii.    Bail must be subject to stringent conditions. [
Sujit Tiwari v. State of




            Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84, Para 12].
25.     The difference in the order of bail and final judgment is similar to a
    sketch and a painting. However, some sketches would be detailed and





    paintings with a few strokes. Satisfying the fetters of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act is
    candling the infertile eggs.
26.     A perusal of the status report reveals the details of calls between the
    accused, preceding the seizure of contraband.
27.
S. 37
of the NDPS Act implies that the accused should satisfy its twin
    conditions and come out clean. In the bail petition, the petitioner did not
    explain the phone calls exchanged between him and the accused Ram Lal
    (A-1). His only contention is that he has been falsely roped in, but does not
    offer any reasons for such implication. Ld. Counsel offered some
    explanations, but it is impermissible to make such submissions in the
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
19
absence of similar pleadings. Thus, the petitioner has failed to make out a
    case for bail.
28.   Any detailed discussions about the evidence may prejudice the case of




                                                                         .
the prosecution or the accused. Suffice it to say that due to the reasons
    mentioned above, and keeping in view the nature of allegations, no case for
    bail is made out in favour of the petitioner.
29.   Any observation made hereinabove is neither an expression of opinion
    on the merits of the case, nor shall the trial Court advert to these comments.
Given the above reasoning, in my considered opinion, no case for bail
30.

    is made out at this stage. Resultantly, the present petition stands dismissed.
    All pending applications, if any, stand closed.
31.   While deciding the propositions of law involved in this matter, I have

    considered all my similar decisions, and without any deviation this decision is
    more comprehensive and up to date. Resultantly, there is no point in citing all
    previous judgments/orders pronounced by me, where the proposition of law


    was similar, or somewhat similar, and those given under
Section 37
of the
    NDPS Act, including
Satish Singh v. State of HP Cr.MP(M) No.
299 of 2020,
    and
Sandeep Kumar v. State of H.P., Cr.MP(M) No.
469 of 2020.
32.   I express my gratitude to counsel for the parties, Ld. Amicus Curiae Mr.





    Lovneesh Kanwar Advocate for excellent assistance, and also to my
    Research Assistant Ms. Kalyani Acharya and my Law Intern Ms. Ananya
    Saxena for outstanding research.
Petition dismissed.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                                      Judge.
Aug 4, 2020 (ks/ps)
::: Downloaded on - 06/08/2020 20:45:45 :::HCHP
