Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 13 A 0170
Citation: SCC 569, wherein it was observed that the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/141521025/

[Cites
56
, Cited by
12
]
Delhi High Court
Narender Singh Jakhar vs The Narcotics Control Bureau on 30 November, 2015
Author:
Vipin Sanghi
Bench:
Vipin Sanghi
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                                       Judgment reserved on:       22.05.2015
%                                      Judgment delivered on:      30.11.2015

+      CRL.A. 1370/2010
       CHAND SINGH                                           ..... Appellant
                                Through:    Mr. Mukesh Kalia & Tushar Sharma,
                                            Advocates
                       versus

       THE NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU           ..... Respondent
                    Through: Mr. Satish Aggarwala, Advocates.

+      CRL.A. 349/2011
       JASBIR SINGH                                        ..... Appellant
                                Through:    Mr. Samrat Nigam, Ms. Ankita M.
                                            Bahl & Ms. Ayshwarya Chandar,
                                            Advocates.
                       versus

       THE NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU           ..... Respondent
                    Through: Mr. Satish Aggarwala, Advocates


+      CRL.A. 546/2011
       NARENDER SINGH JAKHAR                    ..... Appellant
                      Through: Mr. Mukesh Kalia & Tushar Sharma,
                               Advocates.
               versus

       THE NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU           ..... Respondent
                    Through: Mr. Satish Aggarwala, Advocates




CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                       Page 1 of 58
        CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI

                                   JUDGMENT
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.     These appeals are directed against the common judgment dated
15.09.2010 passed by Sh. Sanjiv Jain, Special Judge, NDPS in S.C. No. N-
48/08, convicting Appellant Chand Singh,       Appellant Jasbir Singh and
Appellant Narender Singh Jakhar for the offences punishable under Section
20 (b) (ii) C and Section 29 read with
Section 20 (b) (ii)
C of the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred as 'the
Act') and the order on sentence dated 17.09.2010, sentencing them to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten years and to pay fine of
Rs. 1,00,000/- and in default thereof, to undergo simple imprisonment for a
period of six months for offence punishable under Section 20 (b) (ii) C of
the Act. Further they were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of ten years and to pay the fine of Rs. 1,00,000/- and in default
thereof, to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six months for
offence punishable under
Section 29
read with Section 20 (b) (ii) C of the
Act. Both the sentences were directed to run concurrently. The appellants
were given the benefit of
Section 428
Cr.P.C. Since common arguments
have been advanced by learned counsel for the appellants appearing in these
appeals, they are being recorded in common, and could be dealt with
accordingly in this common judgment.
2.     The brief facts as taken note of in the impugned judgment are that
information was received by R.R. Kumar (PW-4), Superintendent, Narcotics
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 2 of 58
Control Bureau (hereinafter referred as 'NCB') that two persons, namely,
Chand Singh and Jasbir Singh involved in trafficking of hashish would come
to collect charas from Narinder Singh Jhakhar, driver of funeral van HR-68-
1558, near Hero Honda showroom, Peeragarhi, New Delhi on 31.12.2005
between 1800 to 1900 hours. The information was reduced in writing and
forwarded to the Zonal Director who directed to take necessary action.
Search authorization was issued in favour of Sh, R.K. Yadav (PW-1) I.O.
3.     A raiding party comprising of R.K. Yadav (PW-1), Vikas Kumar
(PW-2), N.S. Yadav (PW-5), Avinish Kumar (PW-6), P.C. Khanduri (PW-
10) and Manoj Kumar proceeded to the spot in a government vehicle and
reached there at 1800 hours. One independent witness namely Nafe Singh
was joined. At about 1835 hours they located a funeral van no. HR-68-1558
which was parked in the service lane near Hero Honda showroom, Udyog
Nagar, Peera Garhi. Some gunny bags were being unloaded from the van
into a Marshal Jeep no. HR-13-A-0170. The raiding party encircled both the
vehicles and the occupants, namely, appellant Narender Singh, appellant
Chand Singh and appellant Jasbir Singh. On seeing the officers, they tried to
run but they were apprehended. The NCB officers told them about the
information and served them notices under
Section 50
of the Act apprising
them of their legal right to be searched before a Gazetted officer or a
Magistrate, on which they recorded their refusal. On search, two gunny bags
marked as A and B were found in the jeep HR-13-A-0170 and five gunny
bags marked as C to G were found in the van HR-68-1558. All the seven
bags on checking were found to contain dark brown, dry and hard substance
which, on testing, gave positive for charas. All the three appellants were
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 3 of 58
given summons under
Section 67
of the Act to accompany the officers along
with the vehicles to the NCB office. They reached the office at 2020 hours.
There all the bags were again checked. The bags marked A to F were found
to contain 20 packets each (wrapped in khaki colour tape). The bag mark G
was found containing 28 packets. Each packet had four slabs. On weighing,
each packet was found to be of one kilogram totaling to 148 kilograms. Two
samples of 25 grams each were taken out from each bag and sealed with the
seal of NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU - DZU 1 and given mark A-1,
A-2 to G-1, G-2. All the seven plastic bags with remaining charas were put
in different seven plastic bags. Test memo in triplicate was prepared. The
bags, samples and vehicles were seized. From the vehicles, some documents
were recovered. A panchnama was drawn.
4.     The prosecution claimed that summons under
Section 67
of the Act
were issued to all of the appellants to appear in the NCB office where they
tendered their statements, admitting their role and their complicity in
trafficking of Charas. They were arrested. Statement of panch witness was
also recorded. The seizing officer and the arresting officer submitted their
reports under
Section 57
of the Act to the Superintendent. The case property
was deposited in the malkhana. The samples along with the forwarding letter
and test memo were sent to CRCL through Hawaldar Shiv Rattan Singh. As
per report dated 18.04.2006 the samples were found to contain Tetrahydro
Cannabinol with their purity i.e. A1 - 12.0%, B1 - 10.6%, C1 - 10.3%, D1
- 10.0%, E1 - 11.4%, F1 - 9.6%, and G1 - 11.6%. After investigation,
complaint was filed against the accused persons under
Sections 20
,
23
and
29
of the Act.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 4 of 58
5.       The charge under
Section 29
read with Section 20 (b) (ii) C of the Act
was framed against the appellants. They pleaded "not guilty" and claimed
trial.
6.       The following witnesses were examined by the prosecution to
establish its case:
i.    PW-1: Sh. R.K. Yadav, Investigating Officer/Intelligence Officer,
         NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

  ii.    PW-2: Sh. Vikas Kumar, Intelligence Officer, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

 iii.    PW-3: Sh. R.P. Meena, Chemical Examiner, JNCH, Laboratory,
         Nhavasheva, Distt. Raigarh (Maharashtra)

 iv.     PW-4: Sh. R.R. Kumar, Superintendent, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

  v.     PW-5: Sh. N.S. Yadav, Intelligence Officer, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

 vi.     PW-6: Sh. Avinash Kumar, Intelligence Officer, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

vii.     PW-7: Sh. Shiv Ratan Havaldar, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi

viii.    PW-8: Sh. S.K. Mittal, Assistant Chemical Examiner, CRCL, N.
         Delhi

 ix.     PW-9: Sh. Anil Kumar Joshi, Assistant Secretary, District Red Cross
         Society, Panchkula, Haryana

  x.     PW-10: Sh. P.C. Khanduri, Intelligence Officer & Malkhana
         Incharge, NCB, DZU, N. Delhi
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 5 of 58
7.      Thereafter, statements of the appellants were recorded under
Section
313
, Cr.P.C. wherein they controverted the entire prosecution case and
pleaded their innocence. They denied their presence at the spot and the
recovery, and stated that the contraband substance was planted on them.
They were taken to the NCB office where signatures were taken on several
blank and printed papers under threat and fear. Appellant Chand Singh
stated that he was called by a person when he was working in his fields.
Appellant Chand Singh stated that the statement of Bijender Singh (Ex. PW-
1/V) is totally false, as he is his political enemy and he opposed his election
when he was elected as Sarpanch of his village. He had been falsely
implicated at the instance of Bijender Singh in connivance with the NCB
officials. The search authorization (Ex. PW-1/A) is a manipulated document.
He stated that the statement recorded (Ex. PW-5/A) with respect to the
admission of recovery, seizure and other incriminating facts was false since
the signatures were taken on blank papers and few lines were recorded under
fear and threat. He also denied knowing the other appellants. Appellant
Jasbir Singh stated that he was picked up from his village. The statement
(Ex. PW-2/A) was not his statement. He denied giving any statement to the
NCB officials. Appellant Narender Singh stated that he was asked by the
NCB officials to carry a dead body from Panchkula to Delhi in the funeral
van. He stated that he had not given any statement to the NCB officials. He
was forced to write a few lines and the same were being used against him.
8.     In defence, the appellants produced Ravi Singh Bains as DW-1,
Territory Manager, Sales, Hero Honda Motors Ltd. He stated that as of
31.12.2005, Ex. DW-1/1 and Ex. DW-1/2 show that the company had 12
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 6 of 58
showrooms in Delhi. He further stated that there had never been any
authorized showroom at Udyog Vihar, Peeragarhi.
9.     The learned Special Judge convicted the appellants and sentenced
them in the terms noted hereinabove.
10.    Learned counsels for the appellants submit that there is infirmity with
respect to the secret information (Ex. PW-2/E). It does not mention the
vehicle number and make of second vehicle i.e. Marshall Jeep - HR-13A-
0170 in which appellant Chand Singh and appellant Jasbir Singh would
come to collect the delivery of Charas from appellant Narinder Singh. The
information written was incomplete.
11.    It has been pointed out by the learned counsels that the notice given
under
Section 50
(Ex. PW-1/B) of the Act, wherein the appellant Chand
Singh had only stated that he did not want his search and the vehicle's
search in presence of Gazetted Officer, did not state anything with respect to
the search before a Magistrate. Thus, he was not given an option to be
searched in front of a Magistrate. It is further submitted that the seizure
memo (Ex. PW-1/E) does not record that notice under
Section 50
was given
to the appellants. The giving of notice under
Section 50
of the Act (Ex. PW-
1/B) is not stated by Nafe Singh in his statement recorded under
Section 67
of the Act (Ex. PW-5/A). R.K. Yadav (PW-1), I.O. deposed that "It is
correct that no notice U/s 50 was again given in the office of NCB at R.K.
Puram.". It is also submitted that Arrest Memo/Jamatalashi (Ex. PW-5/C) of
appellant Chand Singh does not show that notice under
Section 50
was
recovered from him. Even the complaint (Ex. PW-2/E) does not make a
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 7 of 58
mention of compliance of
Section 50
of the Act. Thus, the giving of notice
under
Section 50
is doubtful. Moreover, the recovery memo (Ex. PW-1/E)
was only attested by R.K. Yadav (PW-1) and Nafe Singh. It was not attested
by any other official witnesses who are claimed to have been present at the
time of recovery. Furthermore, Nafe Singh was not even examined in the
Trial Court.
12.    Learned counsels submit that the compliance of
Section 50
is
mandatory. Reliance is placed on
Ali Mustaffa Abdul Rahman Moosa v.
State of Kerala
, (1994) 6 SCC 569, wherein it was observed that the
compliance of
Section 50
of the Act is mandatory, and the searching officer
is obliged to inform the person to be searched that, if he so requires, he shall
be produced before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate. It is further
submitted that there existed no reason for the appellants to deny their right to
be produced before a Magistrate.
13.    Learned counsels for the appellants submit that the arrest of the
appellants was made without a proper authorization. The search
authorization (Ex. PW-1/A) only authorizes the Intelligence Officers to
conduct the search of the appellants, but not to arrest them.
14.    It is further submitted by the learned counsels that no independent
witness belonging from same area was associated during the recovery
proceedings. Moreover, Nafe Singh, the independent witness who was
present at the time of recovery of the contraband was not examined in court.
Furthermore, no other independent witness was produced by the prosecution
though, it is claimed that a crowd had gathered at the spot. It is also pointed
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                       Page 8 of 58
out that the only explanation provided by the prosecution is that Nafe Singh
could not be traced at the given address. The fact that no efforts were made
by the NCB officials to trace him clearly brings the story of prosecution in a
cloud of doubt.
15.    On the aspect of samples not being representative, it is submitted by
the learned counsels that samples were not drawn as per the proper
procedure. Recovery memo (Ex. PW-1/E) discloses that seven gunny bags
were recovered from both the vehicles. When the gunny bags were opened,
six of them (A to F) contained 20 packets each, and every packet was found
containing four slabs. The seventh gunny bag ('G') was found containing 28
packets and every packet was found containing four slabs. Each packet was
weighed and was found to be 1 kilogram. Thereafter, two samples were
taken from each gunny bags totaling to 14 samples of 25 grams each. R.K.
Yadav (PW-1) deposed as follows:
"Two samples of 25 grams were drawn and taken from each
       gunny bag and was kept in a plastic polythene in total and the
       mouth of each polythene bag was stapled. The samples drawn
       were marked A1, A2 to G1 and G2. In all 14 samples were
       taken out which were kept in a plastic polythene bag and same
       was put in a white envelope which were sealed with the seal of
       "NARCOTICS CONTROL (sic.) BUREAU DZU 1" over a
       paper slip which was signed by me by all the three accused
       persons and by the public persons."
16.    Learned counsels submit that seven bags contained in total of 148
packets i.e. 592 slabs, and only two samples taken were taken to each bag
and not from each packet. It is not disclosed as to which particular packets
the samples were taken from. In the recovery memo (Ex. PW-1/E), the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 9 of 58
weight of each slab recovered from the packets was not mentioned. Each
packet was approximately 1 kilogram, which contained 4 slabs, yet nowhere
in the recovery memo, it is mentioned whether the weight of each slab was
250 grams. It is quite possible that one slab was 100 grams or any other
weight. Merely taking two samples from each bag does not establish the
nature of the entire material seized. Reliance was placed on
Basant Rai v.
State
, 191 (2012) DLT 403, wherein it was observed that if the proper
procedure is not followed in the taking of samples of the seized contraband,
then the benefit should go in the favour of the accused. The samples taken
must represent the whole of contraband to sufficiently substantiate that the
said quantity had been recovered. The officers ought to have collected the
samples properly to ascertain whether the illicit contraband was found in all
packets contained in the gunny bags. Therefore, the samples taken and sent
to CRCL were not representative.
17.    It is further submitted by the learned counsels that the possibility of
tampering of the seized contraband cannot be ruled out. Reliance is placed
on Abdul Ghaffar v. State (Delhi Administration), 68 (1997) DLT 155,
wherein it was observed that when a public witness was present along with
the raiding party, there was no reason for the Investigating officer not to
hand over the seal to the public witness. In the present case, the seal was not
given to the independent witness after use and it was retained by I.O.
18.    On the aspect of the statements recorded under
Section 67
of the Act,
learned counsels points out that the summons (Ex. PW-1/K) issued to
appellant Chand Singh under
Section 67
of the Act state the date as
31.12.2005, whereas the statement (Ex. PW-5/A) under
Section 67
was
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 10 of 58
recorded on 01.01.2005. In addition, the said statement (Ex. PW-5/A) of
appellant Chand Singh is not in his handwriting. There is no explanation as
to why the said statement was not recorded in the handwriting of the
appellant. As disclosed in the statement itself, he had studied till 9 th
standard.      Thus, he could have written the statement himself. The
supplementary statement of the appellant was written in his own
handwriting.
19.    Learned counsels submit that the appellants were in custody when the
statements under
Section 67
of the Act were recorded. As per the record,
they appeared in the office in pursuance of the summons under
Section 67
NDPS Act. Their arrest was made after the statements, and on the basis of
material collected during investigation. He submits that to say that the
appellants were not in custody is misplaced and incorrect, since, all the
proceedings were carried out while the appellants were in the custody of the
NCB officials. The appellants were already in custody when the statements
were recorded on 31.12.2005 and the formal arrest had been shown on paper
later. Therefore, the said statement recorded under
Section 67
of the Act
cannot be relied upon by the prosecution.
20.    On the aspect of possession and conscious possession, it is submitted
by learned counsels that the burden to prove the possession of the
contraband substance with the appellant was on the prosecution. Reliance is
placed on
Noor Aga v. State of Punjab & Anr.
, (2008) 16 SCC 417,
wherein it was observed that the burden to prove the foundational facts lies
on the prosecution. In the present case, if was for the prosecution to prove
the possession of charas with the appellants beyond reasonable doubt. The
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 11 of 58
question of establishing conscious possession does not even arise, since
possession has not been established in the first place.
21.    Learned counsels submit that it cannot be believed that the contraband
substance was tested at the spot, as the same has never been proved by the
prosecution. Even the usual procedures were not followed by the NCB
officials. R.K. Yadav (PW-1) in his cross-examination stated that:
"No document was prepared in respect of the positive test came
       with the test Field Test Kit, however, later on it was prepared in
       the office as mentioned in the Panchnama. We did not take the
       photographs of the vehicles parked there. Vol. There was heavy
       rush at the spot. I do not remember as to how much time we
       took in the entire proceedings conducted at the spot. We did not
       inform to any of the Police Station on the day of incident. We
       did not weigh the bags seized at the spot of their interception. It
       is also correct that no counting of the packets in each bag was
       made at the spot. No seal was put on the bags seized at the
       spot."
22.    He further stated:
"The accused persons were not arrested at the spot in spite of
       the fact to become aware regarding the contents of the bags as
       large crowd had been gathered there. Thereafter we went to the
       office alongwith the accused persons and witness and the
       contraband recovered there. No proceedings were carried out
       at the spot including the preparation of test memo."
23.    Vikas Kumar (PW-2) in his cross-examination stated that:
"We had not made any testing report near Hero Honda
       showroom and the gunny bags were not sealed at the spot near
       Hero Honda showroom and the said bags were not weighed at
       the spot of inception. I myself had not told any of the accused
       about their legal rights or if they want their search to be
       conducted in presence of Gazetted Officer / Magistrate. I also
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 12 of 58
cannot tell as to which of the accused person was firstly made
       aware of the above stated rights."
24.    It is submitted that usual procedures with respect to the recovery and
seizure were not followed. Moreover, the appellants were not arrested on the
spot in spite of the contraband having been recovered from them.
25.    Learned counsels submit that discrepancies exist in the testimony of
R.K. Yadav (PW-1). In his cross-examination, he deposed that:
"After the completion of the proceedings, the official seal was
       not handed over to any independent witness. We completed all
       the proceedings in the basement of our office till 11.45 p.m. I do
       not know as to whether the independent witness- Nafe Singh left
       the office immediately after the completion of proceedings or
       stay there however he was summoned by serving the notice U/s
       67
NDPS Act
."
26.    The appellants submit that R.K. Yadav (PW-1) clearly stated that the
proceedings were carried on till 11:45 pm in the basement of the office.
However, the office of NCB does not have a basement. Therefore, the story
of the prosecution with respect to the recovery, and proceedings held
thereafter are concocted and cannot be believed.
27.    Learned counsels further submit that the appellants were not
apprehended from the said spot on the relevant date. The statements of
prosecution witnesses are inconsistent with respect to the location of the
vehicles, as well as the location of Hero Honda showroom. In fact, the
Learned Trial Court Judge has gone to the extent of introducing his own
knowledge with respect to the existence of Hero Honda Showroom.
Paragraph 20 on page 20 of the judgment reads as follows:
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 13 of 58
"The accused have produced DW1 who has stated that there
       did not exist any authorized showroom of Hero Honda
       showroom in 2005 but I myself while passing on that route has
       observed a Honda showroom on the right side of the road after
       crossing Peeragarhi chowk from Punjabi Bagh."
28.    On the other hand, Mr. Satish Aggarwala, Learned Special Public
Prosecutor (SPP) for NCB submits that non-recording of vehicle number of
the second vehicle in the secret information (Ex. PW-2/E) is explained by
R.R. Kumar (PW-4) in his cross-examination. He deposed as follows:
"It is correct that there is no reference of Marshall (sic.) Jeep
       bearing No.HR 13A 0170 in the secret information. Voluntarily
       at the time of issue of search warrant (sic.) the number and the
       detail of the other vehicle i.e. Marshall (sic.) Jeep was
       conveyed (sic.) to me telephonically by the informer and that is
       why the search authorization was issued in respect of both the
       vehicles. I received this information at about 4.00pm. It is
       correct that I have not mentioned the fact of receipt of
       telephonic information in respect of Marshall (sic.) Jeep also in
       my secret information nor it was discussed with the senior
       officers."
29.    The learned SPP submits that the
Section 50
of the Act was duly
complied with. Reliance is placed on the statement of R.K. Yadav (PW-1),
who deposed as follows:
"I served upon them the notice U/s. 50 of
N.D.P.S Act
upon all
       the three persons for conducting the search of his person and
       their vehicle. I informed them that this was their right to have
       their search before any Gazetted officer or Magistrate as their
       legal right. All the three persons had denied that they does not
       want the presence of Gazette officer or a Magistrate before
       conducting the search and informed me that the search of their
       vehicle and in person can be conducted by any officer of NCB.
       The fact had been endorsed by the accused persons on the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 14 of 58
notice U/s. 50 of
NDPS Act
given to them in their own hand
        writing."
30.     The notice given under
Section 50
endorses the refusal of the
appellants to be searched in front of a Gazetted Officer. He submits that, in
fact, the compliance of notice under
Section 50
of the Act was not required
to be met, since the recovery was not to be affected from the person of the
appellants themselves, but the vehicles. R.K. Yadav (PW-1) deposed that:
"On the search of the vehicle, I alongwith my officers found
        that two plastic gunny bags were found lying in a vehicle No.
        HR-13/A-0170 martial jeep and five plastic gunny bags were
        found in vehicle no.HR-68-1558."
31.     Even otherwise,
Section 50
was duly complied with, as substantiated
from the statements of official witnesses and the three notices served upon
the appellants (Ex. PW-1/B, Ex. PW-1/C and Ex. PW-1/D).
32.     He further submits that
Section 42
of the Act is not applicable as the
secret information (Ex. PW-2/E) was not required to be reduced in writing.
Even otherwise, prosecution witnesses have explained that telephonic
information had been recorded. The search authorization was in respect of
two vehicles - which is clearly endorsed on the secret information (Ex. PW-
2/E).
33.     It is also submitted by the learned SPP that a reasonable explanation
has been provided by R.K. Yadav (PW-1) in his cross-examination
regarding the non-joining of other public witness. He stated that:
"We contacted two-three public persons at that time. Only one
        person agreed to become witness in this case. I had noted the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 15 of 58
names and addresses of other person whom I had contacted at
       that time. Nafe Singh was not known to any of us prior to the
       date of incident. I did not try to find out the place where Nafe
       Singh was residing after the incident."
34.    On the aspect of seal not given to the independent witness, learned
SPP submits that the cases relied on by the appellants pertain to police, other
than the NCB. However, in the present case, there were paper seals which
were signed by the appellants. The seals were intact till the samples were
tested at the CRCL.
35.    Learned SPP further submits that even though Nafe Singh -
independent witness, was not examined, the case of the prosecution cannot
be disbelieved. It was for the defence to establish that there was a deliberate
endeavour to keep the said independent witness away from the cross-
examination. The appellants in the statement recorded under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. had stated that they have been falsely implicated. However, it is not
shown from the record that there was any motivation for false implication of
the accused/ appellants with such a huge quantity of charas. It is also not
established through any evidence, that the NCB officers had any enmity
against any of the appellants.
36.    On the aspect of tampering of the seized contraband, learned SPP
submits that the seized property could not have been tampered with. At the
time of seizure, signatures of all the appellants were taken on the paper slips
attached to the samples. He relies on the statement of R.K. Yadav (PW-1)
who deposed that:
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 16 of 58
"On weighing each packet were found to contain one Kilogram
       of Charas. In total the quantity of Charas recovered was 148
       kg. of Charas. Two samples of 25 grams were drawn and taken
       from each gunny bag and was kept in a plastic polythene in
       total and the mouth of each polythene bag was stapled. The
       samples drawn were marked A1,A2,to G1 and G2. In all 14
       samples were taken out which were kept in a plastic polythene
       bag and same was put in a white envelope which were sealed
       with the seal of "NARCOTICS CONTROL(sic.) BUREAU DZU
       1" over a paper slip which was signed by me by all the three
       accused persons and by the public persons. All the seven
       recovered gunny bags alongwith recovered charas were again
       put in a different six white colour gunny bags and one in yellow
       colour separately and mouth of gunny bag were closed tiedly
       with the help of plastic rope and same were sealed with the seal
       of "NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU DZU 1" over a paper
       slip signed by me, all three accused persons and by panch
       witness who put their thumb (sic.) impression pasted on the
       cardboard. I also prepared the test memo in triplicate."
37.    He further stated that:
"At this stage, the seven white colour envelopes are produced
       in the court duly sealed over a paper slip of the envelopes.
       There are four seals on each of the envelope. The seal with
       which all are sealed is of Narcotics Control Bureau DZU-1.
       The four seals on each envelope are affixed on both end of the
       envelopes. The seals are intact."
38.     Therefore, if the samples had been tampered with, the seals would
not be found intact. Furthermore, P.C. Khanduri (PW-10), member of the
raiding party and Malkhana incharge deposed as follows:
"On 1.1.2006 sh. RK Yadav IO deposited the case property,
       samples, test memos and the above two vehicles in the
       malkhana. I made entry in the register at sl no. 27 in my own
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 17 of 58
handwriting. The copy of which running into three pages is
       already Ex. PW1/Y."
39.    S.K. Mittal (PW-8), chemical examiner deposed as follows:
"On 31.3.2006 the seven sample packets mark A1 to G1 were
       taken out from the strong room by sh. Shyam Singh under my
       supervision and direction. All the seals affixed on the sample
       packets were checked and it was found that the samples were
       sealed with the seal having impression as given on the test
       memo and the same were intact. The impression of the seal
       affixed on the sample packet were of impression NARCOTICS
       CONTROL BUREAU DZU 1."
40.    R.P. Meena (PW-3), chemical examiner deposed that "On
recommendation of Sh. R.S. Malhotra, chemical examiner I received all the
seven sample packets after checking the seals which were found affixed on
the sample packets in the intact condition".
41.    The learned SPP submits that it is evident from his statement that the
samples received were not tampered with, since the seals were found in
intact condition. It is also pointed out that the seal movement register (Ex.
PW-1/J) and malkhana register (Ex. PW-1/Y) further substantiate that the
case property had not been tampered with. The link evidence evidently
shows that the samples had not been tampered with at any stage of the
proceedings.
42.     Learned SPP submits that the weight of charas seized from the
appellants cannot be doubted. He places reliance on the statement of R.K.
Yadav (PW-1) who deposed that "The solid substance i.e. Hashish/Charas
having 20 kg are taken out from the one plastic bag which were 20 in
number i.e. slab of 1 kg each". Vikas Kumar (PW-2) deposed that "Every
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 18 of 58
packets were containing four slabs, on weighing one packet it was found to
be one kg approximately and in total 148 kg of the charas was recovered".
Therefore, if 20 kg substance is recovered from one bag, it is logical to
deduce that each slab was 1 kilogram in weight. Moreover,
Section 58
of the
Evidence Act, 1872 provides that no fact need to be proved in any
proceeding to which the parties agree to admit at the hearing, or before the
hearing. Since the appellants have admitted in their statement under
Section
67
of the Act that the entire quantity was charas, then there was no occasion
to send the same for testing to CRCL. It is also pointed out that in the
application made for re-examination of seized drugs, the appellants did not
state that the report of CRCL does not pertain to the entire quantity, or
represent the entire quantity. During that stage, no grievance was raised with
respect to the taken samples not being representative.
43.    Learned SPP further submits that the statements recorded under
Section 67
of the Act are, in fact, the statements that were voluntarily given
by the appellants. Perusal of the same revels that the appellants have
disclosed information to which only they are privy to. The statement of
appellant Chand Singh is as follows:
"Q: Give a detailed description of the 148 kgs of charas that
       was recovered from you on 31st December 2005?
A: This whole event was planned by me with the help of Mohan.
       My friend and Jasbir Singh @ Haali from village Rewadi
       Khedi, District-Jhajhar, Haryana was also part of this event.
       We planned to bring charas from Nepal by a vehicle. On 20-12-
       2005, both of us (Jasbir and Chand Singh) travelled to Raksol,
       Bihar by Samparkranti Express (2nd class). Mohan came to
       railway station and took us to his home. We stayed there till 25-
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 19 of 58
12-2005, during our stay we met a person named Rajan who
       was from Nepal and after speaking to him, I gave Rs. 1,45,000/-
       as advance to Mohan for 150 kg of Charas. The money was
       arranged by me and my friend Jasbir. The remaining amount
       was to be given after 10-15 days of the sale of the material.
       Jasbir called Narendra Singh to bring a vehicle. on 23-12-2005
       Narendra Simgh along with the vehicle left for Bihar. Narendra
       Singh was told to contact Mohan as soon as he reached Bihar. I
       left Raksol, Bihar on 25-12-2005 along with Jasbir in an AC
       coach and reached Delhi on 26-12-2005. After reaching, Jasbir
       kept in touch with Narendra Singh to keep a track of his
       position. On 31-12-2005 Jasbir told me that Narendra Singh
       has reached Delhi with Charas and is standing on Peeragarhi-
       New Rohtak road. After which, Jasbir and I left in my Marshall
       Jeep HR 13 A 0170 to the designated spot as told by Jasbir.
       After reaching the said spot, I searched for Narendra who was
       standing in a service lane near Hero Honda show room (Udyog
       Nagar). I parked my Marshal Jeep near Narendra Singh's
       vehicle which was a funeral van numbered HR 68 1558 in a
       manner that my vehicle's back was facing his vehicle's back
       and started transferring charas from the funeral van to my jeep.
We unloaded 2 kattas of charas when we were surrounded by
       some people who claimed to be the officers of Narcotics
       Control Bureau .they stated that they have information that
       there is charas in our vehicle and we want to conduct search of
       the both the vehicles. After hearing this, I attempted to run but
       they used adequate force and stopped me. Then the officials
       checked all the kattas of charas and took the sample and tested
       the same, thereafter, asked us to come to office of Narcotics
       Control Bureau along with the material. We, along with the
       officers went to RK Puram where the office of NCB was
       situated. We reached the office of the NCB at about 8 p.m. After
       reaching the parking of the office, the charas was weighed and
       found to be 148 kg. Two samples out of every kattas was taken
       and all the kattas were sealed and panchnama was made. All
       these procedures were done in our presence which lasted till
       11:45 pm."
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 20 of 58
44.    It is also submitted by the learned SPP that there exist nothing on
record to show that the appellants were in custody when statement was
recorded under
Section 67
of the Act. Even if the appellants were in custody,
it does not render the statements or the process illegal.
45.    It is further submitted by the learned SPP that although the appellants
were produced before the court on 02.01.2006 on an application filed by the
NCB seeking judicial remand, no retraction application was filed by the
appellants. The appellants did not retract the statement at the earliest
opportunity. This clearly suggests that the retraction was made on account of
legal advice received, and same is an afterthought. The retraction application
was filed by appellant Chand Singh and appellant Jasbir Singh on
16.01.2006. Narender Singh did not even file any retraction statement which
strengthens the case of the prosecution. The retractions, therefore, cannot be
read in evidence.
46.    On the aspect of possession and conscious possession, learned SPP
states that
Sections 35
and
54
raise a statutory presumption in favour of
prosecution. The possession of the contraband substance was established
from the link evidence as well as the statements of all the prosecution
witnesses. Therefore, the Court must draw the presumption that the
appellants were in conscious possession of the contraband substance.
Reliance is placed on
M. Prabhulal v. The Assistant Director, DRI
, AIR
2003 SC 4311.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 21 of 58
47.    Learned SPP submits that R.K. Yadav (PW-1) and Vikas Kumar
(PW-2) have both deposed on the same lines with respect to the spot of
recovery. Vikas Kumar (PW-2) deposed as follows:
"The officers had kept their surveillance of the vehicle as
       mentioned in the information and located the vehicle bearing
       no. HR 68 1558 (Funeral van) which was intercepted in the
       service lane near Hero Honda showroom near New Rotak
       Road, Delhi. It was found that some persons were unloading
       some gunny bags from HR 68 1558 in another vehicle bearing
       registration no. HR 13A 0170 (Marshall Jeep)."
48.    In his cross-examination, he stated that:
"The said Hero Honda showroom was in existence towards the
       left side of the main Rohtak Road when we start from
       Peeragarhi towards Rohtak.... ... ... . I cannot tell about the
       front faces of the stationary vehicles as to in which direction
       they were standing. It was around 1 ½ meter distance between
       the two stationary vehicles. ... ... ... . It took around one hour to
       complete the process of tracing vehicles and conducting the
       proceedings near Hero Honda showroom. I cannot tell the size
       of the plastic bags which have been stated to be found in
       marshall jeep."
49.    N.S. Yadav (PW-5), another official witness to recovery and seizure
of the contraband substance. He stated that:
"It took around 20-25 minutes to reach the two vehicles which
       were parked. The Hero Honda showroom was on the right side
       of the road on which we proceeded to trace the stationary
       vehicles. The office vehicle was not removed by us from
       Peeragarhi Chowk where it was initially parked. The distance
       of the Hero Honda showroom from Peeragarhi chowk was
       within 500 meters."
50.    Avinash Kumar (PW-6), in his cross-examination deposed that:
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 22 of 58
"Hero Honda agency is about 1 km from Peeragarhi Chowk. ...
       ... ... . The light was sufficient enough to conduct the
       proceedings at the spot. I don't remember if the vehicle light
       was used or not. So far I remember Hero Honda Agency was on
       the side from Punjabi Bagh to Rohtak. Jeep was facing towards
       Rohtak."
51.    Therefore, the spot of recovery cannot be doubted as all the
prosecution witnesses have deposed on the same lines.
52.    He further submits that minor contradictions are bound to occur in
any case. It is to be seen whether such contradictions are material in nature
and go down to the root of the case. In the present case, contradictions
between the official witnesses are minor in nature.
53.    Learned SPP submits that if the appellants were innocent then it is
difficult to understand so as to why they would try to flee away when the
NCB officials approached them. In his cross examination, R.K. Yadav (PW-
1) stated that "The occupants of the vehicle started running as soon as we
started towards them. Accused Narender Singh Jhakkar was present in his
vehicle and did not run (sic.)"
54.    He further submits that the MLCs of appellants do not show any
injury. Therefore, it cannot be said that the statements or any other
proceedings were conducted based on coercion.
55.    Learned SPP submits that the due process was followed and the letter
to Red Cross Society (Ex. PW-1/Z) substantiates the story of prosecution.
Moreover, Anil Kumar Joshi (PW-9), Assistant Secretary of Red Cross
Society deposed that the appellant Narender Singh Jhakkar was the driver of
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 23 of 58
the funeral van belonging to the Red Cross Society. He had also brought the
original documents i.e. registration certificate (Ex. PW-1/G) and insurance
certificate (Ex. PW-1/G1) pertaining to the funeral van no. HR 68 1558.
Therefore, the identity of the driver of the said funeral van can also not be
doubted.
56.    Lastly, learned SPP submits that Nafe Singh, independent witness has
explained in his statement recorded under
Section 67
(Ex. PW-5/A) that he
is illiterate and this is the reason N.S. Yadav (PW-5) is taking his statement
as per his wish. Therefore, the reason as to why he did not write it himself is
abundantly clear, and a defense that he did not write his own statement has
no merit.
57.    I have carefully perused the impugned judgment, considered the
submissions of learned counsels on either side, perused the record and
evidence laid in the case.
58.    It was argued by the learned counsels for the appellants that there is
an infirmity with respect to the secret information (Ex. PW-2/E) as it does
not mention the vehicle number and make of second vehicle i.e. Marshall
Jeep - HR-13A-0170 in which appellant Chand Singh and appellant Jasbir
Singh had come to take the delivery of the contraband substance. On the
other hand, Learned SPP had relied upon the statement of R.R. Kumar (PW-
4), wherein the so-called infirmity is explained. Perusal of the statement
made by R.R. Kumar (PW-4) reveals that the secret information (Ex. PW-
2/E) was conveyed to him through an informer telephonically. It is correct
that the vehicle number of the second vehicle is not written. However, the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 24 of 58
information pertaining to the identity of appellants Chand Singh and Jasbir
Singh - who were travelling in the second vehicle, such as their residential
address, is stated. Therefore, non-mention of the vehicle used by the
appellants Chand Singh and Jasbir Singh itself does not vitiate the
proceedings, or cast a doubt on the case of the prosecution. The statement of
Anil Kumar Joshi (PW-9) further corroborates the information contained in
the secret information (Ex. PW-2/E). He deposed that the driver of the
funeral van, bearing number HR 68 1558, was appellant Narender Singh
Jhakkar. Thus, in my opinion, there is sufficient evidence on record to
suggest that the secret information (Ex. PW-2/E) contains no infirmity.
59.    On the aspect of compliance under
Section 50
of the Act, it was
submitted by the learned counsels for appellants that appellant Chand Singh
had only stated on his notice (Ex. PW-1/B) that he did not want his search,
and the vehicle's search, to be conducted in the presence of a Gazetted
Officer, and did not state anything with respect to the search before a
Magistrate. Therefore, he was not informed about his right to be searched
before a Magistrate. Consequently, he should have been searched before a
Magistrate. I find no merit in this submission of learned counsels. Perusal of
the said notices (Ex. PW-1/B, Ex. PW-1/C and Ex. PW-1/D) reveals that the
appellants were apprised of their right to be searched before a Gazetted
Officer, or a Magistrate. In reply to the notice, the appellant wrote that he
did not want to be searched before a Gazetted Officer. R.K. Yadav (PW-1)
clearly deposed that the notices were given to all the appellants, and their
denial of being searched before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate had been
endorsed by the appellants on the said notices in their handwriting. This is
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 25 of 58
sufficient to show that the appellants were made aware of their right of being
searched before an appropriate authority, and the opportunity was given to
the appellants to get the search conducted before a Gazetted Officer/
Magistrate, before the search was undertaken. If the appellants did want the
search to be conducted before a Magistrate, they would have stated so while
declining to be searched before a Gazetted Officer.             Therefore, the
compliance of
Section 50
stands established.
60.    It was also argued by the learned counsels that the seizure memo (Ex.
PW-1/E) does not find any mention that the notice under
Section 50
was
given to the appellants. It is also argued that Arrest Memo/Jamatalashi (Ex.
PW-5/C) of appellant Chand Singh does not show that the notice under
Section 50
was recovered from him. The complaint (Ex. PW-2/E) also does
not mention of the compliance of
Section 50
. The omission to mention the
factum of the notice given under
Section 50
in the arrest memo, seizure
memo, or the complaint does not in any way suggest that the notice or any
other document was fabricated. The recording of the factum of issuance of
the notice under
Section 50
in the subsequent documents is not a necessity.
Learned counsels placed reliance on
Ali Mustaffa Abdul Rahman Moosa
(supra). There can be no quarrel with the proposition that the compliance of
Section 50
of the Act is mandatory in nature, and it places an obligation on
the investigating agency to inform the person being searched of his the right
of being searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. However
,
the
said judgment
does not help the case of the appellants since, it stands
established that the appellants were, indeed, apprised of their rights.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 26 of 58
61.    In any event, the above submission of the appellants does not hold
water. It was submitted by the learned SPP that the compliance of
Section
50
of the Act is not required to be met, since the search was not of the
person of the appellants themselves, but the vehicles. I find merit in this
submission, since it is settled position of law that the compliance of
Section
50
is only insisted in cases where a personal search of the apprehended
person is to be carried out, but not when it is made from any other public
place.
In the case of
Madan Lal and Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh
,
(2003) 7 SCC 465, while citing
Kalema Tumba v. State of Maharashtra
and Anr.
, 2000
CriLJ 507, State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh
, (1999) 6 SCC
172 and Gurbax Singh v. State of Haryana, 2001 CriLJ 1166, it was
observed that:
"16. A bare reading of
Section 50
shows that it only applies in
       case of personal search of a person. It does not extend to
       search of a vehicle or a container or a bag, or premises. ... ...
       .... The language of
Section 50
is implicitly clear that the
       search has to be in relation to a person as contrasted to search
       of premises, vehicles or articles. This position was settled
       beyond doubt by the Constitution Bench in
Baldev Singh
's case
       (supra). Above being the position, the contention regarding
       non-compliance of
Section 50
of the Act is also without any
       substance."
62.    From the above discussion, it is evident that the appellants were,
firstly, apprised of their rights before the search. Even if it were to be
assumed that the notices given under
Section 50
of the Act were defective in
nature, the same is not relevant, as personal search of the appellants was not
essential, and the recovery was not effected from the person of the
appellants.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 27 of 58
63.    Learned counsels for the appellants submitted that the arrest of the
appellants was made without a proper authorization. The search
authorization (Ex. PW-1/A) only authorized the Intelligence Officers to
conduct the search of the appellants, but not to arrest them. Even if it is to be
considered that the search authorization did not authorize the intelligence
officers to arrest the appellants,
Section 43
of the Act empowers every
intelligence officer of NCB to arrest at a public place or in transit. A clear
distinction exists between
Section 42
and
Section 43
of the Act.
Section 42
reads as follows:
"42. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without
       warrant or authorisation.-
(i) Any such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a
       peon, sepoy or constable) of the departments of central excise,
       narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence or any other
       department of the Central Government including para-military
       forces or armed forces as is empowered in this behalf by
       general or special order by the Central Government, or any
       such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy
       or constable) of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police or
       any other department of a State Government as is empowered
       in this behalf by general or special order of the State
       Government, if he has reason to believe from persons
       knowledge or information given by any person and taken
       down in writing that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic
       substance, or controlled substance in respect of which an
       offence punishable under this Act has been committed or any
       document or other article which may furnish evidence of the
       commission of such offence or any illegally acquired property
       or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of
       holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for
       seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act is
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 28 of 58
kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or enclosed
       place, may between sunrise and sunset,
(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or
       place;
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any
       obstacle to such entry;
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the
       manufacture thereof and any other article and any animal or
       conveyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to
       confiscation under this Act and any document or other article
       which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of the
       commission of any offence punishable under this Act or furnish
       evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is
       liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V A of
       this Act; and
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any
       person whom he has reason to believe to have committed any
       offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that if such officer has reason to believe that a
       search warrant or authorisation cannot be obtained without
       affording opportunity for the concealment of evidence or
       facility for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search
       such building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time
       between sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds of his
       belief.
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing
       under subsection (1) or records grounds for his belief under the
       proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two hours send a copy
       thereof to his immediate official superior."
(Emphasis Supplied)
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 29 of 58
64.
Section 43
reads as follows:
"43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place.-Any officer
       of any of the departments mentioned in
section 42
may (a)
       seize in any public place or in transit, any narcotic drug or
       psychotropic substance or controlled substance in respect of
       which he has reason to believe an offence punishable under
       this Act has been committed, and, along with such drug or
       substance, any animal or conveyance or article liable to
       confiscation under this Act, any document or other article
       which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of the
       commission of an offence punishable under this Act or any
       document or other article which may furnish evidence of
       holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for
       seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act;
(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to
       believe to have committed an offence punishable under this
       Act, and if such person has any narcotic drug or psychotropic
       substance or controlled substance in his possession and such
       possession appears to him to be unlawful, arrest him and any
       other person in his company.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression
       "public place" includes any public conveyance, hotel, shop, or
       other place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public."
(Emphasis Supplied)
65.    The distinction between
Sections 42
and
43
of the Act was elaborately
explained by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Dharminder Kumar v.
State of Punjab
, 2002 SCC OnLine P&H 762, in the following way:
"10. While
Section 42
empowers the officers of the specified
       departments to carry out search, seizure and arrest in any
       building, conveyance or enclosed place,
Section 43
deals with
       the similar power of seizure and arrest in public places. Powers
       under both these sections can be exercised if the concerned
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 30 of 58
officer has reason to believe that some offence relating to
       narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances has been committed.
Section 49
is another section in the series which empowers
       officers to stop and search animals and conveyance used for
       illegal transport of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.
       The words building, conveyance and enclosed place as used in
Section 42
have been used for the specific purpose of
       protecting the persons who are living in the buildings,
       conveyance and enclosed place. The Legislature in its wisdom
       considered proper to draw a demarcating line between
       building, conveyance and enclosed place on one side and
       public place or in transit on the other side. The words have
       been specifically mentioned to show the demarcating line
       between the two otherwise, the legislature could have used
       any place instead of narrating the words 'building,
       conveyance of enclosed place'. Even a private open place does
       not fall within the purview of
Section 42
unless it is enclosed.
       So, this demarcating line will have to be kept in mind. Under
Section 43
of the Act, the words used are 'any public place or
       in transit'. The requirement of recording of information in
       writing and communicating it to superiors is intended to protect
       the possible harassment to residents and to maintain personal
       liberty and human dignity. The term conveyance used in
Section
       42
is to be understood as ejusdem generis to the terms building
       or enclosed place. It is not every conveyance whether in public
       or private that would fall within the scope of
Section 42
of the
       Act. A conveyance in a public place would fall within
Section
       43
of the Act and
Section 49
gives powers to the empowered
       officer to stop such conveyance for the purpose of search.
11. The Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh
. 1999 SC 237 has held that the
       material difference between the provisions of
Section 43
and
Section 42
is that
Section 42
requires recording of reasons of
       belief and of opinion writing with regard to commission of
       offence before conducting search and seizure whereas
Section
       43
does not contain any provision and empowers the officer
       under
Section 43
of the Act for seizure of the article etc. and
       arrest of the person who is then in possession of narcotic drug
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 31 of 58
and psychotropic substance in a public place where such
       possession appears to him to be unlawful.
The Division Bench
       of the Gujarat High Court in
Surajmal Kania Lal Sonik v. State
       of Gujarat
, 1991 Cr C.J. 1483 has considered the scope and
       ambit of
Sections 42
and
43
of the Act. Such Division Bench has
       relied upon the findings recorded by earlier Division Bench and
       held to the following effect:-
"
Section 43
gives plenary power to the officers to
               seize in a public place or in transit any narcotic
               drug or psychotropic substance and to detain and
               search any person, whom he has reason to believe
               has committed the offence. The only restriction is
               that such powers can be exercised by the officer of
               any Department mentioned in
Section 42
. The
               Police Department is specifically mentioned in
Section 42
and as staled above, even under
Section
               42
the Police Inspector in charge of the Police
               Station is empowered to exercise the powers under
Section 42
. Police Inspector Patil was therefore,
               an authorised officer to exercise the power and
               take action for seizure, detention, search and
               arrest under
Section 43
NDPS Act."
In our view, therefore, the provisions of
Section 41
and
42
,
       NDPS Act are not applicable, but the provisions of
Section 43
,
       NDPS Act are applicable for any search and seizure of the
       narcotic drug in a conveyance etc. and detaining and searching
       any person in a public place. We are fortified, in our view, by
       the judgment of this Court in Aslambhai Ibrahimbhai Memon v.
       The State of Gujarat, Criminal Appeal No.844 of 1988,
       delivered by a Division Bench of this Court, consisting of M.B.
       Shah and B.S. Kapadia, JJ. on October 5, 1989, in which the
       learned Brother Judges, on considering the relevant provisions
       of
Sections 41
and
43
NDPS Act, observed:-
"Thus, the intention of the Legislature in
Section
               41
and
42
is different as revealed from the
               language of sections as stated above from the one
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 32 of 58
in
Section 43
which authorises any officer of the
               departments mentioned in
Section 42
for search,
               seizure, arrest and detention in any public place
               or in transit in respect of any narcotic drug or
               psychotropic substance in respect of which he has
               reason to believe an offence punishable under
               Chapter IV has been committed and, alongwith
               such drug or substance, any animal or
               conveyance or article is liable to be confiscated
               under the Act, or any document or other article
               which he has reason to believe may furnish
               evidence of the commission of an offence
               punishable under Chapter IV relating to such
               drug or substance.
Thus,
Section 42
speaks about search and seizure
               from any building, conveyance or enclosed place,
               while
Section 43
speaks about the search and
               seizure from public place or in transit. It is
               important to note that the wordings of
Sections 41
and
42
with regard to information taken, in
               writing have been deliberately omitted by the
               Legislature in
Section 43
and in our view, that
               has been done so advisedly inasmuch as the
               Police Officer empowered under
Section 42
may
               get information with regard to the person in any
               public place or in transit at the last moment and
               if he has to undergo the procedure of taking that
               information in writing and recording the reasons
               for his belief, possibly such information may not
               be useful. When that is so, any search or seizure
               is to be made in any public place or in a vehicle
               in transit or any person is to be arrested or
               detained from a public place, it is not intended by
               the Legislature to take down the said information
               in writing.
In view of our observations that the provisions of
Section 43
NDPS Act are applicable and the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 33 of 58
provisions of
Sections 41
and
42
are not
               applicable to the facts of the instant case, and that
               the provisions of
Section 43
NDPS Act, are not
               violated, it is not necessary for us to refer to
               certain judgments by the High Courts on the point.
               We shall, however, refer some of them as they are
               cited at Bar."
12. It may be mentioned that the appeal against the said
       judgment was dismissed by the Hon'ble the Supreme Court in
       judgment reported as
Surajmal Kania Lal Soni v. State of
       Gujarat
. 1994 Supp. (2) Supreme Court Cases 276, where
       challenge in appeal regarding the compliance of
Section 50
of
       the Act was made but found no favour with the Hon'ble
       Supreme Court.
13. The distinction between scope of
Sections 42
and
43
of the
       Act has also been considered by the Rajasthan High Court in
Deep Chand v. State of Rajasthan
, 1996 Crl. L.J. 54. In the
       said case the conveyance was searched in the street which is a
       public place and the provision of
Section 42
of the Act was
       found not applicable to such a situation.
Kerala High Court
       has examined this issue in
Abdul Azeez v. State of Kerala
,
       2001 (3) RCR (Cri) 740 and in
Palayan v. State of Kerala
,
       2002(2) RCR (Cri) 857, that under
Section 43
of the Act, the
       empowering Officer has power to seize the articles and arrest
       of the person who is found to be in possession of narcotic
       drugs and psychotropic substance in a public place where
       such possession appeared to be unlawful. The High Court
       concluded it in paras 10 and 16 of the judgment which reads
       as under:-
"10. The said decision, according to me, contains
               clear and categoric declaration of law that the
               provisions of
Section 42(2)
will apply only to the
               case of information relating to the availability of
               the contraband in a 'building, conveyance or
               enclosed place' and that the said provisions will
               not have any application in a case of information
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                       Page 34 of 58
relating to possession of contraband by any
               person as available in a public place.
16. In the circumstances, I am not persuaded to
               extend the benefit of non-compliance with
Section 42(2)
of the NDPS Act and to acquit the
               accused merely based on the two decisions of the
               learned Single Judges of this Court. On the basis
               of the provision of
Sections 42(1)
,
42(2)
and
43
of
               the NDPS Act as also on the basis of the
               decisions in Baldev Singh, Balbir Singh and
               Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri, I am of the
               humble view that
Section 42(2)
of the NDPS Act
               will not apply to a case of information regarding
               the availability of the contraband in a public
               place as it happens in the present case. It follows
               that the accused is not entitled to get an acquittal
               based on alleged violation of
Section 42(2)
of the
               NDPS Act, albeit the prosecution has failed to
               establish that the information received by P.W.2
               was recorded by him and a copy sent to the
               superior officer in writing before P.W.2
               proceeded to the scene of occurrence."
16. Thus, it is evident that if seizure is made from any animal,
       conveyance or article in a public place or in transit then
Section 43
of the Act would be applicable.
Section 43
and
Section 42
of the Act operate in different spheres. Since the
       conveyance has been specifically included in
Section 43
of the
       Act also, therefore, the conveyance which is found in a public
       place or in transit would be covered under the provisions of
Section 43
of the Act whereas conveyance used in
Section 42
of
       the Act has to be read as conveyance which is other than in a
       public place. This interpretation is the only harmonious
       interpretation of
Sections 42
and
43
of the Act."
(Emphasis Supplied)
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 35 of 58
66.    Recently, the Supreme Court has also commented on this distinction
on this distinction in
Mohan Lal v. State of Rajasthan
, (2015) 6 SCC 222.
The Supreme Court observed:
"32. In the present case, the High Court has noted that the
       information was given to the competent authority. That apart,
       the High Court has further opined that in the case at hand
Section 43
applies.
Section 43
of the NDPS Act contemplates
       seizure made in the public place. There is a distinction between
Section 42
and
Section 43
of the NDPS Act. If a search is made
       in a public place, the officer taking the search is not required to
       comply with Sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 42
of the NDPS
       Act.
As has been stated earlier, the seizure has taken place
       beneath a bridge of public road accessible to public. The
       officer, Sub-Inspector is an empowered officer Under
Section 42
of the Act. As the place is a public place and
Section 43
comes into play, the question of non-compliance of
Section 42(2)
does not arise. The aforesaid view gets support
       from the decisions in
Directorate of Revenue v. Mohammed
       Nisar Holia
, (
2008) 2 SCC 370 and State, NCT of Delhi v.
       Malvinder Singh
, (2007) 11 SCC 314."
67.    In the present case, the recovery of the contraband substance was
made in a public place i.e. service lane of Rohtak road near Peeragarhi
Chowk. The submission of the learned counsels has no force, since
Section
43
of the Act was applicable. Under
Section 43
of the Act, the officers
were competent to arrest the appellants, once they were found in
possession of charas.
Section 43
does not require that prior to the arrest,
the information be reduced to writing and be produced before a superior
officer, or that prior authorisation be obtained.
68.    Learned counsels submitted that no independent witness belonging
from same area was associated during the recovery proceedings. Nafe Singh,
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 36 of 58
the independent witness who was present at the time of recovery of the
contraband was also not examined in court. It was further submitted that no
other independent witness was produced by the prosecution, though a crowd
had gathered at the spot. The explanation provided by the prosecution is that
he could not be traced at the given address. Learned SPP submitted that a
reasonable explanation had been provided by R.K. Yadav (PW-1) in his
cross-examination in this regard. Perusal of his cross-examination reveals
that he made the efforts to contact two-three public persons, but only one
person, viz. Nafe Singh agreed to become a witness.
In
Ajmer Singh v. State
of Haryana
, (2010) 3 SCC 746, the Supreme Court has observed:
"19. The learned Counsel for the appellant has submitted that
       the evidence of the official witness cannot be relied upon as
       their testimony, has not been corroborated by any independent
       witness. We are unable to agree with the said submission of the
       learned Counsel. It is clear from the testimony of the
       prosecution witnesses PW-3 Paramjit Singh Ahalwat, D.S.P.,
       Pehowa, PW-4 Raja Ram, Head Constable and PW-5 Maya
       Ram, which is on record, that efforts were made by the
       investigating party to include independent witness at the time of
       recovery, but none was willing. It is true that a charge under
       the Act is serious and carries onerous consequences. The
       minimum sentence prescribed under the Act is imprisonment of
       10 years and fine. In this situation, it is normally expected that
       there should be independent evidence to support the case of the
       prosecution. However, it is not an inviolable rule. Therefore, in
       the peculiar circumstances of this case, we are satisfied that it
       would be travesty of justice, if the appellant is acquitted merely
       because no independent witness has been produced.
20. We cannot forget that it may not be possible to find
       independent witness at all places, at all times. The obligation to
       take public witnesses is not absolute. If after making efforts
       which the court considered in the circumstances of the case
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 37 of 58
reasonable, the police officer is not able to get public witnesses
       to associate with the raid or arrest of the culprit, the arrest and
       the recovery made would not be necessarily vitiated. The court
       will have to appreciate the relevant evidence and will have to
       determine whether the evidence of the police officer was
       believable after taking due care and caution in evaluating their
       evidence.
21. In the present case, both the trial court and the High
       Court by applying recognized principle of evaluation of
       evidence of witnesses has rightly come to the conclusion that
       the appellant was arrested and Charas was recovered from the
       possession of the appellant for which he had no licence. We
       find no good reason to differ from that finding."
69.    I find merit in the submission of the learned SPP that it must be
shown by the defense that there was a deliberate endeavour to keep the
independent witness away from the cross-examination. Perusal of the record
reveals that adequate steps were taken by the Trial Court as well as the
investigating agency to bring Nafe Singh, it is evident from the record that
summons were issued on 06.03.2010, 23.03.2009, 25.04.2007 and vide
orders dated 25.04.2007, 17.12.2007 and 20.02.2008.
In
State of Haryana v.
Mai Ram
, (2008) 8 SCC 292, it was observed that the ultimate question to
be asked is, whether the evidence of the official witness suffers from any
infirmity. It was further observed that the prosecution's case cannot be held
to be vulnerable for non-examination of persons who were not official
witnesses. The lacuna in the present case is not material in nature, and
cannot be said to have caused prejudice to the appellants. In such cases, if
the statements of official witnesses corroborate the proceedings conducted,
the case of the prosecution cannot be disbelieved.
This position was
reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in
M. Prabhulal v. The Assistant
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 38 of 58
Director, DRI
, AIR 2003 SC 4311 and in
Ram Swaroop v. State
, AIR 2013
SC 2068. The appellants - in their statements recorded under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., had stated that they have been falsely implicated. However, the
appellants failed to show that there was any motivation for their false
implication with such a huge quantity of charas. It is also not established
through any evidence that the NCB officers had any enmity against the
appellants.
The Supreme Court in
State, Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Sunil and
Another
, (2001) 1 SCC 652, held that:
".....Hence, when a police officer gives evidence in court that a
       certain article was recovered by him on the strength of the
       statement made by the accused it is open to the court to believe
       the version to be correct if it is not otherwise shown to be
       unreliable. It is for the accused, through cross- examination of
       witnesses or through any other materials, to show that the
       evidence of the police officer is either unreliable or at least
       unsafe to be acted upon in a particular case. If the court has
       any good reason to suspect the truthfulness of such records of
       the police the court could certainly take into account the fact
       that no other independent person was present at the time of
       recovery. But it is not a legally approvable procedure to
       presume the police action as unreliable to start with, nor to
       jettison such action merely for the reason that police did not
       collect signatures of independent persons in the documents
       made contemporaneous with such actions."
70.    The Supreme Court in
State of Punjab v. Balwant Rai
, (2005) 3 SCC
164, held that the question of implanting a huge quantity of the drug does
not arise.
The High Court of Himachal Pradesh in
Sanjiv Kumar v. State of
HP
, 2004 (2) ShimLC 443, held that:
"It is not believable that the police would implicate an innocent
       person in such a serious case by planting a huge quantity of
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 39 of 58
charas on his person. There was no enmity between the police
       and the accused nor one is suggested. Police had no axe to
       grind in implicating the accused."
71.    Therefore, it cannot be accepted that NCB officials implanted a huge
quantity of 148 kilograms of Charas in the vehicles occupied by the
appellants.
72.    It was argued by the learned counsels for the appellants that the
samples extracted from the seized contraband substance were not
representative, since they were not drawn as per the proper procedure.
Perusal of the recovery memo (Ex. PW-1/E) reveals that seven gunny bags
were recovered from both the vehicles and when they were opened, six of
them (A to F) contained 20 packets each and the seventh gunny bag ('G')
was found containing 28 packets. Every packet was found containing four
slabs. Each packet was weighed and was found to be 1 kilogram. Thereafter,
two samples were taken from each of the gunny bags totaling to 14 samples
of 25 grams each. Official witnesses have deposed to this effect in their
depositions.
73.    Firstly, it was argued that the samples were not extracted from each of
the 148 packets containing 592 slabs of Charas. Instead, only two samples
were taken from each bag containing the 20 (A-F) or 28 (G) packets. In my
opinion, it was not necessary to extract the samples from each of the 592
slabs, since two samples were lifted from each bag at random. This situation
is to be seen from a practical perspective. It is not plausible to suggest that in
such cases, the officials should extract samples of each slab. It was sufficient
that reasonable care be taken to extract the best possible representative
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                       Page 40 of 58
sample from the whole of the seized substance. This is a matter of practice,
rather than a point of procedure or law. There is no basis to assume that the
packets, from which the samples were not drawn, were containing substance
different from that contained in the packets from which the samples were
indeed drawn. When all the packets in a particular bag were kept together,
without any differentiation, there is no basis to claim that the untested
packets contained substance different from the packets which were tested.
No rule has been cited by the appellants to claim that samples should have
been drawn as per the prescribed procedure.
74.    The second argument advanced was that the recovery memo (Ex. PW-
1/E) does not mention the weight of each slab contained in the packets. It
was also submitted that, it is possible that each of the slab weighed different.
Therefore, one cannot assume the slabs to be 250 grams each. Perusal of the
record does suggest that the slabs were not individually weighed. R.K.
Yadav (PW-1) deposed that "On weighing each packet were found to
contain one Kilogram of Charas". He further deposed that"The solid
substance i.e. Hashish/Charas having 20 kg are taken out from the one
plastic bag which were 20 in number i.e. slab of 1 kg each.". Vikas Kumar
(PW-2) deposed that "Every packets were containing four slabs, on
weighing one packet it was found to be one kg approximately and in total
148 kg of the charas was recovered."
75.    In my opinion, once each packet is weighed and found to be 1
kilogram, each slab was not required to be weighed. It is immaterial whether
each slab was 250 grams, less or more. The fact that each packet was
weighed and found to be of 1 kilogram, is sufficient. In my opinion, failure
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 41 of 58
to weigh individual slabs is immaterial. It does not advance the case of the
appellants in any way.
76.     Thirdly, reliance was placed on
Basant Rai
(supra), wherein it was
observed that if the proper procedure is not followed with respect to the
taking of samples of the seized contraband, then the benefit should go in the
favour of the accused. The samples taken must represent the whole of
contraband to sufficiently substantiate that the said quantity had been
recovered. The facts in respect of the seizure proceedings of the
abovementioned case are in clear distinction to the facts of the present case.
In the abovementioned case, the officials had recovered 8 packets containing
charas. Small quantity of charas was then taken out of each of the 8 packets,
mixed together and then divided into two samples weighing 25 grams each.
The Court while finding fault with this procedure observed:
"For example, if the 08 packets were allegedly recovered from
       the appellant and only two packets were having contraband
       substance and rest 6 packets did not have any contraband;
       though all may be of the same colour, when we mix the
       substances of all 8 packets into one or two; then definelty, the
       result would be of the total quantity and not of the two pieces.
       Therefore, the process adopted by the prosecution creates
       suspicion. In such a situation, as per settled law, the benefit
       thereof should go in favour of the accused. It does not matter
       the quantity. Proper procedure has to be followed, without that
       the results would be negative."
77.    The process adopted for the extraction of sample is very different to
the one used in the present case. In the present case, the officials took out
two samples weighing 25 grams each from each of the six bags (A-F) and
seventh bag (G), containing 20 and 28 packets respectively. Thus, 14
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 42 of 58
samples were sent to CRCL for analysis. At no point was the recovered
substance mixed together. Therefore, the reports obtained in the present case
were different for different drawn samples.
78.    Even if it is to be assumed that the duplicate samples were drawn
from the same packet contained in each of the seven bags, and the weight of
each of those seven packets was 1 kilogram each, then it can be deduced that
the appellants were in possession of at least 7 kilograms of charas, which
falls within the commercial quantity prescribed under the Act.
79.    On the aspect of tampering, it was submitted by the learned counsels
that there was a strong possibility that the samples were tampered with.
Reliance was placed on Abdul Ghaffar (supra). Learned SPP submitted that
the seized property could not have been tampered with. At the time of
seizure, signatures of all the appellants were taken on the paper slips
attached to the samples. He also relied on the statement of R.K. Yadav (PW-
1) who deposed that the paper slips attached to the seized substance was
signed by him, all the appellants, and the thumb impression of the public
witness was also put. The NCB DZU 1 seals were also put on all the seven
envelopes produced before the Trial Court. The seals were found intact. He
also relied on the statement of P.C. Khanduri (PW-10), member of the
raiding party and Malkhana in charge. He deposed that the case property
was deposited by R.K. Yadav (PW-1) in the Malkhana and P.C. Khanduri
(PW-10) made the entry in the register. The same was exhibited as Ex. PW-
1/Y.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 43 of 58
80.    Furthermore, learned SPP pointed out to the statement of S.K. Mittal
(PW-8), chemical examiner, who deposed that seven sample packets were
taken out of strong room under his supervision, and all the seals were found
intact. In fact, R.P. Meena (PW-3), chemical examiner, also deposed that
the seals of the samples were found intact.
81.    In view of the above discussed evidence, I find force in the
submissions of the learned SPP. The seals which were affixed at the time of
seizure were found in intact condition throughout the process. The link
evidence clearly establishes that at no point of time, the samples could have
been tampered with.
82.    The observation of this Court in Abdul Ghaffar (supra), has to be
read as a whole, and a part of it cannot be read in isolation to the rest. There
are clear distinctions, which can be drawn from Abdul Ghaffar (supra) and
the present case. In the said case, the proceedings conducted by the officials
suffered from many material lacunae. Firstly, no endorsement was made by
the accused on the notice given under
Section 50
, whereby he waived his
right to being searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. In the
present case, all the appellants had made an endorsement that they did not
want to be searched before a Gazetted Officer. Secondly, the malkhana
register did not show that the CFSL form had been deposited. There was no
entry in the register to show that the samples were sent to the CSFL.
However, in the present case, the malkhana register (Ex. PW-1/Y) shows the
relevant entries. The third observation in the said case, on which the learned
counsels have relied upon, was that the seals were not handed over to the
public witness by the I.O. Instead they were handed over to the constable.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 44 of 58
In Abdul Ghaffar (supra), the prosecution had failed to establish its case
since the testimonies of the official witnesses were not substantiated by
cogent evidence. However, in the present case, statements of the official
witnesses stand corroborated with respect to the seals being in intact
condition.
83.    Perusal of the statements of appellants recorded under
Section 67
of
the Act corroborates with the seizure proceedings, as recorded by the official
witnesses. It was also pointed out that none of the appellants made an
application for re-examination of seized drugs. At that time, no grievance
was raised with respect to the representativeness of the sample. In such a
situation, the appellants cannot raise a grievance at this stage, when they did
not raise this issue at the relevant time by making an application for re-
examination of the samples.
84.    I find no merit in the submission of the learned counsels for the
appellants that the statements of appellants recorded under
Section 67
of the
Act were not voluntary. The MLCs of the appellants show no sign of
manhandling or physical coercion. Moreover, the appellants have disclosed
facts leading to the recovery and personal facts that only they were privy to.
Appellant Chand Singh stated as follows:
"Q: Please, introduce yourself.
A: I was born on 12.04.1959 in the village Lowa Khurd, Tehsil
       Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar, Haryana. I studied up to 9 th
       standard in the school of the village and quit learning after
       failing in the 10th standard examination. Afterwards, I started
       working as a landlord. My father Shri Ram Chander also works
       as a landlord (farmer) and my mother Smt. Suraj Mukhi had
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 45 of 58
passed away approximately thirty years ago. I have two
       brothers and two sisters. Both of my sisters Sunita and Anita
       are married and my brother Jai Bhagwan who is approximately
       42 years old and has studied upto 12th standard and has a truck
       supplies building materials. My second brother Shri Bhagwan
       who is approximately 31 years old has studied upto 7th standard
       and works as a peon in Lowa Khurd High School. Both of my
       brothers are also married. I had got married in the year 1980
       and the name of my wife is Santosh and I have two daughters
       and two sons. Elder daughter Manisha studies in the third year
       of B.A. in the Government College, Bahadurgarh and younger
       daughter Babita studies in 12th standard at Noonamajra. My
       elder son Pradeep studies in 10th standard in Golden Valley
       School, Bahadurgarh and younger son Sandeep studies in the
       8th standard in same school. I was eleced as the Sarpanch of the
       village Lowa Khurd in the year 2000 and remained Sarpanch
       till 2005. In the year 1986-1987, we purchased a plot
       measuring 375 yards in the Shakti Nagar Colony of
       Bahadurgarh and got a building constructed in the month of
       June-July, 2005 and started living in Bahadurgarh house since
       October, 2005. Even my brother Jai Bhagwan lives in this
       house with me alongwith his family and my younger brother
       Shri Bhagwan lives in our village house."
85.     Appellant Jasbir Singh stated as follows:
"I was born in village Rewari Kheda in year 1972. I have
       passed 8th standard from Middle School of the village and
       passed by High School examination from village Chhara. My
       father does agricultural work and I also do agricultural work
       on the same land. We are four bothers and one sister. Suresh
       does agricultural work. Ranvir is employed in Police. Sumer
       and Rana Pratap do agricultural work. My marriage took place
       in year 2003 and my wife's name is Savita. I have a son namely
       Aditya whose age is 5 months. I met Chand in village Lowa,
       District Jhajjar, Tehsil Bahadurgarh around 7-8 years ago."
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 46 of 58
86.    Appellant Narender Singh stated as follows:
"Q: Tell about yourself.
A: On 10.05.1974, I was born in my village Khanpur Kalan. My
       father is a farmer. My mother Smt. Sajjan Kaur is a housewife.
       I have an elder brother whose name is Ramesh @ Charan
       Singh who is a Havaldar in 14 Batallion, Rajasthan Rifles,
       Army. I passed my matriculation from government school. After
       studies, I started farming. In year 2002, I joined Red Cross
       Society, Panchkula as a driver. Prior to that i.e. in 1997, I
       worked as a driver in Fire Brigade, Panchkula on temporary
       basis. In 1991, I got married with Smt. Guddi @ Roshni and I
       have two children. My elder son namely Arvind is 6 years old
       and younger son Parveen is 4 and half years old.
       Q: What type of work do you do in Red Cross Society?
A: I am a driver of a funeral van bearing registration number
       HR 68 1558. I ferry dead bodies in a van at different places and
       its charges @ Rs. 4 per km is deposited in Red Cross."
87.    Thus, there is no merit in the submission that the statements of the
appellants recorded under
Section 67
were not voluntarily made.
88.    It is pointed out that there exists a discrepancy with respect to the date
mentioned on the summons (Ex. PW-1/K) issued to appellant Chand Singh
under
Section 67
of the Act. The summons (Ex. PW-1/K) was dated as
31.12.2005, whereas the statement (Ex. PW-5/A) under
Section 67
was
recorded on 01.01.2005. In my opinion, the same is not material in nature
since the proceedings went late in the night. As the statements reveal, the
seizure proceedings went on till 11:45 pm at night. It is possible that by the
time the recording of statements was done, it was past mid night. For this
reason, a minor discrepancy with respect to the recording of a different date,
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 47 of 58
that to, of the next day when the proceedings are continuing till mid night is
not enough to raise any doubts with respect to the proceedings.
89.    It was further argued that the appellants were in custody when the
statements under
Section 67
were recorded. On the other hand, learned SPP
submitted that there exists nothing on record to show that the appellants
were in custody at the time of recording of statement. He further submitted
that even if it is to be considered that the appellants were in custody, it is
immaterial, since they have disclosed such facts in their statements to which
only they were privy.
90.    I find force in the submission of the learned SPP that there exists
nothing on record to suggest that appellants were in custody. However, the
submission that it is immaterial whether they were in custody, or not, is not
correct. The difference in
Section 25
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and
Section 67
of the Act is very clear. The former is with respect to the
statement made while in custody whereas the latter is with respect to the
statement made while not in custody. From this difference, stems the
admissibility of the statements. While the statements made in custody are
not admissible, the statement made while not in custody is admissible.
In
Kanhaiyalal v. Union of India
, (2008) 4 SCC 668, it was observed that:
"43. The law involved in deciding this appeal has been
       considered by this Court from as far back as in 1963 in
Pyare
       Lal Bhargava
's case (supra). The consistent view which has
       been taken with regard to confessions made under provisions of
Section 67
of the NDPS Act and other criminal enactments,
       such as the
Customs Act, 1962
, has been that such statements
       may be treated as confessions for the purpose of
Section 27
of
       the Evidence Act, but with the caution that the Court should
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 48 of 58
satisfy itself that such statements had been made voluntarily
       and at a time when the person making such statement had not
       been made an accused in connection with the alleged offence.
44.
In addition to the above, in the case of
Raj Kumar
       Karwal v. Union of India and Ors.
, 1991 CriLJ 97, this Court
       held that officers of the Department of Revenue Intelligence
       who have been vested with powers of an Officer-in-Charge of a
       police station under
Section 53
of the NDPS Act, 1985, are not
       'police officers' within the meaning of
Section 25
of the
       Evidence Act. Therefore, a confessional statement recorded by
       such officer in the course of investigation of a person accused
       of an offence under the Act is admissible in evidence against
       him. It was also held that power conferred on officers under the
NDPS Act
in relation to arrest, search and seizure were similar
       to powers vested on officers under the
Customs Act
. Nothing
       new has been submitted which can persuade us to take a
       different view.
45. Considering the provisions of
Section 67
of the N.D.P.S.
       Act and the views expressed by this Court in
Raj Kumar
       Karwal
's case (supra), with which we agree, that an officer
       vested with the powers of an Officer-in-Charge of a Police
       Station under
Section 53
of the above Act is not a 'Police
       Officer' within the meaning of
Section 25
of the Evidence Act, it
       is clear that a statement made under
Section 67
of the N.D.P.S.
       Act is not the same as a statement made under Section 161 of
       the Code, unless made under threat or coercion. It is this vital
       difference, which allows a statement made under
Section 67
of
       the N.D.P.S. Act to be used as a confession against the person
       making it and excludes it from the operation of
Sections 24
to
27
of the Evidence Act.
46. There is nothing on record to suggest that the appellant
       was compelled under threat to make the statement after he had
       been placed under arrest which renders such statement
       inadmissible and not capable of being relied upon in order to
       convict him. On the other hand, there is the evidence of PW9
       upon which the High Court has relied in convicting the
       appellant. It may once again be mentioned that no question in
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 49 of 58
cross-examination had been put to PW9 in this regard and the
       version of the said witness must be accepted as corroborative of
       the statement made by the accused.
47. It may also be recalled that though an application was
       made for retracting the confession made by the appellant,
       neither was any order passed on the said application nor was
       the same proved during the trial so as to water down the
       evidentiary value of the said statement. On the other hand, in
       the absence of such evidence on record, the High Court had no
       option but to proceed on the basis of the confession as made by
       the appellant under
Section 67
of the NDPS Act. Since it has
       been held by this Court that an officer for the purposes of
Section 67
of the NDPS Act read with
Section 42
thereof, is not
       a police officer, the bar under
Sections 24
and
27
of the
       Evidence Act cannot be attracted and the statement made by a
       person directed to appear before the officer concerned may be
       relied upon as a confessional statement against such person.
       Since a conviction can be maintained solely on the basis of a
       confession made under
Section 67
of the NDPS Act, we see no
       reason to interfere with the conclusion of the High Court
       convicting the appellant."
91.    Nevertheless, the aforementioned legal position does not affect the
present case, since it is clear from the arrest memo (Ex. PW-1/E) as well as
the statements of official witnesses, that the arrest was made after the
proceedings had been completed.
92.    I find merit in the submissions of the learned SPP that although the
appellants were produced before the court on 02.01.2006 on an application
filed by the NCB seeking judicial remand, no retraction application was
filed by them at the earliest opportunity. The retraction application was filed
by appellant Chand Singh and appellant Jasbir Singh on 16.01.2006.This
evidently suggests that the retraction statements of the appellant Chand
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 50 of 58
Singh and the appellant Jasbir Singh are an afterthought. They did not retract
the statement at the earliest opportunity. Perusal of the record reveals that
appellant Narender Singh did not even file any retraction statement, which
goes on to prove the case of the prosecution.
93.    On the aspect of conscious possession, it is to be first ascertained
whether the appellants were in possession of the contraband substance. As
noted above, the possession of the contraband stands established. Thus, the
question that now remains to be examined is, whether the appellants were in
conscious possession of the contraband substance. The aspect of conscious
possession has been given a statutory recognition under the scheme of the
NDPS Act
under
Sections 35
and
54
, which read as follows:
"35. Presumption of culpable mental state.-(1) In any
       prosecution for an offence under this Act which requires a
       culpable mental state of the accused, the Court shall presume
       the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for
       the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state
       with respect to the act charged as an offence in that
       prosecution.
Explanation.-In this section "culpable mental state" includes
       intention, motive knowledge of a fact and belief in, or reason to
       believe, a fact.
(2) For the purpose of this section, a fact is said to be proved
       only when the court believes it to exist beyond a reasonable
       doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a
       preponderance of probability."
54. Presumption from possession of illicit articles.-In trials
       under this Act, it may be presumed, unless and until the
       contrary is proved, that the accused has committed an offence
       under this Act in respect of
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 51 of 58
(a) any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled
       substance;
(b) any opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant growing on
       any land which he has cultivated;
(c) any apparatus specially designed or any group of utensils
       specially adopted for the manufacture of any narcotic drug or
       psychotropic substance or controlled substance; or
(d) any materials which have undergone any process towards
       the manufacture of a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance
       or controlled substance, or any residue left of the materials
       from which any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or
       controlled substance has been manufactured, for the
       possession of which he fails to account satisfactorily.
(Emphasis Supplied)
94.    The law raises a statutory presumption of conscious possession, where
physical possession of the contraband has been established.         This is a
rebuttable presumption, and it would be for the accused to rebut the
presumption of conscious possession, once the prosecution has established
physical possession of the contraband.
95.
In
Noor Aga
(supra), the Supreme Court observed:
"58.
Sections 35
and
54
of the Act, no doubt, raise
       presumptions with regard to the culpable mental state on the
       part of the accused as also place the burden of proof in this
       behalf on the accused; but a bare perusal of the said provision
       would clearly show that presumption would operate in the trial
       of the accused only in the event the circumstances contained
       therein are fully satisfied. An initial burden exists upon the
       prosecution and only when it stands satisfied, the legal burden
       would shift. Even then, the standard of proof required for the
       accused to prove his innocence is not as high as that of the
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 52 of 58
prosecution. Whereas the standard of proof required to prove
       the guilt of the accused on the prosecution is "beyond all
       reasonable doubt" but it is "preponderance of probability" on
       the accused. If the prosecution fails to prove the foundational
       facts so as to attract the rigours of
Section 35
of the Act, the
       actus reus which is possession of contraband by the accused
       cannot be said to have been established.
59. With a view to bring within its purview the requirements
       of
Section 54
of the Act, element of possession of the
       contraband was essential so as to shift the burden on the
       accused. The provisions being exceptions to the general rule,
       the generality thereof would continue to be operative, namely,
       the element of possession will have to be proved beyond
       reasonable doubt."
96.    Therefore, once possession is established by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt, the court shall presume that the appellants had culpable
mental state and have committed the offence under the Act.
97.
In
Megh Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2003) 8 SCC 666, it was
observed that:
"9. The expression 'possession' is a polymorphous term
       which assumes different colours in different contexts. It may
       carry different meanings in contextually different backgrounds.
       It is impossible, as was observed in
Superintendent &
       Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal v. Anil Kumar
       Bhunja and Ors.
(AIR 1980 SC 52), to work out a completely
       logical and precise definition of "possession" uniformally
       applicable to all situations in the context of all statutes.
10. The word 'conscious' means awareness about a
       particular fact. It is a state of mind which is deliberate or
       intended.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 53 of 58
11. As noted in
Gunwantlal v. The State of M.P.
(AIR 1972
       SC 1756) possession in a given case need not be physical
       possession but can be constructive, having power and control
       over the article in case in question, while the person whom
       physical possession is given holds it subject to that power or
       control.
12. The word 'possession' means the legal right to possession
       (See Health v. Drown (1972) (2) All ER 561 (HL). In an
       interesting case it was observed that where a person keeps his
       fire arm in his mother's flat which is safer than his own home,
       he must be considered to be in possession of the same. (See
       Sullivan v. Earl of Caithness (1976 (1) All ER 844 (QBD).
13. Once possession is established the person who claims
       that it was not a conscious possession has to establish it,
       because how he came to be in possession is within his special
       knowledge.
Section 35
of the Act gives a statutory recognition
       of this position because of presumption available in law.
       Similar is the position in terms of
Section 54
where also
       presumption is available to be drawn from possession of illicit
       articles. This position was highlighted in
Madan Lal and Anr. v.
       State of Himachal Pradesh
(2003 (6) SCALE 483)."
98.    Learned counsels for the appellants submitted that the appellants were
not in conscious possession of the contraband substance. It is submitted that
in the present case, the prosecution has not established the possession of
charas with the appellants, beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, the question of
conscious possession does not arise, since possession has not been
established in the first place.
99.    In the present case, possession has been established by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. The recovery proceedings have been
duly proved beyond shadow of doubt. Perusal of the statements of the
appellants as well as the official witnesses reveals that there is a high degree
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                      Page 54 of 58
of corroboration of facts leading to the recovery, seizure and arrest
proceedings. As noted above, minor discrepancies in the testimonies of
witnesses that do not go into the root of the case of the prosecution cannot
be held to vitiate the proceedings conducted. Therefore, it was for the
defence to rebut the presumption that the appellants were not in conscious
possession of the contraband.
100. However, the appellants have failed to rebut the presumption that they
were not in conscious possession. Hence, it stands proved that the appellants
were not only in possession, but in conscious possession of seized charas.
101. It was argued by learned counsels that it cannot be believed that the
contraband substance was tested at the spot as the same has never been
proved by the prosecution. Reliance was placed on the statements of R.K.
Yadav (PW-1) and Vikas Kumar (PW-2), wherein they have disclosed that
although the seized contraband substance was tested at the spot, no report
was made. They also disclosed that the bags were not weighed at the spot. In
fact, no proceedings were actually conducted at the spot except the alleged
testing.
102. Herein, it must be noted, that they have also disclosed that a huge
crowd had gathered at the spot at the relevant time. Therefore, under the
circumstances, it was felt by the officials that it would be better if the
proceedings are conducted at the office itself. In such a case, it cannot be
said that usual procedures were not followed.
103. Learned counsels for the appellants had relied on the statement of
R.K. Yadav (PW-1) to suggest that it raises a strong concern with respect to
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 55 of 58
the authenticity of the proceedings. In his cross-examination, R.K. Yadav
(PW-1) deposed that the proceedings were conducted in the basement of the
NCB office. It is submitted by the learned counsels that as a matter of fact,
the office of NCB does not have a basement at all. Therefore, the story of
the prosecution with respect to the recovery and proceedings held thereafter
are concocted and cannot be believed. However, the appellants have not
claimed in their defence that there is no basement in the NCB office. No
such suggestion was given to the prosecution witnesses during their cross-
examination. In my opinion, if a finding is to be based on an aspect, it must
be made on the basis of cogent evidence brought on record. The statement of
the counsels for the appellants does not inspire confidence of this Court. In
absence of evidence to this effect, the court cannot rely on an ipse dixit of
the counsel.
104. Learned counsels submitted that the appellants were not apprehended
from the said spot and the statements of prosecution witnesses are
inconsistent with respect to the location of the vehicles as well as the
location of Hero Honda showroom. The Learned Trial Court Judge had also
made an observation from his personal knowledge about the existence of the
showroom. On the other hand, learned SPP submitted that R.K. Yadav (PW-
1) and Vikas Kumar (PW-2) have both deposed on the same lines with
respect to the spot of apprehension and recovery. R.K. Yadav (PW-1), in his
cross examination stated that the two vehicles had their back towards each
other and the distance between the vehicles was about 1 to 2 feet. Vikas
Kumar (PW-2) deposed that the vehicles were parked in the service lane
near Hero Honda showroom and that the appellants were unloading the bags
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                   Page 56 of 58
from HR 68 1558. He also stated that there was about 1 and half meter
distance between the two vehicles. N.S. Yadav (PW-5) stated that the Hero
Honda showroom was on the right side of the road when they approached
the vehicles of the appellants. He also stated that the distance between the
backside of both the vehicles was 2-3 feet. Avinash Kumar (PW-6), in his
cross-examination deposed that the Hero Honda agency is about 1 kilometer
from Peeragarhi Chowk and that the Hero Honda Agency was on the side
from Punjabi Bagh to Rohtak. Jeep was facing towards Rohtak. It is evident
that the prosecution witnesses have all deposed on the same lines. No doubt
certain minor inconsistencies exist with respect to the distance between the
two vehicles and the exact location of the Hero Honda showroom but they
do not affect the case of the prosecution at its root.
In this regard the
Supreme Court in
C. Muniappan and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu
, (2010) 9
SCC 567, observed that:
"85. It is settled proposition of law that even if there are some
       omissions, contradictions and discrepancies, the entire
       evidence cannot be disregarded. After exercising care and
       caution and sifting through the evidence to separate truth from
       untruth, exaggeration and improvements, the court comes to a
       conclusion as to whether the residuary evidence is sufficient to
       convict the accused. Thus, an undue importance should not be
       attached to omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which
       do not go to the heart of the matter and shake the basic
       version of the prosecution's witness. As the mental abilities of
       a human being cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb all
       the details of the incident, minor discrepancies are bound to
       occur in the statements of witnesses. (vide
Sohrab and Anr. v.
       The State of M.P.
, AIR 1972 SC 2020;
State of U.P. v. M.K.
       Anthony
, AIR 1985 SC 48; Bharwada Bhogini Bhai Hirji Bhai
       v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1983 SC 753;
State of Rajasthan v. Om
       Prakash
, AIR 2007 SC 2257; Prithu @ Prithi Chand and Anr.
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                    Page 57 of 58
v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (2009) 11 SCC 588;
State of U.P.
       v. Santosh Kumar and Ors.
, (2009) 9 SCC 626 and State v.
       Saravanan and Anr., AIR 2009 SC 151)."
(Emphasis Supplied)
105. I find force in the submission of the learned SPP that if the appellants
were innocent then it is difficult to understand so as to why they would try to
flee away from the spot when the NCB officials approached them. He relied
on the cross examination of R.K. Yadav (PW-1), who stated that "Accused
persons tried to run away but they could run. The accused persons caught in
their position as we found them on reaching the spot.". Perusal of the
statements of appellants recorded under
Section 67
of the Act reveal the
same. Therefore, the statement of R.K. Yadav (PW-1) stands corroborated
by the statements of appellants.
106. Consequently, this Court finds on the basis of the evidence brought on
record, that the appellants were involved in transportation of a huge quantity
of Charas. Thus, the conviction of the appellants by Trial Court is upheld.
Since the quantity of charas recovered from the possession was 148
kilograms, the order on sentence is also upheld, as it is the minimum
punishment that has been awarded to the appellants.
107. For all the aforesaid reasons, I find no merit in these appeals and the
same are accordingly, dismissed.
(VIPIN SANGHI)
                                                            JUDGE

NOVEMBER 30, 2015
CRL.A. Nos.1370/2010, 349/2011 & 546/2011                     Page 58 of 58
