Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 45 of 1860
Citation: AIR 1979
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/144033913/

[Cites
71
, Cited by
0
]
Patna High Court
Sheo Pujan Singh & Ors vs State Of Bihar on 27 October, 2016
Author:
Navaniti Prasad Singh
Bench:
Navaniti Prasad Singh
,
Chakradhari Sharan Singh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
                    Criminal Miscellaneous No.11852 of 1984
                        Arising Out of PS.Case No. -0 Year- 0 Thana -null District- -
 ===========================================================
 1. Rajan Kumar @ Rajan Lohani, son of Prema Nand, resident of
    Parnadi Manpur, Police Station Mofassil, District Gaya.
 2. Kishori Prasad, son of Rajo Ram, resident of Nawadah, Police
    Station and District - Nawadah.                .... .... Petitioners.
                                 Versus
    The State of Bihar.                        .... .... Opposite Party.
                                            WITH

 ===========================================================
            Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 714 of 1992
           Arising Out of PS.Case No. -null Year- null Thana -null District- SASARAM (ROHTAS)
 ===========================================================
 1. Sheo Pujan Singh, son of Late Shikhan Singh, resident of village
    Jakhini, P.S. Nokha, District- Rohtas.
 2. Net Lal, son of Kapurchand Sah, resident of village Penar, P.S.
    Nokha, District Rohtas.                      .... .... Petitioners.
                                  Versus
     The State of Bihar.                    .... .... Opposite Party.
 ===========================================================
 Appearance :
 (In Cr.Misc. No. 11852 of 1984)
 For the Petitioners    :    Mr. Arun Kumar, Advocate
 For the Opposite Party :    Mr. Anjani Kumar, A.A.G.-VI
                             Mr. Jharkhandi Upadhyay, A.P.P.
                             Mr. Deepak Kumar Jamuar, A.C. to A.A.G.-VI
 (In Cr. WJC No. 714 of 1992)
 For the Petitioner     :    Mr. N.K. Agrawal, Sr. Advocate
                             (Amicus Curiae)
 For the Opposite Party :    Mr. Anjani Kumar, A.A.G.-VI
                             Mr. Jharkhandi Upadhyay, A.P.P.
                             Mr. Deepak Kumar Jamuar, A.C. to A.A.G.-VI
 ===========================================================
 CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
          And
          HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE NAVANITI PRASAD SINGH
          And
          HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHAKRADHARI SHARAN SINGH
                       C.A.V. JUDGMENT & ORDER

(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE NAVANITI PRASAD SINGH)

 Date: 27-10-2016

                        The primal question involved in both these cases,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -2-



        before the Full Bench, is whether the very entry, search and seizure

        conducted illegally and unauthorisedly, can form the basis for lodging

        an F.I.R. leading to prosecution and whether Court can quash the

        prosecution at the threshold on the ground of illegality in entry and

        consequential search and seizure, which form the basis for instituting

        the F.I.R.       Equally in issue is the conflict of judgments between

        Division Bench in the case of Madhusudan Prasad Vs. The State of

        Bihar and others, being order dated 25.11.1981 in Cr.W.J.C. No.212

        of 1981, and in the case of Ramchandra Pansari Vs. The State of

        Bihar since reported in 1988 PLJR 623 and Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal

        Vs. The State of Bihar since reported in 1990 PLJR 416, which

        judgments are on the same issue and in conflict with the judgment in

        the case of Madhusudan Prasad (supra) holds that the prosecution

        cannot be quashed merely on the ground of initial illegality in any

        entry, search and seizure, whereas the other two cases hold to the

        contrary.

        2.             I may, now, refer to the facts of the two cases as before the

        Full Bench. In Cr. Misc. No.11852 of 1994 (Rajan Kumar @ Rajan

        Lohani and another Vs. The State of Bihar), an inspection was

        conducted on 28.07.1981 at 7 PM at the business premises of M/s

        Kisan Ghar, registered dealer in fertilizer, by the Supply Inspector,

        Gaya and, on basis of the said inspection Deo Rai, the Supply
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -3-



        Inspector, Gaya lodged an F.I.R. on 29.07.1981 at about 7:30 PM with

        the Gaya Kotwali Police Station, giving rise to Gaya Kotwali P.S.

        Case No.161 of 1981, dated 29.07.1981, instituted under
Section-7
of

        the Essential Commodities Act against Madhusudan Prasad, Kishori

        Prasad and the petitioner- Rajan Kumar @ Rajan Lohani, allegedly,

        the employee of M/s Kisan Ghar.                    The informant, the Supply

        Inspector, alleges that on inspection of the fertilizer business

        premises, it was found that the display board, displaying the stocks

        and prices of fertilizers, was found dated 26.06.1981, instead of

        28.07.1981 and the books of accounts were not produced for

        inspection.       Therefore, in view of Entry-34 in Schedule-1 of the

        display order, being "fertilizer" as inserted therein vide notification

        no. GSR 15 dated 08.05.1980 to the Bihar Essential Articles (Display

        of Stocks and Price) Order, 1977 (hereinafter in brevity „Display

        Order‟), being an order issued by the State Government in exercise of

        powers delegated to it by the Central Government under the
Essential

        Commodities Act
, had been violated. Pursuant to the F.I.R. lodged,

        the Police, after investigation, submitted a charge-sheet on basis

        whereof by order dated 07.02.1984, the Chief Judicial Magistrate,

        Gaya was pleased to take cognizance of the offence punishable under
Section-7
of the Essential Commodities Act and transferred the case

        for trial to S.D.J.M., Gaya, being G.R. No.1668 of 1981 (Tr. No.669
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -4-



        of 1984), where the matter is pending.

        3.                Here, it may be noted that the inclusion of Entry-34

        "fertilizer" in the Display Order has already been held to be ultra vires

        by Division Bench of this Court in the case of Madhusudan Prasad

        Vs. The State of Bihar, being Cr.W.J.C. No.212 of 1981, disposed of

        on 25.11.1981 and this issue has attained finality. Display order, thus,

        has no application in relation to the present case.

        4.                The basic submission being that the informant, Supply

        Inspector had thus, no jurisdiction to conduct any inspection for

        compliance of the provisions of the Display Order in respect of

        fertilizers. The sale, purchase and storage for sale of fertilizer are

        controlled by the provisions of the Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1957

        (hereinafter in short as „FCO‟), an order issued by the Central

        Government under the powers conferred upon it by the
Essential

        Commodities Act
. FCO authorizes only an Inspector of fertilizer

        appointed under Clause-19 thereof, to enter, search and seize stocks of

        fertilizers for compliance of FCO in terms of Clause-20 thereof.

        Undisputedly, the Supply Inspector, Gaya, the informant, who entered

        the premises and conducted the search and seizure, which was the

        basis for lodging the F.I.R., was not an Inspector of fertilizer who

        alone had the jurisdiction to enter any premises and conduct search

        and seizure in accordance with the provisions of FCO. Thus, the very
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -5-



        entry for inspection, search and seizure, which was foundation of the

        F.I.R., being illegal, the prosecution based thereon, would be without

        jurisdiction, an abuse of process of Court.

        5.                 This application having been filed under
Section-482
Cr.P.C., this Court while admitting the case for final hearing, stayed

        further proceedings in the Court below. Subsequently, this case along

        with other cases have been referred to the Full Bench as noted above.

        6.                Cr.W.J.C. No.714 of 1992 (Sheo Pujan Singh & anr. Vs.

        The State of Bihar) again relates to an offence allegedly punishable

        under
Section-7
of the Essential Commodities Act. It appears that on

        28.09.1992 at about 10:45 AM Mangal Singh, the Additional

        Superintendent of Police, C.I.D. (Food), Sahabad, Dheri, District

        Rohtas entered the premises and conducted inspection in the premises

        of Bhagwatiji Rice Mill. It is alleged that on inspection, the Rice Mill

        was found closed and labourers were found present cleaning the

        machineries.         On inspection, it was found that there was a Display

        Board in the Rice Mill premises dated 25.09.1992, displaying stocks

        of 140 quintals of rice and 35 quintals of khudi (broken rice),

        whereas, on physical verification, it was allegedly found that the stock

        of rice was 130 quintals and that of khudi was 32 quintals. It was thus

        alleged that there was violation of provisions of Bihar Trade Articles

        (Licences Unification) Order, 1984 (hereinafter in brevity „Unification
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -6-



        Order‟). On the basis of the aforesaid allegation on 28.09.1992 at 7

        PM Nokha P.S. Case No.151 of 1992 was instituted for alleged

        violation punishable under
Section-7
of the Essential Commodities

        Act.

        7.                The submission is that the Additional Superintendent of

        Police, C.I.D. (Food) was not authorized in terms of Clause-30 of the

        Unification Order to enter and conduct search and seizure and as such

        the very entry for search and seizure, being illegal, no F.I.R. could be

        registered based on such illegal entry or search and seizure and all

        further steps are illegal. The Additional Superintendent of Police,

        C.I.D. (Food) had no authority under Clause-30 of the Unification

        Order, is not in dispute. The writ petition having been filed, by order

        dated 05.01.1993, further proceedings, pursuant to the F.I.R., was

        stayed and the case is at that stage and, as noticed above, has referred

        to the Full Bench.

        8.               On behalf of the petitioners, primarily reliance has been

        placed on the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of K.L.

        Subhayya Vs. State of Karnataka since reported in AIR 1979

        Supreme Court 711, which has been followed in the case of

        Ramchandra Pansari (supra) and Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal (supra).

        9.               On the other hand, Mr. Anjani Kumar, learned Additional

        Advocate General-VI, submits that an entry, search and seizure
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -7-



        without authority by an officer not authorized could not vitiate the

        prosecution and the trial and supported the view taken by the Division

        Bench of this Court in the case of Madhusudan Prasad (supra).

        10.               In substance on behalf of the petitioners, the submission

        would be that the Officers who entered the premises and conducted

        the search and seizure were not Officers authorized by law in these

        regards. Their very entry and consequential search and seizure were

        wholly without jurisdiction. The obligations and offences are created

        by special orders issued under
Section 3
of the Essential Commodities

        Act (hereinafter in short referred to as
E.C. Act
), which itself provides

        and confers power only on specified Officers to enter, search and

        seize for securing compliance of the law. That being so, an Officer

        not authorized by the statute could not have entered the premises,

        searched and seized violating the fundamental and the only safeguard

        provided by the legislature and, thus, no prosecution could be based

        thereupon.        Even if the trial were to take place on account of

        unauthorized entry, search and seizure, the trial would necessarily

        stand vitiated. If the trial is to stand vitiated, no useful purpose would

        be served by protracted litigation with the result being fate accompali.

        It would thus be an abuse of process of Court. In this Full Bench we

        have to examine the correctness of this submission, which has found

        favour in the two reported judgments referred to above.
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -8-



        11.                In sum and substance, the submission on behalf of the

        State is that offences in relation to
E.C. Act
, by virtue of
Section 10 A
thereof, being cognizable, the police has power to investigate and the

        prosecution based thereon cannot stand vitiated.

        12.               In order to appreciate the submission, it is first necessary

        to look at the provisions as we are dealing with offences exclusively

        relatable to
E.C. Act
and not any offence under the
Indian Penal Code
.

        13.              First, I may refer to
Section 4
of the Criminal Procedure

        Code (hereinafter in short as Cr. P.C.) and, in particular, sub-section

        (2) thereof, which is quoted hereunder:

                           4. Trial of offences under the
Indian Penal
                           Code
and other laws.- (1) All offences under
                           the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) shall be
                           investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise
                           dealt with according to the provisions
                           hereinafter contained.

                           (2) All offences under any other law shall be
                           investigated, inquired into, tried and otherwise
                           dealt with according to the same provisions,
                           but subject to any enactment for the time being
                           in force regulating the manner or place of
                           investigating, inquiring into, trying or
                           otherwise dealing with such offences.

        14.                 At the very outset, it may be noticed and reiterated that

        if it was an offence under any of the provisions of the
Indian Penal

        Code
, then all provisions of
Cr.P.C
. would apply, but sub-section (2)

        of
Section 4
of the Cr.P.C. makes a departure to the extent that if any
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         -9-



        special law provides any special procedure, it is that procedure that

        has to be followed and not the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
.

        15.
E.C. Act, 1955
was enacted in the interest of general

        public, for control of production, supply and distribution of and trade

        and commerce in certain commodities by the Parliament. It is a

        skeleton legislation, inasmuch as, it by itself does not provide for

        duties and obligations nor provides for offences. It merely authorizes

        the Central Government under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act to issue

        statutory orders for the purposes of the said Act as enumerated in the

        said section or delegate its powers to the State Government under
Section 5
of the E.C. Act, subject to such conditions and restrictions

        as it may prescribe.
Section 3 (2) (j)
of the E.C. Act reads as follows:

                             3. Power to control production, supply,
                             distribution, etc. of essential commodities.
                             (1)......
                             (2)Without prejudice to the generality of the
                             powers conferred by sub-section (1), an
                             order made thereunder may provide,-
                             (a)...
                             (b)....
                             ......
                             (j) for any incidental and supplementary
                             matters including in particular, the entry,
                             search or examination of premises, aircraft,
                             vessels, vehicles or other conveyances and
                             animals, and the seizure by a person
                             authorized to make such entry, search or
                             examination-
                                 (i) of any articles in respect of which
                                 such person has reason to believe that a
                                 contravention of the order has been, is
                                 being, or is about to be, committed and
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 10 -




                                  any packages, coverings or receptacles
                                  in which such articles are found;
                                  (ii) of any aircraft, vessel, vehicle or
                                  other conveyance or animal used in
                                  carrying such articles, if such person
                                  has reason to believe that such aircraft,
                                  vessel, vehicle or other conveyance or
                                  animal is liable to be forfeited under the
                                  provisions of this Act;
                                  (iii) of any books of accounts and
                                  documents which in the opinion of such
                                  person, may be useful for or relevant to,
                                  any proceedings under this Act and the
                                  person from whose custody such books
                                  of accounts or documents are seized
                                  shall be entitled to make copies thereof
                                  or to take extracts therefrom in the
                                  presence of an officer having the custody
                                  of such books of accounts or documents.
                                                              (emphasis supplied)


        16.                   From the aforesaid provision, it would be seen that

        whenever any obligation is created by issuance of an order specific

        persons have to be authorized as Enforcement Officer for the purposes

        of entry, search, examination or seizure.
Section 6
of the E.C. Act

        read as follows:

                             6. Effect of order inconsistent with other
                             enactments.- Any order made under
section
                             3
shall have effect notwithstanding anything
                             inconsistent therewith contained in any
                             enactment other than this Act or any
                             instrument having effect by virtue of any
                             enactment other than this Act.

                             6 A. Confiscation of foodgrains, edible
                             oilseeds and edible oils. - (1) Where any
                             essential commodity is seized in pursuance
                             of an order made under
section 3
in
                             relation thereto, a report of such seizure
                             shall, without unreasonable delay, be made
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 11 -




                             to the Collector of the district or the
                             presidency town in which such essential
                             commodity is seized and whether or not a
                             prosecution      is    instituted    for    the
                             contravention of such order, the Collector
                             may, if he thinks it expedient so to do, direct
                             the essential commodity so seized to be
                             produced for inspection before him, and if
                             he is satisfied that there has been a
                             contravention of the order may order
                             confiscation of -
                             (a) the essential commodities so seized;
                             (b) any package, covering or receptacle in
                             which such essential commodity is found;
                             and
                             (c) any animal, vehicle, vessel or other
                             conveyance used in carrying such essential
                             commodity:
                             ........
                             ........

        17.
Section 6
of the E.C. Act in clear terms gives an

        overriding effect to the orders made under the Act over provisions of

        any other law to the extent of inconsistency. At this stage, I may just

        refer to
Section 6 A
quoted above, dealing with confiscation. It, inter

        alia, provides that where any essential commodities is seized, in

        pursuance of an order made under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act, in

        relation thereto, a report has to be sent to the Collector, who, after

        hearing the parties, order confiscation, if violation is found. Pertinent

        to note, that seizure has to be in pursuance of an order made under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act. Meaning thereby, clearly predicating that

        seizure had to be by a person authorized under the order and none
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 12 -



        else.     I am quoting this only to show the efforts made by the

        legislature to restrict the power to be exercised in respect of the
E.C.

        Act
to only specified persons. This has an object. It is to protect the

        rights of the traders, businessman and industrialists from an

        unauthorized and indiscriminate intrusion into their affairs by all and

        sundry.

        18.                  Now, I may refer to
Section 7
of the E.C. Act dealing

        with penalties, in so far as it is relevant, is quoted hereunder:

                             7. Penalities. - (1) If any person
                             contravenes any order made under
section
                             3-
                             (a)
he shall be punishable-
                             (i) in the case of an order made with
                             reference to clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-
                             section (2) of that section, with
                             imprisonment for a term which may extend
                             to one year and shall also be liable to fine,
                             and
                             (ii) in the case of other order, with
                             imprisonment for a term which shall not be
                             less than three months but which may extend
                             to seven years and shall also be liable to
                             fine:
                             (b) any property in respect of which the
                             order has been contravened shall be
                             forfeited to the Government,
                             (c) any package, covering or receptacle in
                             which the property is found and any animal,
                             vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in
                             carrying the property shall, if the Court so
                             orders, be forfeited to the Government.


        19.              From the aforesaid provisions, it would be seen that there
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 13 -



        are different punishments for different types of contravention. For

        example, if the contravention relates to an order made with reference

        to
Section 3 (2) (h)
, which is for collection of information or statistics

        or
Section 3 (2) (i)
for maintenance of books of accounts and

        production for inspection thereof, the punishment would not exceed

        one year. It would normally, thus, be non-cognizable in terms of the
Cr.P.C
. but in other cases the punishment may extend to seven years

        which makes those offences cognizable. The consequences and the

        provisions of
Cr.P.C
. are different in both the cases. If the offences

        are non-cognizable then there would be no F.I.R. and only a

        complaint by an aggrieved person would lie to the Court. The Court‟s

        power to take cognizance is also restricted inasmuch as the Court

        cannot exercise powers under Section 190 (1) (c) of the Cr. P. C. and

        the only power it would have which is referable to Section 190 (1) (a)

        of the Cr. P. C. I may add, as has been held by the Full Bench in the

        case of Kuli Singh and others Vs. The State of Bihar and others

        since reported in AIR 1978 Patna 298 and in particular in paragraph

        11 thereof, that powers of Magistrate under Section 190 (1) (c) is not

        available in cases of
E.C. Act
, being special statute, which decision is

        not questioned. Now, I may refer to
Section 10 A
of the E.C. Act,

        which is quoted hereunder:

                             10A. Offences to be cognizable and non-
                             bailable. - Notwithstanding anything
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 14 -




                             contained in the
Code of Criminal
                             Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence
                             punishable under this Act shall be
                             cognizable and non-bailable.

        20.                The reason for this is clear. If we refer back to
Section

        7
of the E.C. Act, as quoted above, some of the offences would

        normally not be cognizable and nor non-bailable, punishment being

        less than three years, therefore, the legislature specifically provided

        that contrary to the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
. all offences punishable

        under the Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable, a clear departure

        from the
Cr.P.C
.

        21.                Then, I may refer to
Section 11
of the E.C. Act, which

        empowers Court to take cognizance and restricts it to be based upon

        only a report in writing of a fact constituting offence made by a

        person, who is a public servant. This has to be read with
Section 10 A
of the E.C. Act from which it would be clear that the power of the

        Court, even though it is cognizable offence, to take cognizance is

        restricted and power under Section 190 (1) (c) of the Cr. P. C. cannot

        be exercised as has been held in the case of Full Bench of this Court

        in Kuli Singh' s case (supra).

        22.                Now, I may refer to two other provisions, which may be

        necessary for the purposes of interpretation and applicability of the

        provisions of the
E.C. Act
, they are
Section 10 C
and
Section 14
,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 15 -



        which are quoted hereunder:

                             10C. Presumption of culpable mental state.-
                             (1) In any prosecution for any offence under
                             this Act which requires a culpable mental
                             state on the part of the accused, the court
                             shall presume the existence of such mental
                             state but it shall be defence for the accused to
                             prove the fact that he had no such mental
                             state with respect to the act charged as an
                             offence in the prosecution.
                             (2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is
                             said to be proved only when court believes it
                             to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not
                             merely when its existence is established by
                             preponderance of probability.

                             14. Burden of proof in certain cases. - Where
                             a person is prosecuted for contravening any
                             order made under
section 3
which prohibits
                             him from doing any act, or being in
                             possession of a thing without lawful authority
                             or without a permit, licence or other
                             document, the burden of proving that he has
                             such authority, permit, licence or other
                             document shall be on him.

        23.                These two sections would show that departing from the

        general jurisprudence in relation to criminal law, the presumption of

        guilt and the burden of proof is shifted to an accused which makes the

        provisions quite harsh and stringent as against the accused.

        24.               A close reading of the aforesaid provisions would, in my

        view, show that the intention of the legislature was to restrict the

        rights of any persons including the police to enter, search, examine

        and seize books of accounts, stocks etc. for ensuring compliance to
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 16 -



        orders issued under the
E.C. Act
. This is the only safeguard as against

        arbitrary intrusion into affairs of a person, especially when we see this

        in conjunction with
Section 10 C
of the E.C. Act (presumption of

        guilt) and
Section 14
of the E.C. Act (shift of onus of proof). The

        legislature never intended to confer power on general police in

        exercise of the authority conferred upon them under the
Cr.P.C
. or to

        any person to institute prosecution and investigate the same, except

        upon a report of a person authorized to enter, search, examine or

        seize.
Section 3 (2) (j)
of the E.C. Act clearly stipulates the person on

        whom such a power could be conferred and, now, if we look to the

        provisions of the orders, which are alleged to have been violated, it

        would clearly appear that the police in general are not conferred with

        such powers, which they would ordinarily have if the offences are

        merely cognizable.

        25.                 The provision of FCO, relevant are as under:

                             19. Appointment of Inspectors.- The State
                             Government may by notification in the
                             Official Gazette, appoint such number of
                             persons as it thinks necessary to be
                             Inspectors of fertilizers for the purpose of
                             this Order and may in any such notification
                             define the local area within which such
                             Inspector shall exercise his jurisdiction.

        26.               Then Clause 20 of the Fertilizer Control Order thereafter

        provides for power of inspector as an Enforcement Officer which
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 17 -



        includes power to enter and inspect premises, seize any stocks or

        books of accounts etc. Clause 20 (1) A makes applicable only Section

        102 and
Section 103
of the Cr.P.C. in relation to powers exercised

        under Clause 20 (1) (d) of the
E.C. Act
by the Inspector.

        27.                  Thus seen, the Fertilizer Control Order no where

        authorizes any Police Officer to take any action whatsoever, much

        less the Supply Inspector, who is not a notified Inspector. It may also

        be noticed that Inspector of Fertilizer are special class of person

        separately notified and, undisputedly, Supply Inspector are not so

        notified. These provisions are relevant for the first case of Rajan

        Kumar alias Rajan Lohani, where the allegations would be for

        violation of Fertilizer Control Order, 1957, the provision in relation to

        "fertilizer" in the Bihar Essential Articles (Display of Prices and

        Stock) Order, 1977 already having been declared ultra vires by this

        Court, as noted earlier.

        28.                 Now, we may refer to Clause 30 of the Bihar Trade

        Articles (Licences Unification) order, 1984 (hereinafter in short as

        Unification Order), which is relevant for the second case, Sheo Pujan

        Singh. Clause 30 empowers entry, search and seizure etc. and Clause

        30 (1) designates officers authorized for the said purpose, to which I

        will refer in great detail.

                           30. Powers of entry, search and seizure etc.
                           - (1) The Licensing Authority Food
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 18 -




                           Commissioner and Secretary, Food, Supply
                           and Commerce Department, Collector,
                           Additional Collector, Additional District
                           Magistrate (Supply), District Development
                           Officer, Deputy Director, Food and Civil
                           Supplies, District Supply Officer, Assistant
                           District Supply Officer, Deputy Inspector
                           General of Police, Food-cum-Additional
                           Secretary, Food, Supply and Commerce
                           Department, Superintendent of Police
                           (Food), Secretary to Food Commissioner,
                           Food, Supply and Commerce Department,
                           Magistrate Incharge, Flying Squad, Food,
                           Supply and Commerce Department and
                           Executive Magistrate, Block Development
                           Officer, P.V.P., Circle Officer, Project
                           Executive Officer, Assistant Project
                           Executive Officer, Special Officer Incharge,
                           Rationing, Patna, Jamshedpur, Dhanbad
                           and Ranchi, Deputy Rationing Officer,
                           Marketing Officer, Assistant Marketing
                           Officer, Supply Inspector and any police
                           officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector
                           or any other person empowered by the
                           Government....
                               (a) require, the owner, occupier, or any
                               other person Incharge of any place,
                               premises, vehicle or vessel in which he
                               has reason to believe that any
                               contravention of the provisions of this
                               Order has been or is being or is about to
                               be made to produce any books of
                               accounts or documents showing
                               transaction      relating    to     such
                               contravention;
                               (b) enter, inspect or break open and
                               search any place or premises, vehicle or
                               vessel in which he has reason to believe
                               that any contravention of the provisions
                               of this Order has been, is being or is
                               about to be made;
                               (c) seize any books of accounts and
                               documents placed before him, which in
                               his opinion may be useful or relevant to
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 19 -




                                in connection with the contravention
                                made and shall be entitled to make
                                copies thereof or to take extracts
                                therefrom;
                                (d) search, seize and remove stocks of
                                trade articles along with the packages,
                                coverings or receptacles in which such
                                stock is found, if he has reasons to
                                believe that any provision of this Order
                                has been or is being or is about to be
                                contravened in respect of such stock or
                                any part thereof and may also search,
                                seize and remove the animals, vessels or
                                other conveyance used in carrying the
                                said trade articles, in contravention of
                                the provisions of this Order and
                                thereafter take or authorize the taking of
                                all measures necessary for securing the
                                production of stocks of trade article and
                                the animals, vehicles, vessels or other
                                conveyances so seized before the Court
                                and for their safe custody pending such
                                production;
                                (e) for the purpose of such inspection
                                etc. ask any person all necessary
                                questions.

        29.                It may be mentioned here that Clause 30 (2), inter alia,

        provides that provisions of
Section 100
of Cr.P.C. so far as may apply

        to search and seizure under this clause. A reference to Clause 30

        would show that the legislature have enumerated various officers

        including the Superintendent of Police (Food) as also any Police

        Officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector but not the A.S.P.

        (C.I.D.) Food.

        30.                   Thus, if we see the provisions of Clause 19 of the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 20 -



        Fertilizer Control Order and Clause 30 of the Unification Order, it

        would be seen that they have specified the persons, who have the

        authority to enter, search and seize.              References to certain police

        officials are also there but notwithstanding the offences under
E.C.

        Act
, being cognizable, not all Police Officers or officials have been

        authorized to take any action. In respect of fertilizer no Police Officer

        is authorized.        In relation to Unification Order, there are specific

        mention of various officers including the Superintendent of Police

        (Food) and officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector. It is well

        settled principle that express mention of something implies exclusion

        of other others - expression unius est exclusion alterius.                 The

        intention, thus, is to restrict the persons to conduct search, seize and

        enquire into the offences by restricting the general power under the
Cr.P.C
.

        31.                 In my view, this being the statutory scheme, the very

        entry by a person, who is not authorized by a statute, would be a rank

        illegality and contrary to and in conflict with the provisions of the

        statutory order. The search and seizure by them, not being authorized,

        would also be without jurisdiction.                As noticed above, these are

        valuable and virtually the only safeguard that is available to a person,

        especially when we read the provisions of
Section 10 C
(presumption

        of guilt) and
Section 14
(burden of proof) of the
E.C. Act
. In my
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 21 -



        view, the intention of the legislature has been that it is only upon a

        legally authorized inspection that further proceedings can take place,

        otherwise the whole scheme would collapse. The whole intention of

        the legislature to protect the privacy of a businessman would be lost.

        All and sundry could enter the premises start exercising power of

        search and seizure and then go and lodge an F.I.R., pursuant to such

        illegal entry, search and seizure and once F.I.R. is lodged the police

        would then have power to investigate the same unrestricted. If this be

        correct, then the very specification of persons and confirmation of

        authority on them alone would become meaningless because, in any

        case, ultimately, a person could be prosecuted without restriction.

        This, in my view, leads to only one conclusion that for a valid

        prosecution, a valid authorized entry is prerequisite. If there is

        violation of this statutory safeguards, the trial would necessarily

        vitiate. If the trial would stand vitiated, then what is the purpose for

        permitting the trial at all? There being a fundamental defect in the

        prosecution. It must be nipped at the bud as has been held by the

        Apex Court in the case of Smt. Nagawwa Vs. Veeranna

        Shivalingappa Konjalgi and others since reported in AIR 1976

        Supreme Court 1947.

        32.                 At this juncture, I may refer to a judgment in the case

        of K.L. Subhayya Vs. State of Karnataka since reported in AIR
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 22 -



        1979 Supreme Court 711 wherein the question arose in relation to

        Mysore Excise Act and, Section 53 and 54 of the Mysore Excise Act

        thereof, with regard to recording of reasons before proceeding to

        search vehicle. This is what their Lordships held in paragraphs 3 and

        4 of the reports, which is reproduced herein below:

                             "3. In the instant case, it is admitted that the
                             inspector who searched the car of the
                             appellant had not made any record of any
                             ground on the basis of which he had a
                             reasonable belief that an offence under the
                             Act, was being committed before proceeding
                             to search the car and thus the provisions of S.
                             54 were not at all complied with.

                             4. This, therefore, renders the entire search
                             without jurisdiction and as a logical corollary
                             vitiates the conviction. We feel that both Ss.
                             53 and 54 contain valuable safeguards for the
                             liberty of the citizen in order to protect them
                             from ill-founded or frivolous prosecution or
                             harassment. .......... We are satisfied that
                             there has been a direct non-compliance of the
                             provisions of S. 54 which renders the search
                             completely without jurisdiction. In this view of
                             the matter, the appeal is allowed, the
                             conviction and sentence passed on the
                             appellant is set aside and he is acquitted of
                             the charges framed against him."


        33.               At the cost of repetition, I may point out that in both the

        cases in hand, admittedly, the officer, who entered the premises and

        conducted the search and seizure, which search and seizure was the

        foundation of the F.I.R., were not authorized to enter, search or seize
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 23 -



        under the respective statutory orders. This position has not been

        disputed by the State.

        34.                 Now, I may refer to the case of State of Punjab Vs.

        Balbir Singh since reported in (1994) 3 Supreme Court Cases 299.

        The said case dealt with, inter alia, the implications of non-

        compliance of
Sections 41
and
42
of the Narcotic Drugs and

        Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as        the
NDPS Act
), where their Lordships held that if there is any irregularity

        in carrying out search in accordance with
Sections 100
and
165
of the

        Cr.P.C., which is applicable to cases in
NDPS Act
by virtue of

        Section 51 thereof, those are mere irregularities, but when we come to
Sections 41
and
42
of the NDPS Act, the position is different.
Section

        41
of the NDPS Act, as it then stood, provided certain classes of

        Magistrates, who were competent to issue warrants of arrest of any

        person whom they have reason to believe committed any offence

        under the
NDPS Act
or for search of any building, conveyance or

        place for such an act.
Section 42
of the NDPS Act empowers only

        certain officers to enter, search, seize and arrest without warrants or

        authorization. The Court was, inter alia, called upon to decide what

        would be the effect if
Sections 41
and
42
of the Act were not

        complied with. In other words, the person who entered, searched and

        seized was not so authorized nor was he in possession of warrant
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 24 -



        issued by any empowered Magistrate. The conclusions of the Court

        on various issues including the aforesaid is recorded in paragraph 25

        of the reports and the relevant are quoted hereunder:

                             25. The questions considered above arise
                             frequently before the trial courts. Therefore
                             we find it necessary to set out our
                             conclusions which are as follows:
                             (1) If a police officer without any prior
                             information as contemplated under the
                             provisions of the
NDPS Act
makes a search
                             or arrests a person in the normal course of
                             investigation into an offence or suspected
                             offences as provided under the provisions of
CrPC
and when such search is completed at
                             that stage
Section 50
of the NDPS Act would
                             not be attracted and the question of
                             complying with the requirements thereunder
                             would not arise. If during such search or
                             arrest there is a chance recovery of any
                             narcotic drug or psychotropic substance
                             then the police officer, who is not
                             empowered, should inform the empowered
                             officer who should thereafter proceed in
                             accordance with the provisions of the
NDPS Act
. If he happens to be an
                             empowered officer also, then from that
                             stage onwards, he should carry out the
                             investigation in accordance with the other
                             provisions of the
NDPS Act
.

                             (2-A) Under Section 41(1) only an
                             empowered Magistrate can issue warrant
                             for the arrest or for the search in respect of
                             offences punishable under
Chapter IV of the
                             Act
etc. when he has reason to believe that
                             such offences have been committed or such
                             substances are kept or concealed in any
                             building, conveyance or place. When such
                             warrant for arrest or for search is issued by
                             a Magistrate who is not empowered, then
                             such search or arrest if carried out would
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 25 -




                             be illegal. Likewise only empowered
                             officers or duly authorized officers as
                             enumerated in Sections 41(2) and 42(1)
                             can act under the provisions of the
NDPS
                             Act
. If such arrest or search is made under
                             the provisions of the
NDPS Act
by anyone
                             other than such officers, the same would be
                             illegal.

                             (2-B) Under Section 41(2) only the
                             empowered      officer    can     give    the
                             authorization to his subordinate officer to
                             carry out the arrest of a person or search
                             as mentioned therein. If there is a
                             contravention, that would affect the
                             prosecution case and vitiate the conviction.
                                                           (emphasis supplied)



        35.               From the aforesaid, it would be seen that the Court made

        a distinction where a person in normal course was investigating an

        offence under
Cr.P.C
. not related to
NDPS Act
and there is chance of

        recovery of narcotics, then the search or seizure of the narcotics would

        not be vitiated because, he initially did not lack the jurisdiction but

        when it came to
Sections 41
and
42
of the NDPS Act, the position was

        different. If the search and seizure were to be made under the Act, at

        the very inception under the
NDPS Act
, then compliance of
Sections

        41
and
42
of the NDPS Act were mandatory and non-compliance

        thereof would be illegal and vitiate the conviction ipso facto. This part

        of the decision still holds the field.

        36.               I may then refer to another judgment in the case of Roy
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 26 -



        V.D. Vs. State of Kerala since reported in (2000) 8 Supreme Court

        Cases 590. It may be noted here that in this case the Apex Court

        noted with approval of the judgment in the case of Balbir Singh

        (supra) as also the Constitution Bench judgment in the case of State

        of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh since reported in (1999) 6 Supreme

        Court Cases 172. Their Lordships held that the Constitution Bench

        judgment in the case of Baldev Singh (supra) were dealing with non-

        compliance of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, which dealt with

        information to the accused to be searched before a Gazetted Officer,

        whereas in Balbir Singh's case (supra) dealt with non-compliance of
Sections 41
and
42
of the NDPS Act. Their Lordships held that the

        High Court should have quashed the proceedings under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C.          I may quote what was said in the under-noted

        paragraphs of the judgment:

                             4. Mr. K. Sukumaran, the learned Senior
                             Counsel appearing for the appellant
                             contended that on the basis of recovery of
                             illicit material on search and seizure made by
                             an Excise Inspector, not authorized under
                             Section 41(2) or 42(1) of the
NDPS Act
, no
                             charge could have been laid against the
                             appellant so the High Court ought to have
                             quashed the impugned proceedings.

                             5. Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, the learned Additional
                             Solicitor General appearing for the
                             respondent State, argued that the appellant
                             could as well raise this plea at his trial before
                             the Sessions Court and when the High Court
                             declined to quash the proceedings it would
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 27 -




                             not be appropriate for this Court to quash the
                             proceedings.

                             6. On these contentions, the question that
                             arises for consideration is whether the
                             impugned proceedings in Sessions Case No.
                             78 of 1993 are liable to be quashed under
Section 482
of the Criminal Procedure Code.

                             7. The life and liberty of an individual is so
                             sacrosanct that it cannot be allowed to be
                             interfered with except under the authority of
                             law. It is a principle which has been
                             recognized and applied in all civilized
                             countries. In our Constitution
Article 21
guarantees protection of life and personal
                             liberty not only to citizens of India but also to
                             aliens.

                             8. The ground on which the proceedings are
                             sought to be quashed is that search, seizure
                             and the alleged recovery of "ganja" are all in
                             violation of Section 42(1) being by an Excise
                             Inspector who was not empowered under
                             Section 41(2) of the said Act.
                             16. Now, it is plain that no officer other than
                             an empowered officer can resort to Section
                             41(2) or exercise powers under
Section 42(1)
of the NDPS Act or make a complaint under
                             clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
Section 36-A
of the NDPS Act. It follows that any collection
                             of materials, detention or arrest of a person
                             or search of a building or conveyance or
                             seizure effected by an officer not being an
                             empowered officer or an authorized officer
                             under
Section 41(2)
of the NDPS Act, lacks
                             sanction of law and is inherently illegal and
                             as such the same cannot form the basis of a
                             proceeding in respect of offences under
Chapter IV of the NDPS Act
and use of such a
                             material by the prosecution vitiates the trial.

                             17. To the same effect is the view expressed
                             by this Court in State of Punjab v. Balbir
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 28 -




                             Singh. In paras 13 Jayachandra Reddy, J.
                             speaking for the Court observed thus: (SCC p.
                             313)
                             "13. Therefore, if an arrest or search
                             contemplated under Section 41 and 42 is
                             made under a warrant issued by any other
                             Magistrate or is made by any officer not
                             empowered or authorized, it would per se be
                             illegal and would affect the prosecution case
                             and consequently vitiate the trial."

                             18. It is well settled that the power under
Section 482
CrPC has to be exercised by the
                             High Court, inter alia, to prevent the abuse of
                             the process of any court or otherwise to
                             secure the ends of justice. Where criminal
                             proceedings are initiated based on illicit
                             material collected on search and arrest which
                             are per se illegal and vitiate not only a
                             conviction and sentence based on such
                             material but also the trial itself, the
                             proceedings cannot be allowed to go on as it
                             cannot but amount to abuse of the process of
                             the court; in such a case not quashing the
                             proceedings would perpetuate abuse of the
                             process of the court resulting in great
                             hardship and injustice to the accused. In our
                             opinion, exercise of power under
Section 482
CrPC to quash proceedings in a case like the
                             one on hand, would indeed secure the ends of
                             justice.

                             20. It may be noticed that that conclusion was
                             reached by the Constitution Bench in the
                             context of non-compliance with
Section 50
of
                             the NDPS Act. While emphasising that it is
                             imperative on the officer who is making
                             search of a person to inform him of his right
                             under sub-section (1) of
Section 50
of the
                             NDPS Act, it was held that the recovery of the
                             illicit article in violation of
Section 50
of the
                             NDPS Act would render the recovery of the
                             illicit article suspect and use of such material
                             would vitiate the conviction and sentence of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 29 -




                             an accused. It is manifest that the recovery of
                             an illicit article in that case was by a
                             competent officer but was in violation of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act. In the instant
                             case, however, the search and recovery were
                             by an officer who was not empowered so to
                             do. Further in Balbir Singh case this Court
                             took the view that arrest and search in
                             violation of
Sections 41
and
42
of the NDPS
                             Act being per se illegal would vitiate the trial.
                             Therefore, the said conclusion cannot be
                             called in aid to support the order under
                             challenge. If the proceedings in the instant
                             case are not quashed, the illegality will be
                             perpetuated resulting in grave hardship to the
                             appellant by making him to undergo the
                             ordeal of trial which is vitiated by the
                             illegality and which cannot result in
                             conviction and sentence. It is, in our view, a
                             fit case to exercise power under
Section 482
CrPC to quash the impugned proceedings.


        37.                   Thus, in my view, the aforesaid judgments clearly

        indicate that if a person who is not authorized to enter, search, inspect

        or seize by the statute, which creates the obligation and the offences,

        then the very inception of the prosecution is based upon a

        fundamental illegality, which is not curable irregularity and the High

        Court would, thus, have the power to interfere at the very inception

        itself.

        38.                   In view of the aforesaid, it cannot be said that the

        decision of this Court in Ramchandra Pansari (supra) or Sanjay

        Kumar Jaiswal (supra) requires reconsideration. To the contrary,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 30 -



        the judgment in the case of Madhusudan Prasad (supra) would not

        be laying down the correct law.

        39.                In fairness to the State, I may first notice the case of the

        Apex Court in the case of H.N. Rishubud and another Vs. State of

        Delhi since reported in AIR 1955 Supreme Court 196. That was a

        case under
Prevention of Corruption Act
where the investigation was

        conducted by an unauthorized Police Officer. The case dealt with

        investigation and not the initial entry, search and seizure, which was

        the foundation in the case at hand.                The Apex Court held that

        irregularity in course of investigation would not vitiate the trial.

        Similarly reliance has been placed on behalf of the State on the case

        of State of M.P. Vs. Ramesh C. Sharma since reported in (2005) 12

        Supreme Court Cases 628 which case is clearly distinguishable,

        inasmuch as the aforesaid case again dealt with irregularity in course

        of investigation.          The Apex Court, inter alia, relying on H.N.

        Rishubud (supra) and other decisions held that an irregularity in

        course of investigation would not vitiate the trial.

        40.                   In fairness to learned counsel for the State, another

        argument must be noted. He submits that by virtue of
Section 10 A
of

        the E.C. Act, offences punishable under the
E.C. Act
are cognizable

        and, as such, any Police Officer can investigate the offence and F.I.R.

        can be registered upon entry, search and seizure by any person. To
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 31 -



        me, there is a distinction when the Act itself provide that only such

        officers who are authorized can enter, search and seize, which is the

        foundation for the prosecution, then the general power in terms of
Section 4 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. would stand excluded. Moreover, what is

        contended herein and what has been noticed by the Supreme Court in

        the case of Balbir Singh (Supra) and Roy V.D. (supra) is with

        regard to illegality, at the very inception, for holding the prosecution

        to be invalid. I may refer in this connection that these decision are,

        not notwithstanding, similar provision of
Section 37 (1) (a)
of the

        NDPS Act which also provides that every offence punishable under

        this Act shall be cognizable. In spite of this, it was held that the initial

        entry, search and seizure had to be authorized under the
NDPS Act
otherwise the prosecution has to fail.

        41.                Thus, in my view, the decisions of this Court in the case

        of Ramchandra Pansari (supra) or Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal (supra)

        requires no consideration as they lay down the correct law, the

        decisions to the contrary are not laying down the correct law.

        Reference is answered accordingly. Prosecutions in both the cases

        under reference to Full Bench have to be quashed accordingly.



                                                           (Navaniti Prasad Singh, J.)
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016




                                         - 32 -



                 Per Hon'ble Mr. Justice Chakradhari Sharan Singh :-
42.                   I    have had the privilege of going through the

        judgment written by my esteemed brother, Navaniti Prasad

        Singh, J.        Despite the profound regard, which I have for His

        Lordship's erudition and scholarship, I have not been able to

        persuade myself to agree with the views recorded in the

        judgment and, therefore, I am recording my own views, on the

        question involved, in order to answer the reference.
43. The moot question, which has arisen in the present

        reference made to the Full Bench is as to whether a criminal

        prosecution launched on the basis of illegal entry, search and

        seizure should essentially be quashed at the very threshold in

        exercise of power under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of

        India or under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

        1973 (hereinafter referred to as "
Cr.P.C
."). Noticing the conflict

        of judgments by a Division Bench of this Court, in the case of
Madhusudan                Prasad     v.    State   of   Bihar
,   rendered   on

        25.11.1981, in Cr.W.J.C. No. 212 of 1981, and in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari v. The State of Bihar
, reported in

        1988 PLJR 623, and the decision rendered by a learned single

        Judge of this Court, in the case of
Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal v.

        State of Bihar
, reported in 1990 PLJR 416, a learned single

        Judge of this Court has referred the matter to a Larger Bench by

        an order, dated 08.03.1991, passed in Criminal Misc. No. 6735
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 33 -
of 1986, for an authoritative pronouncement on the question

        involved and for setting the controversy at rest.
44.               Before I proceed to take note of the issues involved

        in the present reference, I must point out a significant

        development in this regard.
In a recent decision, a Division

        Bench of this Court, in the case of
Jagdish Sah and Others v.

        The State of Bihar and Another
, reported in 2014 (1) PLJR

        243, has held the judgment rendered in the case of
Ram

        Chandra Pansari
(supra), per incurium, having not taken notice

        of the amendment made in the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to as the "
E.C. Act
"), whereby the offence,

        under of the
E.C. Act
, came to be declared cognizable.
The

        Division Bench, in the case of
Jagdish Sah
(supra), was

        answering a reference made by a learned single Judge to the

        following effect:-
"i.         Whether           after      the
                                      amendment              of        the
Essential
                                      Commodities            Act,      1955
,         making
offence cognizable though the Police
                                      has not been notified as an Inspector
                                      under the different Control Orders,
                                      has jurisdiction to make the search
                                      and seizure of the premises or the
                                      moving         vehicles     or    carts    carrying
                                      essential commodity in violation of the
                                      Act will make the search and seizure
                                      illegal in consequence, will lead the
                                      whole prosecution illegal or irregular
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 34 -
and     the       prosecution        would        vitiate
                                      depending on prejudice caused to the
                                      accused concerned?
ii.      Whether       the        seizure     of
                                      loaded vehicle intercepted by Police at
                                      a deserted place in dark night, will
                                      make such search illegal, would vitiate
                                      the whole prosecution?"
45. The Division Bench answered the reference in paragraph 18

        of the decision, in case of
Jagdish Sah
(supra), by concluding

        as under:-
"18. Having noticed the facts,
                                      heard the arguments and dealt with
                                      the case law relied upon by the
                                      counsel for the parties, it is evident
                                      that        the    petitioners        in    the      four
                                      petitions have challenged the order
                                      taking         cognizance       or     refusing        to
                                      discharge them of the offence under
Section 7
of the Act on the ground
                                      that     launching        of    the        prosecution
                                      against the petitioners was preceded
                                      by illegal search, seizure.
In support
                                      of such contention heavy reliance has
                                      been placed by the counsel for the
                                      petitioners          on   the    Division         Bench
                                      judgment of this Court in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), perusal
                                      whereof indicates that Division Bench
                                      in the case of Ram Chandra Pansari
                                      has placed heavy reliance on the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 35 -
judgment of the Supreme Court in the
                                      case of K.L. Subhayya (supra) and
                                      held that in case of illegal search and
                                      seizure prosecution under
Section 7
of
                                      the Act is fit to be quashed. While
                                      quashing           the    prosecution    of    Ram
                                      Chandra Pansari Division Bench of this
                                      Court did not notice the Amendment
                                      made in the Act by Act 36 of 1987
                                      making the offence under the Act
                                      cognizable. The Division Bench also
                                      could not notice sub-section (2) of
Section        4
of    the   Cr.P.C.      which
                                      empowered the police to investigate,
                                      enquire into, try or otherwise deal
                                      with        cognizable      offence     committed
                                      under any law including the Act with
                                      reference to the provisions contained
                                      in
Sections 41
to
60
,
70
to
81
,
93
to
105
and
165
Cr.P.C. The Division
                                      Bench in the case of Ram Chandra
                                      Pansari also did not notice the earlier
                                      Supreme Court judgment in the case
                                      of Wassan Singh (supra) holding that
                                      irregularity in search cannot vitiate
                                      the seizure of the articles. Division
                                      Bench also did not notice the case of
                                      Radha Kishan (supra) holding that
                                      irregularity in search would cast a
                                      duty upon the court to scrutinize the
                                      evidence           regarding      search       very
                                      carefully. Division Bench also did not
                                      consider the law laid down by the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 36 -
Supreme Court in the case of Shyam
                                      Lal Sharma (supra) that even if the
                                      search is illegal subsequent steps in
                                      the investigation shall not be vitiated
                                      on account of illegality in search and
                                      seizure.
It also did not consider the
                                      dictim of the Supreme Court laid down
                                      in the case of
State of Kerala Vs.
                                      Alasserry           Mohammed
etc.    (supra)
                                      where the Supreme Court observed
                                      that        failure    on    the       part    of    the
                                      Inspector to comply strictly with the
                                      statutory provisions would not vitiate
                                      the     trial       and     conviction         of    the
                                      respondents.
Finally        the     Division
                                      Bench in the case of
Ram Chandra
                                      Pansari
(supra) also did not consider
                                      the case of
State of Maharashtra Vs.
                                      Natwarlal Damodardas Soni
(supra)
                                      referred to in the reference order in
                                      which Supreme Court observed that
                                      police has powers under the
Code of
                                      Criminal          Procedure
to    search       and
                                      seize       the     commodity          if    they    had
                                      reason to believe that a cognizable
                                      offence         has       been     committed          in
                                      respect        of     the   commodity.
It    is,
                                      therefore, evident that Division Bench
                                      in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra) could not notice the amending
                                      Act 36 of 1987 whereunder offence
                                      under the Act is made cognizable as
                                      also the Supreme Court judgments
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 37 -
noted above in the case of Wassan
                                      Singh,        Radha          Kishan,       Shyamlal
                                      Sharma, State of Kerala Vs. Alasserry
                                      Mohammed              etc.
and
State     of
                                      Maharashtra                   Vs.         Natwarlal
                                      Damodardas Soni
(supra) whereunder
                                      it has been observed that illegality in
                                      search and seizure may not vitiate the
                                      prosecution,          trial      and      conviction
                                      unless prejudice is shown to have
                                      been caused to the offender.
It is,
                                      thus, not difficult to conclude that the
                                      Division Bench judgment of this Court
                                      in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra) has been rendered without
                                      the benefit of having noticed the
                                      amending         Act       36       of   1987,     the
                                      judgment of the Supreme Court in the
                                      case of Wassan Singh, Radha Kishan,
                                      Shyam Lal Sharma, State of Kerala
                                      Vs. Alasserry Mohammed etc.
and
State of Maharashtra Vs. Natwarlal
                                      Damodardas Soni
(supra) is per in
                                      curium and not a binding precedent.
In view of the provisions of
Amending
                                      Act
36 of 1987 (sic,1967) offence
                                      under the Act having been made
                                      cognizable police officers though not
                                      notified      as      Inspector          under     the
                                      different control orders issued under
                                      the     Act    have        the      jurisdiction    to
                                      investigate          the     offence     committed
                                      under the Act with respect to the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 38 -
essential       commodity.            Search       and
                                      seizure being part of investigation
                                      police officers have also jurisdiction to
                                      conduct        search,         seizure       of    the
                                      premises,            vehicle    in     which       the
                                      essential commodity is stored or is
                                      being transported."
46.              Before I proceed to consider, in this background, the

        three      Division     Bench       decisions        of   this     Court    in   case   of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra),
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra)

        and
Jagdish Sah
(supra), I must indicate here itself that

        offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, has been made

        cognizable by Essential Commodities (Second Amendment) Act,

        1967 (Indian Parliament Act No. 36 of 1967), and not Act No

        1987, as mentioned in case of
Jagdish Sah
(supra), which is

        apparently result of a typographical/printing error.
47.              I need to notice, now, the conflicting views in case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra) and in case of
Ram Chandra

        Pansari
(supra).
In the case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra)

        exactly the same question had arisen as to whether the

        prosecution under
Section 7
of the EC Act deserved to be

        quashed since it was based on search/inspection conducted by a

        person, who was not an Inspector of fertilizers.
Answering the

        said question, the Division Bench of this Court, in case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), held in paragraph 8 as follows:-
"8. Mr. Rameshwar Prasad,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 39 -
however, relied upon certain decisions
                                      to show that where the search is
                                      illegal no prosecution can be launched
                                      and the prosecution was bound to fail.
He first relied upon the case of K.L.
                                      Subhayya         Vrs.    State        of    Karnatka
                                      (A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 711) where the
                                      search       was     made       in    violation      of
                                      provision of section 54 of Mysore
                                      Excise Act.          It was held that if the
                                      search       was      illegal    as        a     logical
                                      corollary,       conviction          was       vitiated.
That case, however, is distinguishable
                                      inasmuch as under section 54 of the
                                      Mysore       Excise      Act,    as        has    been
                                      pointed out by the Supreme Court, no
                                      search would have been made unless
                                      the provisions were complied with and
                                      non-compliance was held to be such
                                      as illegality as vitiated the conviction.
                                      In the instant case there is no such
                                      provision       which     specifically           proves
                                      under the Fertilizer (Control) Order,
                                      1957 that a search or inspection can
                                      not be made by any other person
                                      except an inspector of fertilizer.                 The
                                      next case relied upon by the learned
                                      counsel is the case of Suresh Prasad
                                      Vrs. State of Bihar and others (1981
                                      Bihar       Labour      and     Review         Journal,
                                      page 1) where a Bench of this Court
                                      held that if a seizure was illegal then
                                      no confiscation on the basis of illegal
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 40 -
seizure could be made under
section
                                      6A
of the Act.              That case is again
                                      distinguishable            because
section    6A
authorises the competent authority to
                                      confiscate           the    goods        seized      in
                                      accordance with law which are not in
                                      violation of
section 7
of the Act.                   In
                                      the case before us there is no such
                                      provision.           We are therefore of the
                                      view that the investigation which is
                                      being conducted on the basis of the
                                      first information report, a copy of
                                      which is annexure 2, can not be
                                      quashed or set aside."
48.
In a subsequent decision, in case of
Ram Chandra

        Pansari
(supra), the another Division Bench of this Court,

        answering the challenge to the prosecution on the same ground,

        held in paragraph 7 as follows:-
"7.    .....................             In    the      case
                                      before us, the trial has not begun.
                                      The petitioner, therefore, is certainly
                                      entitled to raise the point regarding
                                      violation of the mandatory provisions
                                      of rule 12 of the Order.                   There is
                                      another        aspect       also.         The      case
                                      reported in A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 196
                                      (supra) shows certain infirmities in
                                      course of investigation, as it was
                                      investigated by an officer below the
                                      Deputy         Superintendent             of    Police
                                      without the order of a Magistrate of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 41 -
first class.          But in the case at hand,
                                      the violation of rule 12 of the Order
                                      was not in the process of investigation
                                      rather it was the basis for registering
                                      the case under
section 7
of the Act.
The         illegal     search   and   seizure,
                                      therefore, is the foundation of the
                                      present prosecution and this, in my
                                      opinion, cannot be treated as mere
                                      irregularity and can also not be cured
                                      and rectified by directing fresh search
                                      and seizure.            The case reported in
                                      A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 196 (supra) does not
                                      help Mr. Jaiswal."
49.
In the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), the

        Division Bench held that since search and seizure made by

        Assistant Sub Inspector of Police was without jurisdiction, the

        same had to be ignored and once the search and seizure was

        ignored, the very foundation for instituting a proceeding under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, would vanish.
In effect, this Court, in

        the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), has proceeded on

        the premise that if search and seizure are illegal, the First

        Information Report on such basis and subsequent investigation

        and submission of charge sheet, all stand vitiated.
Similar view

        was taken by a learned single Judge, in the case of
Sanjay

        Kumar Jaiswal
(supra).
In the case of
Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal
(supra), search and seizure of fertilizer was made by District
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 42 -
Agriculture Officer and in the absence of any valid notification

        under the provisions of Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985, he was

        held not to be authorized to conduct search and seizure and,

        accordingly, the prosecution, in the said case, was quashed.
50.                 It is noteworthy years before this Court's decision,

        in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), came to be

        pronounced; the Division Bench of this Court had negatived the

        contention that entire investigation and criminal prosecution

        would stand vitiated because the Supply Inspector, who had

        conducted the search/seizure was not declared Inspector under

        the Control Order and, accordingly, the very foundation of

        lodging      of    the     criminal       case     was   bad,   in   the   case   of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra). The said decision had come on

        25.11.1981.
The Division Bench, in the case of
Madhusudan

        Prasad
(supra), held that even if there was an illegality in the

        inspection; investigation of the case could not be quashed.
51.                  It   is    evident on perusal of the Division Bench

        decision, rendered in the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), that it did not notice the earlier decision of a co-ordinate

        Bench, in the case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), possibly

        because
the said decision
was not reported in any law journal.
52.                 Noticing       the apparent conflict between the two

        Division Bench decisions, in the cases of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra) and
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), keeping in mind the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 43 -
importance of the issue involved, a learned single Judge, by an

        order, dated 08.03.1991, passed in Criminal Misc. No. 6735 of

        1986, referred the matter to a Larger Bench for authoritative

        pronouncement in the following terms:-
"5.    That    apart,       the     points
                                      involved in the case are important
                                      questions        of    law.        The     offences
                                      punishable           under     the
Essential
                                      Commodities Act
have been made
                                      cognizable (
Section 10A
). According
                                      to
Section 11
of the Act, the Court is
                                      precluded for taking cognizance of the
                                      offences under the Act except upon a
                                      report in writing constituting such
                                      offence made by a public servant. In a
                                      case proceeded on First Information
                                      Report, the report submitted by the
                                      Police under Section 173 (2) of the
                                      Code disclosing an offence along with
                                      accompanying documents is treated
                                      as report in writing by the public
                                      servant and cognizance is taken on
                                      the basis of the said report. In such a
                                      situation,       question      arises       as    to
                                      whether        illegality     in    search       and
                                      seizure conducted prior to the lodging
                                      of First Information Report will vitiate
                                      the     prosecution         even    though       the
                                      written report submitted by the police
                                      contains       facts   constituting         offence
                                      under the Act. The other issue to be
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 44 -
determined is as to whether this Court
                                      will quash the prosecution at the
                                      threshold on the ground of illegality in
                                      search and seizure even though the
                                      allegations constitute a prima facie
                                      case.
6. As the decisions rendered by
                                      the two Division Benches of this Court
                                      are         conflicting         and     important
                                      questions of law are involved in the
                                      case, in my view, there should be an
                                      authoritative pronouncement on the
                                      point involved in this case by a Larger
                                      Bench for clarity of precedent. Let this
                                      case be placed before the Hon'ble the
                                      Chief       Justice       for   considering    the
                                      desirability         of   placing     the   matter
                                      before a Larger Bench."
53.                   Since the same issue, in question, cropped up in

        the case of Rajan Kumar @ Rajan Lohani and Others v. The

        State of Bihar, (Criminal Misc. No. 11852 of 1984), a

        learned single Judge of this Court directed the said case to be

        listed along with Criminal Misc.
No. 6735 of 1986 (
Sitaram Sah

        v. State of Bihar
). Later, one Cr. W.J.C. 714 of 1992 was filed,

        under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, questioning the

        search and seizure conducted by the Additional Superintendent

        of Police, C.I.D. (Food), Sahabad, and a Division Bench of this

        Court, by order, dated 02.03.1993, directed the case to be listed
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 45 -
along with Criminal Misc. No. 11852 of 1984. On a request being

        made by learned Counsel for the petitioner appearing in Criminal

        Misc. No. 6735 of 1986, the said application was permitted to be

        withdrawn by order, dated 16.07.1991.
54.                This is how these two applications, one filed under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. (Cr. Misc. No. 11852 of 1984) and

        another filed under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution of

        India (Cr. W.J.C. No. 714 of 1992), have been listed and taken

        up together by the Full Bench for answering the reference.
55.                 The issue involved for answering the reference can

        be better appreciated if facts of the two cases are narrated in

        brief:
CRIMINAL           MISCELLANEOUS          NO.   11852   OF

        1984 :-
(i)      Sub-Inspector   of     Police,   Gaya,

                   conducted an inspection on the business premises of M/s

                   Kishan Ghar, a registered dealer in fertilizer, in course of

                   which he found certain discrepancies, including in the

                   matter of displaying stocks and prices of the fertilizers on

                   the display board. When the inspection was made on

                   28.07.1981, in the display board, price of fertilizer was

                   mentioned as on 26.06.1981, instead of 28.07.1981.
Allegedly, books of accounts were also not produced for

                   inspection. This was found to be in violation of Bihar
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 46 -
Essential Articles (Display of Price and Stocks) Order,

                   1977 (hereinafter referred to as the Display Order).

                   Fertilizer falls in Entry-34 in Schedule-I to the said

                   Display Order. The Display Order has been issued in

                   exercise of power under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act.
(ii)
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, makes

                   contravention of any Order made under
Section 3
of the

                   Act as punishable.
Section 7 (1) (a)
of the Act prescribes

                   two categories of punishment for contravention of any

                   Order made under
Section 3
of the Act. One is with

                   reference to clause (h) of clause (i) of Sub-Section (2) of
Section 3
of the Act. In this case, the offence is

                   punishable for a term, which may extent to one year. For

                   any other violation, as per
Section 7 (1) (a) (ii)
of the

                   Act, the punishment of imprisonment for a term which

                   may extend to seven years has been prescribed.
Section

                   10A
of the Act has made all the offences under the Act to

                   be cognizable.
(iii) Accordingly, on the basis of inspection

                   report of the Sub-Inspector of Police, communicated to

                   the Officer-in-Charge of Gaya Kotwali Police Station, an

                   F.I.R. being Gaya Kotwali Police Station Case No. 0161 of

                   1981 came to be instituted. The Police, upon completion

                   of investigation, appear to have submitted charge sheet,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 47 -
whereupon the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gaya,

                   has taken cognizance on 07.02.1984.
(iv) Mithilesh Prasad is said to be the owner

                   of the said firm. The petitioner No. 1, Ranjan Kumar, had

                   claimed that he was merely sitting at the shop of

                   Mithilesh Prasad when the inspection was held and had

                   no connection at all with               the business,   in question,

                   except occasionally doing the work of M/s Kishan Ghar

                   in     relation to         matters relating to sales tax, etc.

                   The petitioner No. 2, Kishori Prasad had claimed that he

                   was      working merely as salesman and he was in no

                   manner responsible of conduct of the business of the firm

                   of said Mithilesh Prasad. As per the records, upon

                   transfer of the case after taking cognizance by the

                   learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gaya, the matter is

                   pending for trial in the Court of learned Sub Divisional

                   Judicial Magistrate, Gaya, being G.R. No. 1668 of 1981

                   (Trial No. 669 of 1984).
(v) It is the plea of the petitioners that the

                   Sub-Inspector of Police, Gaya, who had entered into the

                   premises and conducted search and seizure, was not an

                   Inspector of Fertilizer under the Fertilizer (Control) Order,

                   1957, issued by the Central Government, under the

                   powers conferred upon it under the provisions of the E.C.
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 48 -
Act. It is their case that only an Inspector of Fertilizer,

                   appointed under Clause 19 of the Fertilizer (Control)

                   Order, had the authority to enter into a premises,

                   conduct search and seizure of stocks of fertilizer in terms

                   of Clause 20. It is, accordingly, their case that the very

                   inspection, search and seizure, made by the Sub-

                   Inspector of Police being illegal, the First Information

                   Report on such basis and subsequent investigation and

                   order taking cognizance stand vitiated.
CRIMINAL WRIT JURISDICTION CASE NO. 714
OF 1992 :-
(i) On the basis of an inspection conducted

                   by the Additional Superintendent of Police, C.I.D. (Food),

                   in the premises of Bhagwati Ji Rice Mill, Jakhini, on

                   25.09.1992,         certain     discrepancies   were   detected   in

                   relation to displaying the stocks, which was materially

                   different from the stock of rice available.
(ii) With the allegation of violation of

                   provisions of
Bihar Trade Articles (Licenses Unification)

                   Order, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as the "Unification

                   Order"), Nokha Police Station
Case No. 151 of 19912

                   was instituted for violation of the Unification Order, again

                   punishable under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act.
(iii) In this case also, it is being argued
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 49 -
that Additional Superintendent of Police, C.I.D. (Food),

                   had no authority, under Clause 30 of the Unification

                   Order and, therefore, First Information Report, registered

                   on the basis of illegal entry, search and seizure, deserves

                   to be quashed.
56.                  Both the cases in hand arise out of prosecution

        launched against the petitioners under the provisions of the
E.C.

        Act, 1955
.         In both the cases, proceedings pending before the

        Courts below had been directed to be stayed by the separate

        interim orders passed in the said two cases.
57.                As has been noticed, at the very outset, the only

        question which needs to be answered is as to whether on the

        basis that entry, search and seizure was made by a person not

        authorized will amount to vitiate the entire criminal prosecution,

        under        the
E.C.      Act
,      founded     on     report      of   such

        inspection/search/seizure, right from its inception.
CASE OF THE PETITIONERS :-
58.                 It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioners

        that there being no dispute that inspection/search/seizure was

        made by Officers not authorized under the provisions of the
E.C.

        Act, 1955
or the Orders issued thereunder, registration of the

        First    Information         Report       based    thereon   and      investigation

        conducted thereafter stand vitiated; any proceeding based on
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 50 -
illegally search/seizure/inspection, has no sanctity in the eyes of

        law/ and it would be an abuse of the process of the Court to

        allow investigation/enquiry/trial to continue.
59.                Mr. Nawal Kishore Agrawal, learned Senior Counsel,

        on our request has appeared as as amicus curiae and has

        extended valuable assistance to us. He has argued that the law
laid down by
Division Bench of this Court, in case of
Ram

        Chandra Pansari
(supra), is correct proposition of law and a

        proceeding instituted on the basis of an illegal search and/or

        seizure, made by a person not authorized to do so, shall stand

        vitiated.
He has referred to the Supreme Court decision in case

        of
K.L. Subhayya Vs. State of Karnataka
[AIR 1979 SC

        711], relying on which the Division Bench of this Court delivered

        the judgment in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra).
He has

        taken us to the Supreme Court decision in case of
State of

        Punjab Vs. Balbir Singh
, reported in (1994) 3 SCC 299 and a

        subsequent Constitution Bench decision in case of
State of

        Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh
, reported in (1999) 6 SCC 172,

        wherein the Supreme Court had the occasion to consider

        whether strict compliance of
Section 50
of the Narcotic Drugs

        and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as

        the "
NDPS Act
"), which lays down the procedure for search

        and/or seizure, is mandatory. Relying on the said decisions, it is

        his     submission         that      search        and/or   seizure,   made   in
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 51 -
contravention of mandatory statutory provisions, shall render a

        criminal trial vitiated.            He has argued that where the very

        foundation of a criminal case/registration of the First Information

        Report is based on inspection, search and/or seizure, made in

        contravention of the statutory requirements, the prosecution

        stands vitiated from its very inception.           In such situation, he

        argues the prosecution, right from the beginning, will be void ab

        initio and this Court in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. or Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, should

        quash the entire proceeding from the very beginning, since

        otherwise it will be an abuse of the process of the Court.

        According to him, the Division Bench of this Court, in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), has noticed this distinguishing

        feature between two situations, as noted above, and argued that

        the case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra) enunciates correct

        proposition of law.
He has, thus, submitted that the ratio in case

        of
Sanjay Kumar Jaiswal
(supra
)
,
laid down by
a Single Judge

        of this Court, which is based on a Division Bench decision of this

        Court, in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), also lays down

        the correct proposition.
60.                    Adverting to the Division Bench decision of this

        Court, in case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), it has been

        submitted by Mr. Agrawal, learned Senior Counsel, that
the said

        decision
does not take into account the true import of the law
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 52 -
laid down by the Supreme Court in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra) and the distinction made with reference to Section 54 of

        the Mysore Excise Act, which was the subject matter in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), is incorrect.
61.                    Learned Counsel, appearing on behalf of the

        petitioners, have adopted the arguments advanced by Mr.

        Agrawal, learned Senior Counsel.
CASE OF THE RESPONDENTS :-
62.                    Mr. Anjani Kumar, learned Additional Advocate

        General No.-II, appearing on behalf of the State of Bihar, has

        argued that the Division Bench decision of this Court, in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), is per incurium inasmuch as it

        failed to notice the earlier Division Bench decision of this Court in

        case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra).
According to him, the

        earlier Division Bench decision of this Court, in case of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), went unnoticed in which the

        Supreme Court decision, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), had

        been duly dealt with. He has next submitted that in any event,

        a criminal prosecution cannot be quashed, on the ground that

        inspection, search and/or seizure made by the officer, based on

        which the First Information Report came to be registered, was

        not authorized to make such inspection, search and/or seizure.

        It is his plea that even if it is held that the provisions, under the

        Control Order, requiring search to be made by authorized
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 53 -
officers only, to be mandatory, failure to comply with the

        provisions may render the recovery of the seized articles

        suspect, but in no event, on that ground investigation by the

        police itself can be said to be vitiated or on that basis

        subsequent proceedings or trial can be held to be illegal.

        According to him, the provision laying down the procedure,

        under the Control Orders, cannot be said to be mandatory.
63.                    Mr. Anjani Kumar, has also submitted that since

        the offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, has been made

        cognizable, the police have wide and unquestioned powers to

        investigate, once commission of cognizable offence is brought to

        the notice of an Officer In-Charge of the concerned police

        station, under the scheme of the
Cr.P.C
.. He has submitted that

        the
E.C. Act
does not bar taking of cognizance of an offence, on

        the ground of illegality or irregularity in search and/or seizure.

        According to him, under
Section 11
of the E.C. Act, the only

        limitation which has been put for taking of cognizance by the

        Court is that it should be based on a report, in writing, of the

        facts constituting such offence made by the person, who is a

        public servant, as defined in
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code

        or    "any      person       aggrieved        or   any   recognized   consumer

        association".          He, accordingly, submits that even if it is

        presumed that the inspection/search/seizure was not made by

        an authorized officer, that cannot be a ground for not taking
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 54 -
cognizance of the offence under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, on the

        basis of police report submitted after completion of investigation

        by the police. He has also submitted that unless the petitioners

        are in a position to demonstrate that inspection/search/seizure

        made       by    the     concerned         officer,   becoming    foundation    of

        registration of the First Information Report, caused any serious

        prejudice       amounting         to      miscarriage   of   justice;   the   First

        Information Report cannot be quashed in exercise of extra

        ordinary powers, vested in this Court, under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.

        and under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India. He has

        placed reliance on Supreme Court decisions in case of
H.N.

        Rishbud & Anr. Vs. State of Delhi
[AIR 1955 SC 196],

        State of Maharashtra Vs. Natwarlal Damodardas Soni [AIR

        1980 SC 593], State of Punjab Vs. Wassan Singh & Ors.,

        reported in (1981) 2 SCC 1, Sunder Singh Vs. State of Uttar

        Pradesh [AIR 1956 SC 411] and Radha Kishan Vs. State of

        Uttar Pradesh [AIR 1963 SC 822], in support of his

        submission that an irregularity of the nature cannot vitiate the

        trial unless the accused is in a position to demonstrate that such

        irregularity or serious prejudice leading to miscarriage of justice.
DISCUSSION :-
64.                    Before I begin to discuss the rival submissions,

        made on behalf of the petitioners and the State of Bihar, for

        answering the reference, I may point out at the very outset that
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 55 -
no binding precedence has been shown to us, wherein it has

        been held that a criminal prosecution will be required to be

        quashed right from its inception, if an illegal or irregular

        search/seizure is the foundation for registration of a criminal

        case disclosing commission of a cognizable offence.                    All the

        Supreme Court decisions, which have been cited on behalf of the

        petitioners, as mentioned above, arise out of appeals after

        conviction of the accused persons.                 The effect of illegal search

        and/or seizure came to be elaborately discussed by the Supreme

        Court in later years in appeals arising out of conviction or

        acquittal when the provisions laying down the procedure for

        search and/or seizure, under the various sections of the
NDPS

        Act
, fell for consideration.
In case of
State of Punjab Vs.

        Balbir Singh
(supra), the Supreme Court, while interpreting
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, held that the provision was

        mandatory and non-compliance with the said provision would

        affect the prosecution case and vitiate the trial.
Interpreting
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, the Supreme Court, in case of
State

        of Punjab Vs. Balbir Singh
(supra), held that it was obligatory

        on the part of the officer concerned to inform the person to be

        searched, of his right to demand that the search be conducted in

        the presence of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate.
The 2-Judge

        Bench decision of the Supreme Court, in case of
State of

        Punjab Vs. Balbir Singh
(supra), was subsequently affirmed
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 56 -
by a 3-Judge Bench of Supreme Court in case of
Saiyad Mohd.

        Saiyad Umar Saiyad & Ors. Vs. State of Gujarat
, reported in

        (1995) 3 SCC 610.
However, in view of conflicting decisions in

        case of
State of H.P. Vs. Pirthi Chand & Anr.
, reported in

        (1996) 2 SCC 37, the matter was referred to a larger Bench of

        Supreme Court in case of
State of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh
(supra).
Upon threadbare analysis of statutory provisions, the

        Supreme Court, in case of
State of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh
(supra), laid down the law in paragraph 57 as follows:-
"57.        On     the      basis   of    the
                                      reasoning and discussion above, the
                                      following conclusions arise:
(1) That when an empowered
                                      officer or a duly authorised officer
                                      acting on prior information is about to
                                      search a person, it is imperative for
                                      him to inform the person concerned of
                                      his     right        under      Sub-section        (1)
                                      of Section 50 of being taken to the
                                      nearest        Gazetted           Officer    or    the
                                      nearest Magistrate for making the
                                      search.       However,         such     information
                                      may not necessarily be in writing.
(2) That failure to inform the
                                      person concerned about the existence
                                      of his right to be searched before a
                                      Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate would
                                      cause prejudice to an accused.
(3) That a search made by an
                                      empowered                 officer,      on        prior
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 57 -
information,          without          informing       the
                                      person of his right that if he so
                                      requires, he shall be taken before a
                                      Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate for
                                      search and in case he so opts, failure
                                      to     conduct        his        search       before    a
                                      Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate, may
                                      not vitiate the trial but would render
                                      the     recovery           of    the    illicit    article
                                      suspect and vitiate the conviction and
                                      sentence of an accused, where the
                                      conviction has been recorded only on
                                      the basis of the possession of the illicit
                                      article, recovered from his person,
                                      during a search conducted in violation
                                      of the provisions of
Section 50
of the
                                      Act.
(4) That there is indeed need
                                      to protect society from criminals. The
                                      societal intent in safety will suffer if
                                      persons who commit crimes are let off
                                      because the evidence against them is
                                      to be treated as if it does not exist.
The answer, therefore, is that the
                                      investigating agency must follow the
                                      procedure as envisaged by the statute
                                      scrupulously and the failure to do so
                                      must        be       viewed       by      the      higher
                                      authorities seriously inviting action
                                      against the official concerned so that
                                      the     laxity        on        the    part       of   the
                                      investigating authority is curbed. In
                                      every case the end result is important
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 58 -
but the means to achieve it must
                                      remain       above         board.      The      remedy
                                      cannot be worse than the disease
                                      itself. The legitimacy of the judicial
                                      process may come under a cloud if
                                      the court is seen to condone acts of
                                      lawlessness            conducted             by     the
                                      investigating agency during search
                                      operations and may also undermine
                                      respect for the law and may have the
                                      effect               of             unconscionably
                                      compromising the administration of
                                      justice. That cannot be permitted. An
                                      accused is entitled to a fair trial. A
                                      conviction resulting from an unfair
                                      trial is contrary to our concept of
                                      justice. The use of evidence collected
                                      in breach of the safeguards 50 have
                                      by Section           50 at      the    trial,     would
                                      render the trial unfair.
(5) That whether or not the
                                      safeguards                provided         in Section
                                      50 have been duly observed would
                                      have to be determined by the Court
                                      on the basis of evidence led at the
                                      trial. Finding on that issue, one way or
                                      the     other,       would        be   relevant     for
                                      recording an order of conviction or
                                      acquittal.           Without           giving       an
                                      opportunity          to     the    prosecution       to
                                      establish,       at       the     trial,   that     the
                                      provisions            of Section           50      and,
                                      particularly, the safeguards provided
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 59 -
therein were duly complied with, it
                                      would not be permissible to cut short
                                      a criminal trial.
(6) That in the context in which
                                      the protection has been incorporated
                                      in Section 50 for the benefit of the
                                      person intended to be searched, we
                                      do not express any opinion whether
                                      the         provisions         of Section     50 are
                                      mandatory or directory, but, hold that
                                      failure to inform the person concerned
                                      of his right as emanating from sub-
section (1) of Section 50, may render
                                      the     recovery          of     the     contraband
                                      suspect        and        the     conviction      and
                                      sentence        of   an        accused      bad   and
                                      unsustainable in law.
(7) That an illicit article seized
                                      from the person of an accused during
                                      a search conducted in violation of the
                                      safeguards provided in
Section 50
of
                                      the Act cannot be used as evidence of
                                      proof of unlawful possession of the
                                      contraband on the accused though
                                      any other material recovered during
                                      that search may be relied upon by the
                                      prosecution,         in       other    proceedings,
                                      against an accused, notwithstanding
                                      the recovery of that material during
                                      an illegal search.
(8)              A            presumption
                                      under
Section 54
of the Act can only
                                      be raised after the prosecution has
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 60 -
established          that    the    accused      was
                                      found to be in possession of the
                                      contraband in a search conducted in
                                      accordance            with         the   mandate
                                      of Section 50. An illegal search cannot
                                      entitle the prosecution to raise a
                                      presumption under
Section 54
of the
                                      Act.
(9)    That      the    judgment       in
                                      Pooran Mal case cannot be understood
                                      to have laid down that an illicit article
                                      seized during a search of a person, on
                                      prior        information,          conducted       in
                                      violation of the provisions of
Section
                                      50
of the Act, can by itself be used as
                                      evidence of unlawful possession of the
                                      illicit article on the person from whom
                                      the     contraband           has     been      seized
                                      during the illegal search.
(10) That the judgment in Ali
                                      Mustaffa case correctly interprets and
                                      distinguishes the judgment in Pooran
                                      Mal case and the broad observations
                                      made in
Pirthi Chand
case and Jasbir
                                      Singh case are not in tune with the
                                      correct exposition of law as laid down
                                      in Pooran Mal case."
(Emphasis added)
65.                  It cannot be forgotten that the Supreme Court, in

        case of
State of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh
(supra), was laying

        down       the    law,    keeping         in    mind      the    stringent    provisions
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 61 -
prescribing severe punishment for mere possession of illicit

        drugs and psychotropic substances and in that circumstance, the

        effect of personal search having not been carried out strictly in

        accordance with the prescribed procedure.
66.                   I notice from the Supreme Court decision, in case

        of
State of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh
(supra), with particular

        reference        to    paragraph          57,      which    has    been   extracted

        hereinabove, that the Supreme Court held that failure to inform

        the person of his right to be searched before a gazetted officer

        or a Magistrate would cause prejudice to the accused and in case

        of failure to conduct his search before a gazetted officer or a

        Magistrate, may not vitiate the trial but would render the

        recovery of the illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction

        and sentence of an accused, where conviction has been recorded

        only on the basis of possession of the illicit article, recovered

        from his person, during a search conducted in violation of the

        provisions of
Section 50
of the Act.
67.                    Apparently, the Court               did    not hold that the

        prosecution of such person shall itself stand vitiated for non-

        compliance of provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act.
In sub-

        paragraph 5 of paragraph 57, in case of
State of Punjab Vs.

        Baldeo Singh
(supra), the Supreme Court went on to clarify

        that whether or not the safeguards provided in Section 50 have

        been duly observed would have to be determined by the Court
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 62 -
on the basis of the evidence led down at the trial and finding on

        that issue, one way or the other, would be relevant for recording

        of order of conviction or acquittal.               The Supreme Court, in

        expressed terms, held that it would not be permissible to cut-

        short the criminal trial.             The Supreme Court further refrained

        from expressing any opinion as to whether the provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act were mandatory or directory, but

        held that failure to comply with the provisions of
Section 50
of

        the NDPS Act, i.e., to inform the person concerned of his right to

        be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, may

        render recovery of the contraband suspect and the conviction

        and sentence of an accused bad and unsustainable in law.
68.                  The question of effect of the search conducted on

        an accused in violation of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, again

        came to be considered in a subsequent decision of Supreme

        Court in case of
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja Vs. State of

        Gujarat
, reported in (2011) 1 SCC 609, paragraph 29 of which

        reads thus:-
"29. In view of the foregoing
                                      discussions, we are of the firm opinion
                                      that the object with which the right
                                      under
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act,
                                      by way of a safeguard, has been
                                      conferred on the suspect viz. to check
                                      the misuse of power, to avoid harm to
                                      innocent persons and to minimise the
                                      allegations of planting or foisting of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 63 -
false cases by the law enforcement
                                      agencies, it would be imperative on
                                      the part of the empowered officer to
                                      apprise the person intended to be
                                      searched of his right to be searched
                                      before       a       gazetted     officer   or   a
                                      Magistrate. We have no hesitation in
                                      holding that insofar as the obligation
                                      of the authorised officer under sub-
                                      section (1) of
Section 50
of the NDPS
                                      Act is concerned, it is mandatory and
                                      requires strict compliance. Failure to
                                      comply       with      the      provision   would
                                      render the recovery of the illicit article
                                      suspect and vitiate the conviction if
                                      the same is recorded only on the basis
                                      of the recovery of the illicit article
                                      from the person of the accused during
                                      such search.          Thereafter, the suspect
                                      may or may not choose to exercise
                                      the right provided to him under the
                                      said provision."
69.                  It can easily be noticed from
the said decision
of

        Supreme Court, in case of
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
(supra), that failure to comply with the provisions may render

        recovery of the illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction if

        the same is recorded only on the basis of recovery of illicit article

        from the person of the accused during such search, the Supreme

        Court never held that failure to comply with the said provision
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 64 -
would unexceptionally render the conviction vitiated.         The said

        decision, in case of
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
(supra), has

        been subsequently relied on by the Supreme Court in case of
Ram Swaroop Vs. State (Government of NCT of Delhi
),

        reported in (2013) 14 SCC 235.
70.                  As has been noticed in foregoing paragraphs, it is

        the plea on behalf of the State that even if it is presumed that

        entry/inspection/search/seizure was not made by an Officer

        authorized under the
E.C. Act
, or Control Orders issued

        thereunder, once First Information Report has been registered

        and/or cognizance has been taken by a Court of competent

        jurisdiction, the criminal proceeding cannot be said to be

        vitiated. It is their case that since the offence punishable is

        cognizable in view of
Section 10A
of the E.C. Act, power to

        investigate and prosecution based thereon cannot be said to

        have been vitiated.
71.                  I will now come to the decision of Supreme Court,

        in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), which is, in fact, seat anchor

        of the petitioners' case and which is the basis for the Division

        Bench decision of this Court in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra).
The said decision, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra),

        has been considered by the Division Bench of this Court in case

        of
Madhusudan Prasad
(supra), wherein the Division Bench

        distinguished the provisions as contained in Section 54 of the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 65 -
Mysore Excise Act and the provisions under the Fertilizer

        (Control Order), 1957. This is also to be noticed that in the case

        of Radha Kishan (supra), the Supreme Court has held that a

        person has a right to resist, if the search was illegal and in that

        circumstance, the Court may be inclined to examine the seizure

        carefully.
The said decision in case of Radha Kishan (supra)

        has been noticed in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra), but

        it has been distinguished on account of the fact that in case of
Ramchandra Pansari
(supra), illegal search and/or seizure was

        the foundation of the case and, therefore, the investigation on

        that basis cannot be said to be lawful.
We also find that on the

        same ground, the Division Bench of this Court, in case of
Ram

        Chandra Pansari
(supra), distinguished the case of
H.N.

        Rishbud
(supra).
72.
In    my      opinion, the decision in case of
K.L.

        Subhayya
(supra), which arose out of a case under the
Karnataka Excise Act, 1965
(1966 Kar.
Act 21), has been

        wrongly applied in case of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra) by

        the Division Bench for quashing of the very investigation of the

        case in exercise of power under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. for

        more than one reasons.                    Firstly, the provisions under the
Karnataka        Act
of   1965,       are      materially   distinct   from   the

        provisions under the
E.C. Act
inasmuch as the offence under the
Karnataka Act
of 1965, was non-cognizable and it has been
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 66 -
made cognizable by
Amending Act
14 of 2005. I have examined

        the provisions of the Karnataka Excise Act (Mysore Act 21 of

        1966), Sections 33 to 39 of which are penal provisions.                      The

        punishments prescribed under those provisions, as they existed

        prior to the judgment, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), was

        delivered in 1979 were less than three years.
Evidently, power

        of the police to investigate a cognizable case on the basis of

        written report of an officer, submitted consequent upon illegal

        search and/or seizure, was not an issue before the Supreme

        Court in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra).                      The statement of

        objects      and     reasons       for    introducing     Amendment,    through
Amending Act
14 of 2005, by Karnataka Legislature reads thus:-
"
Amending Act
14 of 2005.-
It is felt necessary to make the excise
                                      law more stringent in order to net
                                      more revenue.        Check excise evasion
                                      of excise duties, by taking away the
                                      existing      compounding      powers    and
                                      making the law more stringent by
                                      rendering the offences under the Act
                                      cognizable and non-cognizable.
Hence the bill."
73.                  Evidently thus, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra)

        the investigation of a cognizable offence by the police was not in

        issue.     Secondly, the effect of result of an illegal investigation,

        search and/or seizure had been elaborately dealt with in case of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 67 -
Radha Kishan (supra).
With due respect, I am of the opinion

        that larger Bench decision in case of Radha Kishan (supra) had

        higher presidential value than the decision in case of
K.L.

        Subhayya
(supra).
Thirdly, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra),

        the Supreme Court did not hold that the investigation and trial

        would stand vitiated because of the illegal search.
K.L.

        Subhayya
(supra) is a short judgment in four paragraphs, the

        last paragraph of which, i.e., paragraph 4, is the consideration

        part, which reads thus:-
"4. This, therefore, renders the
                                      entire search without jurisdiction and,
                                      as a logical corrolary, vitiates the
                                      conviction. We feel that both Sections
                                      53 and 54 contain                           valuable
                                      safeguards           for   the    liberty      of    the
                                      citizen in order to protect them from
                                      ill-founded or frivolous prosecution or
                                      harassment.           The       point    was     taken
                                      before the High Court which appears
                                      to    have     brushed           aside    this      legal
                                      lacuna       without        making         any      real
                                      attempt to analyse the effect of the
                                      provisions of Sections 53 and 54. The
                                      High Court observed that these two
                                      sections were wholly irrelevant. With
                                      due respect, we are unable to approve
                                      of such a cryptic approach to a legal
                                      question       which        is    of     far-reaching
                                      consequences.              It    was,       however,
                                      suggested that the word "place" would
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 68 -
not include the car, but the definition
                                      of the word "place" under the Act
                                      clearly includes vehicle which would
                                      include a car. Thus the ground on
                                      which the argument of the petitioner
                                      has been rejected by the High Court
                                      cannot be sustained by us. We are
                                      satisfied that there has been a direct
                                      non- compliance of the provisions
                                      of Section           54 which     renders    the
                                      search completely without jurisdiction.
                                      In this view of the matter, the appeal
                                      is      allowed,       the      conviction   and
                                      sentence passed on the appellant is
                                      set aside and he is acquitted of the
                                      charges framed against him."
74.                   Evidently, in the case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra),

        the 3-Judge Bench decision of Supreme Court, in case of Radha

        Kishan (supra), was not considered.
Further in view of the

        subsequent decisions of Supreme Court, some of which have

        been noticed above, on the point, the decision in case of
K.L.

        Subhayya
(supra) cannot have any binding precedence.
In my

        opinion, the decision rendered by the larger Bench of Supreme

        Court, in case of Radha Kishan (supra), deals elaborately with

        the provisions of
Section 165
of the Cr.P.C.                      The said decision

        having not been noticed in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), the

        same cannot be said to be a binding precedent on the point of

        consequence of case having been registered on the basis of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 69 -
illegal inspection, search or seizure, disclosing a cognizable

        offence.      In my opinion, defect in search and/or seizure of the

        nature alleged, made before registration of an F.I.R., cannot

        vitiate registration of the First Information Report itself in

        relation to an offence, which is cognizable.
75.                Before I proceed further, I must notice the 3-Judge

        Special Bench decision, in case of
Kuli Singh Vs. State
[AIR

        1978 PATNA 298], wherein expressing majority view, Hon'ble

        Justice Uday Sinha, J. (as he then was), dealing with the

        obligations of a Magistrate under
Section 190
of the Cr.P.C., held

        in paragraph 11, as follows :-
"11. x x x x x x x That he would
                                      be    doing      not   in   exercise   of   any
                                      inherent jurisdiction but in exercise of
                                      his obligation cast upon him in terms
                                      of Section           173 (4)     and Section
                                      190 (1) (b) of the Code. This must be
                                      so except in cases where a statute
                                      provides that a Court shall not take
                                      cognizance of an offence except on a
                                      report in writing of facts constituting
                                      an offence as provided under the
Essential       Commodities      Act
or     the
                                      Defence of India Rules and similar
                                      statutes. x x x x x x x."
(Emphasis added)
76.                   The said observation, by no means, construed to

        mean that power of a Magistrate to take cognizance of an
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 70 -
offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, is not available under
Section 190
of the Cr.P.C..
Section 190
of the Cr.P.C. falls under

        Chapter-XIV of the
Cr.P.C
., which lays down "conditions requisite

        for initiation of proceedings".               Undisputedly, cognizance of an

        offence by a Magistrate is one of the conditions, requisite for

        initiation of a proceeding under the
Cr.P.C
..
77.
Section 4 (1)
of the Cr.P.C. prescribes that all the

        offences under the
Indian Penal Code
shall be investigated,

        inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the

        provisions of the
Cr.P.C
..
Section 4 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. refers to

        offences under any other law and lays down that all such

        offences shall be investigated, inquired into, tried or "otherwise

        dealt with", according to the same provisions, but subject to any

        enactment for the time being in force, regulating the manner or

        place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or "otherwise dealing

        with" such offences.
78.                  For the benefit of quick reference
Section 4
of the

        Cr.P.C. is being reproduced hereinbelow:-
"4. Trial of offences under
                                      the
Indian Penal Code
and other
                                      laws.-(1)            All   offences   under   the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) shall
                                      be investigated, inquired into, tried,
                                      and otherwise dealt with according to
                                      the provisions hereinafter contained.
(2) All offences under any other
                                      law shall be investigated, inquired
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 71 -
into, tried, and otherwise dealt with
                                      according to the same provisions, but
                                      subject to any enactment for the time
                                      being in force regulating the manner
                                      or place of investigating, inquiring
                                      into, trying or otherwise dealing with
                                      such offences."
79.                   I may refer now
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, which

        puts a restriction on taking of cognizance and prescribes that no

        cognizance can be taken by a Court of an offence punishable

        under the provisions of
E.C. Act
except on a report in writing of

        the facts constituting such offence made by a person, who is a

        public servant, as defined under
Section 21
of the Indian Penal

        Code or any other person aggrieved or any recognized consumer

        association,        whether       such      person      is   a   member    of    that

        association or not.
80.                      Apparently, by            virtue of
Section 4 (2)
of the

        Cr.P.C., an offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, is to be

        investigated, inquired into, tried or "otherwise dealt with" in

        accordance with the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
., but subject to the

        provisions of
E.C. Act
.
Section 11
of the E.C. Act deals with

        cognizance of offences under the Act and reads thus:-
"11.          Cognizance         of
                                      offences.-           No    Court    shall   take
                                      cognizance of any offence punishable
                                      under this Act except on a report in
                                      writing of the facts constituting such
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 72 -
offence made by a person who is a
                                      public servant as defined in
section 21
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
                                      [or any person aggrieved or any
                                      recognised            consumer           association,
                                      whether such person is a member of
                                      that association or not]."
81.                      Ostensibly, therefore, power of a Magistrate to

        take cognizance, under
Section 190
of the Cr.P.C., is subject to
Section 11
of the E.C. Act, as quoted above. I should now come

        to
Section 190
of the Cr.P.C., which reads thus:-
"190. Cognizance of offences
                                      by Magistrates. -(1) Subject to the
                                      provisions           of    this     Chapter,      any
                                      Magistrate of the first class, and any
                                      Magistrate           of     the     second       class
                                      specially empowered in this behalf
                                      under       sub-section           (2),   may     take
                                      cognizance of any offence-
(a)          upon       receiving      a
                                      complaint of facts which constitute
                                      such offence;
(b) upon a police report of
                                      such facts;
(c) upon information received
                                      from any person other than a police
                                      officer, or upon his own knowledge,
                                      that        such          offence        has     been
                                      committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate
                                      may empower any Magistrate of the
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 73 -
second class to take cognizance under
                                      sub-section (1) of such offences as
                                      are within his competence to inquire
                                      into or try."
82.                    A conjoint reading of the provision under
Section

        190
of the Cr.P.C.,
Section 11
of the E.C. Act and
Section 4
of

        the Cr.P.C. together, leaves no scope of doubt that a Magistrate

        can take cognizance of an offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C.

        Act, upon receiving a complaint of facts made by "any person

        aggrieved or any recognized consumer association, whether such

        person is a member of that association or not", in exercise of its

        jurisdiction under Section 190 (1) (a) or 190 (1) (c) of the
Cr.P.C
.. Needless to say that such complaint of facts should be

        in writing, in compliance of
Section 11
of the E.C. Act. Further,

        since the offence is cognizable, the police have a duty to register

        a case, investigate it in accordance with the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
.,      on     completion           whereof    submit   a    police   report.

        Thereupon, the Magistrate may take cognizance of the offence

        punishable         under
Section        7
of   the   E.C.   Act,   exercising

        jurisdiction under
Section 190 (1) (b)
of the Cr.P.C..
Section

        190 (1) (c)
of the Cr.P.C. is a residuary provision under which

        the Magistrate may take cognizance of the offence "upon

        information received from any person other than a police officer"
or "upon his own knowledge that such offence has been

        committed". In case of offence under the provisions of
E.C. Act
,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 74 -
by virtue of
Section 11
of the E.C. Act, power to take cognizance

        under
Section 190 (1) (c)
of the Cr.P.C. is subject to condition

        that such person is himself "aggrieved" within the meaning of
Section 11
of the E.C. Act or "any recognized consumer

        association,        whether       such      person   is   a   member   of   that

        association or not".           It is true that the Magistrate cannot take

        cognizance of the offence, punishable under
Section 7
of the E.C.

        Act, upon "his own knowledge" as occurring under
Section 190

        (1) (c)
of the Cr.P.C., as
Section 11
of the E.C. Act prohibits

        taking of cognizance except on "a report in writing of the facts

        constituting such offence".
83.                       This discussion can be summarized by holding

        that following conditions must exist for taking of a cognizance by

        a Magistrate for an offence to be punishable under the provisions

        of the
E.C. Act
:-
(i) It must be on a report in writing of facts

                                  constituting such offence; and
(ii) Such report in writing must be made either

                                   by:-
(a.) a person, who is a public servant, as

                                   defined in
Section 21
of the Indian Penal

                                   Code;
(b.) any person aggrieved; and

                                    (c.) any recognized consumer association,
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 75 -
whether such person is a member of that

                                    association or not.
84.                      Since the offence is cognizable, on the basis of

        the police report, submitted after completion of investigation by

        the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station, the

        Magistrate may take cognizance, exercising jurisdiction under
Section 190 (b)
of the Cr.P.C..                    On the basis of a report in

        writing of facts constituting offence, made by a public servant,

        cognizance may be taken invoking jurisdiction under Section

        190(1)(a) or
Section 190 (1) (c)
of the Cr.P.C..
85.                    Cognizance of an offence is taken under Section

        190 of the Cr. P.C., in either of the three situations mentioned in
Section 190(1)(a)
,
190(1)(b)
and
190(1)(c)
of the Cr.P.C.                   In

        case of offence, under the
E.C. Act
, cognizance can be taken by

        the Court only upon a report, in writing, of facts constituting

        such offence, made by a person, who is a public servant, as

        defined in
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code. By way of

        Amendment introduced w.e.f. 01.05.1987, persons aggrieved or

        any recognized consumer association can also make a report, in

        writing, on the basis of which the Court can take cognizance.

        What has been mentioned in the case of
Kuli Singh
(supra), as

        has been quoted above, is mere reiteration of provisions

        contained in
Section 11
of the E.C. Act. There is no gainsaying
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 76 -
that a police officer is public servant on whose report, submitted

        under
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C., a Magistrate can take

        cognizance of an offence punishable under the
E.C. Act
.
86.                   In the case in hand, the First Information Reports

        have been registered with the police in respect of commission of

        cognizable offence, punishable under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act.

        Power of the police to investigate a cognizable offence is wide

        and unfettered, except in exceptional cases. The police may

        enquire into the correctness and truthfulness of inspection,

        search and/or seizure made by an officer, on whose report, the

        First Information Report came to be registered. Merely, on the

        ground that the First Information Report has been registered on

        the basis of report submitted by an officer not authorized under

        the Control Orders, the Investigating Officer does not become

        bound by such report as he is free to examine and investigate

        into the correctness or otherwise of the allegations made in the

        report.      Therefore, even if there had been any defect on the

        ground that officer, who made the inspection, search and/or

        seizure, was not authorized to do so, the investigation based on

        that, cannot be said to be illegal. I am also of the opinion that

        since the offence, under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act, is cognizable;

        the police may upon information initiate investigation on the

        basis of any information received with regard to commission of

        an offence under
Section 7
of the E.C. Act.
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 77 -
87.                    Situated thus, I find it difficult to agree with the

        submissions advanced on behalf of the petitioners that the First

        Information Report needs to be quashed, on the ground that

        inspection/search/seizure, which is the foundation of registration

        of First Information Report, was not carried out by an officer

        authorized to do so.
88.                   Further, whether any defect in investigation can

        create a bar, in taking cognizance of the offence or holding trial,

        is the next step, which I intend to consider.
89.                     In    my opinion, the Court's jurisdiction, under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. or under Articles 226/227 of

        Constitution of India, to interfere with the investigation of a

        cognizable offence is very limited. The Supreme Court in case of
State of Bihar Vs. J.A.C. Saldhana
, reported in (1980) 1 SCC

        554,       made very significant observation in the very opening

        paragraph while considering the Court's jurisdiction to interfere

        with the investigation of an offence registered at a police station,

        which reads thus:-
"Reverence and anxiety to the
                                      same degree, if not more, to shoot at
                                      sight even a remote intrusion into the
                                      field       preserved   for      judiciary   must
                                      inform the judicial approach whenever
                                      assistance of the judicial machinery is
                                      sought          for         an       unwarranted
                                      encroachment into the field of activity
                                      reserved        for   the    other    branch   of
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 78 -
Government,              more           so,         when
                                      extraordinary power conferred on the
                                      High Court to issue prerogative writ in
                                      aid of justice is invoked to thwart a
                                      possible       detection          of   a     suspected
                                      offence. How dangerous it is to rush
                                      in where one should be wary to tread
                                      is amply demonstrated by the facts
                                      revealed in these two appeals."
90.                   The Supreme Court noted with approval the Privy

        Council decision in case of
King Emperor Vs. Khwaja Nazir

        Ahmad
, [AIR 1944 PC 18], wherein the Privy Council had

        made following observations of immense importance:-
"In India, as has been shown,
                                      there is a statutory right on the part
                                      of    the      police    to       investigate        the
                                      circumstances                of        an      alleged
                                      cognizable           crime    without         requiring
                                      any         authority        from      the     judicial
                                      authorities and it would, as their
                                      Lordships think, be an unfortunate
                                      result if it should be held possible to
                                      interfere with those statutory rights
                                      by     an      exercise       of       the    inherent
                                      jurisdiction of the Court. The functions
                                      of the judiciary and the police and
                                      complementary, not overlapping, and
                                      the combination to be obtained by
                                      leaving       each      to    exercise        its   own
                                      function, always, of course, subject to
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 79 -
the right of the Court to intervene in
                                      an     appropriate   case   when   moved
                                      under
Section 491
of the Criminal
                                      Procedure Code to give directions in
                                      the nature of habeas corpus. In such
                                      a case as the present, however, the
                                      Court's functions begin when a charge
                                      is preferred before it, and not until
                                      then."
91.                     The said decision of Supreme Court, in case of
J.A.C. Saldhana
(supra), has been consistently followed in a

        subsequent decision and the said proposition holds the field.
Conclusion:-
92.                    Having noticed the factual background and rival

        submissions advanced on behalf of the parties, as noted above,

        and various judicial pronouncements of the Supreme Court, to

        sum up my discussion, I answer the reference in following

        terms:-
(i)     The judgment rendered by the Supreme Court,

        in case of K.L. Subhayya (supra), does not lay down a law that

        registration of an F.I.R disclosing commission of cognizable

        offence, on the basis of illegal inspection/search/seizure, will

        render the entire investigation, enquiry or trial, illegal from its

        very inception, requiring the High Court to exercise its extra

        ordinary jurisdiction, under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. or Articles

        226/227 of the Constitution of India, by quashing the very F.I.R.
Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 80 -
(ii)    The Supreme Court, in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), was dealing with a case arising out of a non-cognizable

        offence at the stage of appeal, after conviction.       The Supreme

        Court
in that case
had no occasion to deal with the question of

        such illegality or irregularity in inspection/search/seizure made

        in a cognizable case, being investigated by the police.
(iii) A search being made by an officer, not

        authorized in this behalf, can be resisted by a person, whose

        premises are sought to be searched and because of illegality of

        that nature, the Court may be inclined to examine carefully, the

        evidence regarding seizure. Beyond these two consequences, no

        further consequence would ensue and seizure of the articles shall

        not be vitiated, as has been held by the Supreme Court in case

        of Radha Kishan (supra).
(iv) An illegal search may render the recovery of

        illicit articles suspect, but it will certainly not vitiate the trial.

        Further, the accused will have to make out a case that such

        illegal search by a person, not authorized, caused serious

        prejudice having consequence of miscarriage of justice.
(v) Seizure of loaded vehicle, inspected by a police,

        at a deserted place in dark night, will not make such search

        illegal and will not vitiate the entire prosecution, in view of what

        has been held above.
(vi) The Division Bench decision in case of Ram
 Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 81 -
Chandra Pansari
(supra), to the effect that an F.I.R. registered

        on the basis of illegal seizure made, in violation of Rule 12 of the

        Bihar Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel Oil Dealers Licensing

        Order, 1996, an Order, issued under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act,

        shall stand vitiated on that ground and no investigation can

        legally ensue or trial held on such basis and, thereby, requiring

        the High Court to quash the prosecution, invoking jurisdiction

        under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C., with due regard, doesn't lay

        down the correct law.
The decision in case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), has been incorrectly applied by Division Bench in case

        of
Ram Chandra Pansari
(supra).
In case of
K.L. Subhayya
(supra), the offences were non-cognizable, under
Karnataka

        Excise Act, 1965
, whereas the offences under
Section 7
of the

        E.C. Act is cognizable.
The Division Bench decision in case of

        Madhusudan Prasad (supra) lays down the correct law,

        wherein it has been held that on the plea of illegality of search

        and/or seizure, having been made by an unauthorized officer

        leading to registration of an F.I.R, the said First Information

        Report cannot be quashed or set aside at very threshold,

        exercising power under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
93.                 Having answered the reference as above, I do not

        find any merit in these applications, which are, accordingly,

        dismissed. The interim orders stand vacated.
94.                 Before       I    part     with, I must record my deep
          Patna High Court Cr.Misc. No.11852 of 1984 dt.27-10-2016
- 82 -
appreciation for the assistance extended by Mr. N.K. Agarwal,

                 learned Senior Counsel, who appeared, as amicus curiae, on our

                 request, and Mr. Anjani Kumar, learned Additional Advocate

                 General No. II, appearing on behalf of the State of Bihar.
(Chakradhari Sharan Singh, J.)

                 I agree with the views of
                 Hon'ble Mr. Justice C.S. Singh
                 I.A. Ansari, C.J.:
(I.A. Ansari, C.J.)


Trivedi/Praveen/-
AFR/NAFR              AFR
CAV DATE          28.01.2016
Uploading Date    28.10.2016
Transmission Date     N.A.
