Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 2 AIR 1936
Citation: AIR 1936 Privy Council 253 (2)
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/144622544/

[Cites
40
, Cited by
8
]
Bombay High Court
Tci Industries Limited vs The Municipal Corporation Of Greater ... on 19 December, 2011
Author:
P.B. Majmudar
Bench:
P.B. Majmudar
,
Mridula Bhatkar
KPP                                         -1-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006


                                                        




                                                                                               
                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY

                              ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL  JURISDICTION 




                                                                      
                                WRIT PETITION  NO. 2859 OF 2006

    TCI Industries Limited                                                     )




                                                                     
    a public limited company incorporated under the                            )
    provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
and having its                       )
    registered office at 1-7-293, Mahatma Gandhi Road,                         )
    Secunderabad-500 003                                                       )...Petitioner




                                                      
                   versus
                                   
    1. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
        statutory Corporation incorporated under Bombay 
                                                                               )
                                                                               )
Municipal Corporation Act, 1888
and having its office                  )
                                  
        at Mahapalika Marg, Mumbai-400 001                                     )

    2. Union of India through the Secretary,                                   )
        Ministry of Defence and through the Defence Estate                     )
        Officer, Ministry of Defence having its office at Mumbai               )
       


        Circle, Near Afghan Church,  Colaba, Mumbai-400 005                    )
    



    3. State of Maharashtra, through Collector of Mumbai City, )
        having its office at Old Custom House, Mumbai.         )..Respondents

    Mr. Rohit Kapadia, Senior Advocate, with Mr. Pravin Samdani, Senior Advocate, 





    along with Miss Bindi Dave, Mr. Kunal Vajani, Mr. Ankit Virmani, Mr. Sameer 
    Pandit and Mr. Ameya Malkan, instructed by M/s. Wadia Ghandy & Co., for the 
    petitioner.

    Ms. P.A. Purandare for respondent No.1.





    Mr. D.J. Khambata, Additional Solicitor General, with Mr. Rui Rodrigues and Mr. 
    S.R. Rajguru for respondent No.2.

    Mr. M.D. Naik, Assistant Government Pleader, for respondent No.3. 
       
                                                            CORAM:  P.B. MAJMUDAR  &
                                                                            MRS. MRIDULA BHATKAR, 
                                                                                                  JJ.
                                                                                                       

                                                 DATE:     DECEMBER 19, 2011.




                                                                      ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
     KPP                                       -2-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006




                                                                                            
    ORAL JUDGMENT: (Per P.B. Majmudar, J.)
The petitioner is occupying  land admeasuring 10.264 acres located 

    in the Colaba area of the city of Mumbai.  The petitioner is occupying the said 




                                                                  
    land   as   a   lessee   by   virtue   of   the   leasehold   rights.   The   petitioner   obtained 

    leasehold rights by virtue of an Indenture of Assignment  dated 6th August, 1979 




                                                    
    executed between one Tungabhadra Sugar Works  and the petitioner. By virtue 
                                 
    of the same, the petitioner is occupying the said piece of land and is entitled  to 

    use the aforesaid property. The ownership rights in respect of the said property 
                                
    are duly reflected in the PR cards.  In order to carry out development work, the 

    petitioner took  steps for clearing the dues of the workmen of the mill standing 
       

    on   the   said     property   i.e.   Mukesh   Mills.     According   to   the   petitioner,   they 

    incurred about Rs. 17  crores in this behalf.
2.            In order  to  obtain development  permission, the petitioner  carried 





    out certain search  and  they came  to know  that   Respondent No.2,  Union  of 

    India, is asserting its rights over the property.  The petitioner,  in the meanwhile 





    also   came   across  a  newspaper   article   published   by    Respondent   No.2   in  the 

    Times of India dated 2nd  December, 2004, stating that the said property was 

    being acquired for constructing helipad for civilian flights.     According to the 

    petitioner, respondent No.2, therefore, wanted to acquire the said piece of land 

    for the purpose of constructing helipad and for expanding its naval base.   In
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                        -3-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
connection with the development permission sought for by the petitioner from 




                                                                                              
    the   Municipal   Corporation   of   greater   Mumbai,   respondent   No.2   addressed   a 




                                                                     
    letter to respondent No. 1 pointing out  that the said property is part of defence 

    land   and   is   on   lease   to   the   erstwhile   Colaba   Land   &   Mill   Company.   The 

    Respondent No.2, therefore, asked respondent No.1 not to grant development 




                                                                    
    permission   regarding   construction     over   the   said   piece   of   land.       In   the 

    meanwhile, correspondence ensued between the petitioner and respondent Nos.
1 and 2.   According to the petitioner, respondent No.2 tried to assert its title 
                                  
    over   the   suit  property   in   view   of   certain   articles  in   the   newspapers.     In   the 

    meanwhile, the petitioner sent a letter dated 5th September, 2006 to respondent 
                                 
    No.1   seeking   approval/permission   in   respect   of   the   development   of   the   said 

    property.     The   Respondent   No.1-Corporation   informed   the   petitioner   that 
       


    development permission is refused on the ground that as per letter dated 27th 
    



    July,   2006,   no   permission   to   develop   the   said   property     be   given   without 

    obtaining NOC from respondent No.2.  Since respondent No.1 refused to grant 





    development   permission   to   the   petitioner   on   that   ground   that   unless   no 

    objection certificate from respondent No.2 is obtained, more particularly from 

    the Indian Navy, development permission cannot be granted.  It is the aforesaid 





    decision   of   the   Corporation   in   not   granting   development   permission   to   the 

    petitioner  that the petitioner has filed   this petition challenging the said action.
The petitioner has prayed that appropriate writ, order or direction be issued 

    calling for the records pertaining to the property in question and to set aside the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                        -4-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
decision   of   the   Corporation   in   refusing   development   permission   by   its   letter 




                                                                                              
    dated 22nd  September, 2006 in connection with the proposed development of 




                                                                     
    the   said   property   which   the   petitioner     intended   to   do.    The   petitioner   also 

    prayed for issuance of a  Fresh Survey Section (City) Report by Respondent No.1 

    in   respect   of   the   said   property.     The   petitioner   further   prayed   for   issuing 




                                                                    
    appropriate writ or order directing Respondent No.2   to refrain from making 

    any   claims   in   respect   of   the   said   property     and/or   interfering 




                                                     
    with/obstructing/preventing the petitioner from developing the said property.
3.             During  the  course  of  hearing, the learned  Senior Counsel  for  the 
                                 
    petitioner states that the petitioner is not pressing prayer clauses (b) as well as
(d) as this Court cannot decide disputed questions of title in a Writ Petition 
       


    under
Article   226
of   the   Constitution   of   India   and   would   assert   its   right   in 
    



    appropriate proceedings by way of filing suit or any other remedy available to 

    the petitioner in this behalf.  Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that 





    prayer clause (d) is not pressed in view of the  stand taken during the course of 

    arguments   by   the   learned   Additional   Solicitor   General   that   they   are   not 

    asserting their ownership rights in these proceedings and in view of the said 





    submission prayer clause (d) is not pressed. It is accordingly clarified that this 

    Court is not examined the question of title as to whether the Respondent No.2 

    is the owner of the property in question or whether the property in question 

    belongs   to   the   State   of   Maharashtra.     That   question   is   kept   open   for
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                       -5-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
consideration   in   appropriate   forum   in   future,   if   so   required.       In   these 




                                                                                            
    proceedings, therefore, the Court is only required to consider the aspect as to 




                                                                    
    whether   Respondent   No.2   is   entitled   to   object   the   development   permission 

    which is to be granted by respondent No.1  by insisting that unless their NOC is 

    obtained, such permission for development  cannot be granted.
4.            As   stated   above,   the   land   in   question   is   located   at   the   Victoria 




                                                    
    Bunder   Road,   Colaba,   Mumbai.     The   adjoining   property   belongs   to   Defence 
                                 
    Department  and the Navy is having its Station known as INS Shikra, which was 

    earlier known as INS Kunjali.    Since the Navy is occupying the adjoining area, 
                                
    it has refused  to grant NOC on the ground of security and in view of the same, 

    the respondent-Corporation has not sanctioned permission to the petitioner to 
       


    develop the said property.
5.            In order to find out the location of the property as well as to find out 





    whether under the relevant Rules and Regulations, the Defence  Department is 

    entitled to prevent development activity in the adjoining area, it is necessary to 

    find out as to in which manner the petitioner has come into possession of the 





    said property.  It is required to be noted that under an Indenture of Lease dated 

    9th  January,   1878,   i.e.   the   original   lease,   lease   agreement   was   entered   into 

    between the Secretary of State for India in Council (the lessor)  on the one hand 

    and Colaba Co. Ltd., who was the original lessee. The said lease was registered
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                        -6-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
on 24th  January, 1878. As per the lease agreement, lease was granted for 999 




                                                                                               
    years with effect from 1st January, 1874.  Thereafter several assignments of the 




                                                                      
    leasehold   interest   had   taken   place   by   virtue   of   which   lessee   was   entitled   to 

    develop the said property.  Ultimately, under the Indenture of Assignment dated 

    6th August, 1979, one Tungabhadra Sugar Works, who had come to acquire and 




                                                                     
    hold the leasehold rights in respect of the property,  assigned to the petitioner 

    all   the   leasehold   rights,   title   and   interest   in   respect   of   the     said   property.
According to the petitioner, the petitioner was thus entitled to develop the said 
                                  
    property   as   per   the   said   assignment   and   was   also   entitled   to   enjoy   the   said 

    property for the remaining period of lease, which according to the petitioner, 
                                 
    would be about 871 years.     Since a textile mill was also located in the said 

    portion i.e. Mukesh Mill, which was not functioning, the petitioner, in order to 
       


    develop the property also cleared the dues of the workmen of the said mill and 
    



    thereafter   submitted   an   application   for   developing   the   said   property.     It   is 

    required to be noted that in the lease deed, the lessee was permitted to develop 





    the said property. Since it is agreed by both the sides that it is not necessary to 

    examine the title deeds  and to decide as to whether after the Independence and 

    in  view  of  the  provisions of  the   Govt.  of  India  Act,  Union of  India   has now 





    become lesser or whether the State Government has become lesser of the said 

    property.  In view of the fact that both the sides have frankly stated that it is not 

    necessary   to   examine   the   title   whether   the   property   vests   with   the   Defence 

    Department   or   not,   the   said   point   is   not   required   to   be   adjudicated   in   this
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                        -7-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
petition and, as pointed out earlier, the only point which requires consideration 




                                                                                               
    is whether the Navy which occupies the adjoining property having its naval base 




                                                                      
    is   entitled   to   insist   for   their   NOC   for   development   of   the   property   in   the 

    adjoining area.
6.             On behalf of the petitioner, it is submitted by the learned Senior 

    Counsel Mr. Kapadia that the petitioner is occupying part  of the property which 




                                                      
    was   originally   let   out   to   Colaba   Company   Limited.     It   is   submitted   that   the 
                                  
    remaining part of the said  property  is in possession of other lessees, who have 

    already carried out development in the adjoining area.  It is also submitted that 
                                 
    there is a slum in the adjoining portion of the land which the Navy is occupying.
According to Mr. Kapadia, the point of security raised by Navy is nothing but a 
          


    bogey for which there is no basis and foundation.   According to the learned 
       



    Counsel, as per earlier press report published in Times of India by the Defence 

    Department in 2003, the Navy had already disclosed its stand that they wanted 





    to have private helipad landing facility in the area which is in occupation of the 

    petitioner for Pawan Hans  helicopter services.  It is submitted by Mr. Kapadia 

    that with a view to assign this land for the purpose of private helicopter services 





    that   the   Navy   is   creating   a   story   of   defence   which   in   his   submission   is   not 

    justified. It is further submitted by Mr. Kapadia that out of the entire area of the 

    leased property, only one portion is in possession of the petitioner as a lessee 

    and, according to him, petitioner cannot be deprived  to use its property in the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                         -8-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
manner it wants to use. It is submitted that there is no requirement under the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(hereinafter referred to as 




                                                                       
    "the   MRTP   Act")   or   under   the   Development   Control   Regulations   for   Greater 

    Mumbai, 1991 (hereinafter "the D.C. Regulations") for getting   NOC from the 

    Navy and, according to him, once the D.C. Regulation does not provide for such 




                                                                      
    NOC,   the   Corporation   has   committed   an   error   in   rejecting     the     permission 

    sought for by the petitioner.  It is further submitted by Mr. Kapadia that while 




                                                      
    granting   development   permission,   the   Corporation   is   required   to   insist   only 
                                  
    those things which are provided under the MRTP Act as well as under the D.C. 

    Regulations and the Corporation cannot travel beyond the said provisions and 
                                 
    insist something which is not provided under the MRTP Act or the Regulations.
It   is   further   submitted   by   Mr.   Kapadia   that   even   otherwise   looking   to   the 
       


    location   of   the   nearby   area,   it   is   clear   that   the   security   aspect   pressed   into 
    



    service by the  Navy is not justified as there are so many high rise buildings 

    nearby and there is also a slum   which is located only just adjoining to Naval 





    base.  It is submitted by Mr. Kapadia that under the
Works of Defence Act, 1903
(hereinafter "the
Defence Act
"), there is a provision under Section (3) regarding 

    issuing declaration pointing out that  no development activity may be provided 





    in connection with the area qua which declaration is issued under
Section 3
of 

    the Defence Act.   Relying on the same, it is submitted by Mr. Kapadia that if 

    there   is   any   security   aspect   involved   in  the   matter,   the   Defence   Department 

    could have issued declaration under
Section 3
of the said Act but since no such
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                        -9-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
declaration   is   issued,  it   is  clear   that   the   security   point  raised   in   the   present 




                                                                                               
    proceedings is without any basis as there is no threat of security in any manner.
It is further submitted by Mr. Kapadia that even  for the adjoining premises or 

    even   the   slum,   no   such   declaration   is   issued   even   till   today.   It   is   further 

    submitted by Mr. Kapadia that the petitioners cannot be deprived of its right to 




                                                                     
    use the property permanently as on one hand Navy is not acquiring the property 

    under the provisions of the Act and on the other hand, petitioner is deprived to 




                                                      
    develop the property indefinitely for years to come.
8.             It   is   further   submitted   by   Mr.   Kapadia   that   if   any   administrative 
                                 
    order or circular is issued by the State of Maharashtra asking the development 

    authority not to sanction the development plan without NOC from the Defence 
       


    department,   if   the   Defence   Department   is   having   adjoining   property,   such 
    



    administrative order or circular cannot have any binding effect as it is not in 

    consonance with the statutory provisions contained in the MRTP Act and D.C. 





    Regulations.   Mr. Kapadia has relied upon certain case laws which we will deal 

    with in the latter part of this judgment.
9.             Mr. Khambata, learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for 

    the Navy in his turn submitted that the provisions of the MRTP Act cannot be 

    construed     narrowly     and   so   far   as   the   objection   of   the   Navy   is   concerned 

    regarding security is most relevant as, according to him, looking to the location
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:08 :::
KPP                                       -10-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
of the area which the petitioner  occupies is just touching the  premises of Navy.
It is submitted by Mr. Khambata that if any high rise  building is allowed to be 




                                                                   
    constructed, it may affect the security of INS Shikra. He further submits that 

    there is a genuine security risk and as such permission cannot be granted to the 

    adjoining owner for development. It is submitted by Mr. Khambata that so far as 




                                                                  
    Section 46 of the MRTP Act is concerned,  it is only an enabling provision and it 

    cannot be read narrowly.  It is submitted by Mr. Khambata that even if there is 




                                                    
    no specific provision in the Development Control Rules, yet as per Section 46 of 
                                 
    the MRTP Act, the Planning Authority is required to apply its mind and required 

    to   call   for   necessary   documents     to   find   out   as   to   whether   development 
                                
    permission can be granted to the property in question.   It is submitted by Mr. 

    Khambata that whether the element of security is  involved or not is a question 
       


    which is required to be left to the expert authority i.e. Navy and if, according to 
    



    the Navy, there is a threat of security if adjoining premises are allowed to be 

    developed, this Court in its extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the 





    Constitution of India may not interfere with such decision. It is submitted by Mr. 

    Khambata that it is true that in the nearby vicinity there are high rise buildings 

    and adjoining area also there is a slum located.  According to  him, if in the past 





    the permission is granted without insistence for NOC from the Navy, the Navy is 

    not estopped now from insisting for the same, looking to the  present situation 

    as security aspect can always be reviewed by the authorities from time to time.
It   is   submitted   by   Mr.   Khambata   that   even   as   per   the   provisions   of     D.C.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                        -11-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
Regulations, the Planning Authority can insist for such NOC. It is submitted by 




                                                                                              
    Mr. Khambata that simply in the past, some officers had informed the press that 




                                                                      
    area in question can be utilised for private helicopter services, it cannot be said 

    that it is binding even at all stages and the authority cannot take a fresh decision 

    in   this   behalf.     It  is   also   submitted   by  Mr.  Khambata   that  so   far   as   slum   is 




                                                                     
    concerned, even though there is apprehension of security, yet the apprehension 

    is much more, if on the adjoining premises high rise building is allowed  to be 




                                                      
    constructed   as   from   the   hight   a   terrorist   can   very   well   target   a   missile   or 
                                  
    damage the naval basis.     It is submitted by Mr. Khambata that it is true that 

    under
Section 3
of the Defence Act, a declaration can be issued but that is a very 
                                 
    drastic provision which can be resorted to as a last resort and without resorting 

    the same, if under any other provision the development work can be permitted, 
       


    there is nothing wrong if the authority takes  less drastic measure. It  is not the 
    



    mandate of law that unless notification is issued under
Section 3
of the Defence 

    Act, the Respondents have no right whatsoever refusing NOC for development.
It   is   submitted   by   Mr.   Khambata   that   the   interest   of   the   petitioner   is   a 

    commercial interest as against that there is a national interest regarding security 

    of the country and between the two, the national interest must prevail.
10.            It is further submitted by Mr. Khambata that when expert body like 

    Navy is of the opinion that if high rise building is allowed to be constructed  in 

    the adjoining area, there will be danger to the security and in such eventuality,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -12-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
the decision of the expert body is required to be accepted.  It is submitted by Mr. 




                                                                                           
    Khambata  that in any case it cannot be said that the stand taken by the Navy is 




                                                                   
    arbitrary or without any basis or foundation.   It is further submitted that the 

    power of judicial review in such a case is very limited and this Court cannot 

    substitute the say of the Navy by giving its own conclusion about the security 




                                                                  
    aspect.     It   is   submitted   by   Mr.   Khambata   that   subsequently   the   State 

    Government has also issued instructions  by which the Planning Authority is also 




                                                   
    directed   to   obtain   NOC   from   the   Defence   Department   before   granting 
                                 
    development permission  to the developer.
10.           It   is   submitted   by   Mr.   Khambata   that   even   subsequently   the 

    petitioner had also submitted its  plan to the Corporation wherein the petitioner, 
       


    as per the plan, wanted to construct a five star hotel and since the planning 
    



    authority rejected the same, the petitioner filed an appeal under Section 47 of 

    the MRTP Act, which is pending before the State Government.  It is submitted 





    by Mr. Khambata that so far as the Naval base of the Navy is concerned, it is in 

    full swing and operating so many helicopters of the Navy which is coming every 

    day   and   helicopters   of   VVIPs   are   landing   at   the   said   place.     Mr.   Khambata 





    submitted  that even recently the American President Mr. Barack Obama was 

    also landed at this very place.  The said naval base is actively used and in fact 

    important armaments are also kept such as missiles and there is also radar at 

    the said place.  It is submitted that the apprehension of security aspect is not a
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -13-                             WP No. 2859 of 2006
bogey created but it is as such in substance and reality.  It is submitted that even 




                                                                                    
    regarding old buildings which are in existence, if any development permission is 




                                                            
    asked, Navy will definitely object to the same. It is submitted that the area in 

    question is a  restricted  and   prohibited  area    and  is governed  by the
Official 

    Secrets Act
.  It is further submitted that it is for the Respondent Navy to exercise 




                                                           
    an option and simply because option under
Section 3
of the Defence Act  is not 

    exercised,   yet other provisions of the Act can be pressed into service, while 




                                                    
    refusing to give  NOC for development. It is submitted that under Section 154 of 
                                 
    the MRTP Act, the State Government is empowered to give necessary direction 

    to the planning authority and in this case in fact the same has been given. It is 
                                
    submitted that  by not granting no objection certificate, the Navy Department is 

    not taking away the property of the petitioner   in any manner and, therefore, 
       


    reliance placed  on
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India has no relevance 
    



    whatsoever. Mr. Khambata has tried to distinguish the judgments cited by Mr. 

    Kapadia in this behalf.
11.            In rejoinder, Mr. Kapadia  has  relied upon an unreported judgment 

    of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Lok Holding and Construction Ltd.
and
others vs. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai
and others1   as also 

    judgment of the Privy Council in the case of
Nazir Ahmad vs. King Emperor2
. He 

    also submitted that the provision in D.C.
Regulation 16
regarding public interest 


    1 Decided on 10th August, 2011 in WP No. 840 of 2011
    2 AIR 1936 Privy Council 253 (2)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -14-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
cannot   be   construed   in   any   other   sense   and   the   said   Regulation   is   to   be 




                                                                                          
    interpreted   by giving appropriate meaning of public interest as mentioned in
Regulation 16
.     According to Mr. Kapadia the security aspect is not covered 

    under   D.C.
Regulation   16
and,   therefore,   the   same   cannot   be   pressed   into 

    service.
12.           We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties at great 




                                                   
    length. We have also gone through the provisions of the MRTP Act, the D.C. 
                                
    Regulations as well as the provisions of the
Defence Act,  the Aircraft Act, 1934
and the Rules framed thereunder.
13.           The principal question which requires to be decided in this petition 
       


    is as to whether the Respondent Corporation is justified in insisting for NOC 
    



    from   the   Defence   Department   in   connection   with     the   development   activity 

    which the  petitioner wants to carry out in their premises. In order  to consider 





    this aspect, firstly it is necessary to consider the location of the place in question.
Both   the   sides   have   relied   upon   various   photographs   regarding   the   exact 

    location of the place. It is of course not in dispute and it is an admitted fact that 





    so far as Naval base is concerned, wherein INS Shikra is established, the same is 

    adjacent to the property of the petitioner. There is also a common compound 

    wall between the premises of the Navy and the petitioner. The area beyond the 

    boundary wall belongs to  the  petitioner where the substantial area  is vacant
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                           -15-                                       WP No. 2859 of 2006
area where some grass and some trees are located. The premises in question are 




                                                                                                   
    also touching the sea water. So far as Navy premises is concerned, there is also 




                                                                         
    constructed building which according to Mr. Khambata is utilised for keeping 

    armaments and missiles.   This is the factual position so far as the premises in 

    question are concerned.
14.            It is no doubt true that at some distance there are some high rise 




                                                        
    buildings.  There is also a slum which is on the other side of the premises of the 
                                    
    Navy.  On the  basis of the aforesaid location, learned Counsel  Mr. Khambata 

    tried to argue that since there is a common wall between the premises of the 
                                   
    petitioner   and   Navy,   that   it   is   all   the   more   necessary   that   no   construction 

    activity may be allowed to be carried out in an area  which is just adjacent to the 
       


    Navy area   as   anybody can easily climb and jump from one area to another.
On the basis of the aforesaid aspect, it is submitted by Mr. Khambata that the 

    risk   of   danger   is   on   the   higher   side   so   far   as   the   area   of   the   Petitioner   is 





    concerned     as compared  to  other  high rise  buildings,  whose  borders are  not 

    touching the border of the premises of the Navy, as some buildings are located 

    at   some   reasonable   distance,   though   the   entire   leasehold   area   originally 





    belonged to Colaba  Company Ltd.  In order  to appreciate the rival contentions, 

    it   is   necessary   to   rely   upon   the   statutory   provisions   contained   in   various 

    enactments.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                  -16-                                   WP No. 2859 of 2006
15.          So far as Municipal Corporation is concerned, the same is a Planning 




                                                             
    Authority under the provisions of the MRTP Act, 1966.  The Planning Authority 

    is required to process  the development permission as provided under Section 46 

    of the MRTP Act.
Section 46
provides as under:
"46.   Provisions of Development plan to be considered before 




                                               
           granting   permission.-  The   Planning   Authority   in   considering 
           application for  permission shall have due regard to the provisions 
                              
           of any draft or final plan   or proposals   published by means of 
           notice submitted or sanctioned under this Act."
15.1        Section  51   of   the  MRTP  Act deals  with  power  of  revocation  and 

    modification of permission to development. Section     154 provides   about the 
       


    control by State Government which reads as under:
"154.  Control by State Government.- (1) Every Regional Board, 
           Planning   Authority   and   Development   Authority   shall   carry   out 





           such directions or instructions as may be issued from time to time 
           by the State Government for the efficient administration of this 
           Act.
(2)    If in, or his connection with, the exercise of its powers and 





           discharge   of   its   functions   by   the   Regional   Board,   Planning 
           Authority or Development Authority under this Act, any dispute 
           arises between the Regional Board, Planning Authority, and the 
           State Government, the decision of the State Government on such 
           dispute shall be final."
15.2        So far as the Development Control Regulations for Greater Mumbai,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                             -17-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
1991 are concerned,  the relevant provisions of
Regulation 16
provide as under:
"16.     No   land   shall   be   used   as   a   site   for   the   construction   of 
           buildings.-
(a)     if the Commissioner considers that the site is insanitary or 
           that   it   is   dangerous   to   construct   a   building   on   it   or   no   water 
           supply is likely to be available within a reasonable period of time.
....                            ......                          ....

           (e)     If   the   use   of   the   said   site   is   for   a   purpose   which   in   the
Commissioner's opinion may be a source of danger to the health 




                                                          
           and safety of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood;
...
ig      ....                            ....
(n)   If the proposed development is likely to involves damage to 
           or   have   deleterious   impact   on  or   is  against   urban   aesthetics   or 
                                 
           environment or ecology and/or historical/architectural/aesthetical 
           buildings and precincts or is not in the public interest."
15.3
Section 3
of the Works of Defence Act, 1903 provides as under:
"3.  Declaration and notice that restrictions will be imposed.-  (1) 
    



           Whenever   it   appears   to   the   Central   Government     that   it   is 
           necessary to impose restrictions upon the use and enjoyment of 
           land in the vicinity  of any work of defence or of any site intended 
           to be used to be acquired for any such work, in order that such 





           land may   be kept free from buildings and other obstructions, a 
           declaration shall be made to that effect under the signature of a 
           Secretary to such Government or of some officer duly authorised 
           to certify its orders.
(2)   The said declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette 
           and shall state the district or other territorial division in which the 
           land   is   situate   and   the   place   where   a   sketch   plan   of   the   land, 
           which shall be prepared on a scale not smaller than six inches to 
           the mile and shall distinguish the boundaries referred to in
Sec. 7
may be inspected, and the Collector shall cause public notice of 
           the  substance  of  the  said  declaration  to   be   given  at convenient 
           places in the locality.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                        -18-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
(3)       The   said   declaration   shall   be   conclusive   proof   that   it   is 




                                                                                              
            necessary   to   keep   the   land   free   from   building   and   other 
            obstructions."
15.4          So far as helicopter is concerned, it is also considered as an aircraft 

    under   the
Aircraft   Act,   1934
.
The   Act
also   prescribes   certain   provisions   in 




                                                                    
    connection with security of the Airport and aircraft.
Section 9A
of the Aircraft 

    Act,   1934   empowers   the   Central   Government   to   prohibit   or   regulate 




                                                     
    construction of buildings, planting of trees, etc.
16.           Relying on the aforesaid provisions, it is submitted by Mr. Kapadia 
                                 
    that unless there is a notification under
Section 3
of the Defence Act, the security 

    aspect cannot be considered by the Planning Authority and it is argued by him 
       


    that   even     under   the
Aircraft   Act
,   the   Central   Government   can   prohibit   or 
    



    regulate construction and that aspect has also not been done in the present case.
We   have   considered   the   aforesaid   provisions   of   the   MRTP   Act   and   D.C. 





    Regulations as well as
Section 3
of the Defence Act as well as the
Aircraft Act
.
17.           So far as Section 46 of the MRTP Act   is concerned, in our view, it is 





    not possible for us to give such a restricted meaning as canvassed by the  learned 

    counsel  for  the  petitioner.    Under  Section 46 of  the  MRTP Act, the  Planning 

    Authority   is   required   to   examine   the   aspect   about   granting   development 

    permission in an appropriate manner and by considering the relevant aspects.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -19-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
While granting development permission, one of the things which the Planning 




                                                                                              
    Authority is required to consider is to the provisions of the draft or final plan 




                                                                      
    sanctioned under the Act meaning thereby that if any provision in respect of 

    anything   in   the   draft   or   final   plan   published   by   means   of   notice   or   same   is 

    sanctioned under the Act, the Planning Authority cannot ignore the same and it 




                                                                     
    has to be taken into consideration.   It is impossible for us to accept the say of 

    Mr. Kapadia that the Planning Authority cannot consider any other thing except 




                                                      
    giving due regard to the provisions of the draft or final plan as mentioned in 
                                   
    Section  46 of the MRTP Act.  In our view, Section 46 of the MRTP Act cannot be 

    given such a restricted meaning and it cannot be said that under
Section 46
, the 
                                  
    Planning Authority cannot consider any other aspect such as security etc.   It is 

    not possible for us to accept the submission of Mr. Kapadia  that Section 46 of 
       


    the MRTP Act is to be read in such a restrictive manner.
18.            It   is required to be noted that it is in fact the inherent duty of the 





    planning authority  to  apply its mind before giving development permission and 

    the planning authority is required to keep in mind the pros and cons of such 

    development permission. For example, if there is a fire brigade station or refinery 





    or   any   sensitive   object   is   located   at   the   place     nearby   the   area   for   which 

    development permission is sought, the planning authority cannot shut its eyes 

    and is blindly give sanction only on the basis that, except what is provided in
Section  46
,   they   are   not   required   to   call   for   any  other   information.     On   the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                        -20-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
contrary, it is the duty of the planning authority to call for such information 




                                                                                              
    otherwise they will be failing in their duty and they are not required to sanction 




                                                                      
    blindly by shutting their eyes to the relevant  aspect of the matter.  In view of the 

    same, it is not possible for us to accept the submission of Mr. Kapadia that except 

    what is provided under the MRTP Act and the D.C. Regulations, the planning 




                                                                     
    authority is not empowered to call for any other information and to straightaway 

    grant permission and is not required to call for any other information except the 




                                                      
    one provided under Section 46 of the MRTP Act or under the D.C. Regulations.
19.           In   view   of   what   is   stated   above,   no   fault   can   be   found   with   the 
                                 
    Corporation in insisting for  NOC from the Defence Department.   Even as per the 

    D.C.
Regulation 16 (n)
, the Planning Authority may refuse to grant permission of 
       


    using the land   if the proposed development is likely to involve damage or to 
    



    have   a   deleterious   impact   on   or   is   against   the   aesthetics   or   environment   or 

    ecology and/or   historical/architectural/aesthetical building and precincts or is 





    not in the public interest.  In our view, public interest cannot be read in line of 

    what is mentioned under
Regulation 16
regarding environment as public interest 

    have wide connotation and if any particular development activity is found to be 





    not in public interest, in a given case, the development authority can refuse such 

    permission.  The  public   interest,  therefore,  is  to   be   read   independently  to   the 

    earlier part of the said Regulation i.e. ecology, architectural aspects etc.  Reading 

    the   provisions   of   Section   46   of   the   MRTP   Act,   it   cannot   be   said   that   the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -21-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
insistence of the planning authority of NOC of a particular department which, 




                                                                                              
    according to the Planning Authority is in public interest, such insistence cannot 




                                                                      
    be said to be de hors the provisions of the Act and the Regulations.
20.
Section 3
of the Works of Defence Act, 1903 provides for issuance of 




                                                                     
    declaration  and notice.  As per the said provision, if the Central Government is 

    of   the   opinion   to   impose   restriction   upon   use   and   enjoyment   of   land   in   the 




                                                      
    vicinity, said land is to be kept free from buildings and other obstructions, a 
                                  
    declaration can be issued.  It is, however, required to be noted that in the instant 

    case, the  premises which are in possession of the petitioner are concerned, there 
                                 
    is some construction which has already taken place since long, which is of course 

    not high rise building and the Respondent has not tried to insist upon demolition 
       


    of the same, the question for their NOC arose when petitioner wanted to develop 
    



    the property by constructing high rise building. Under
Section 3
of the said Act, 

    even the  Central Government can acquire the property  for  national interest. In 





    the instant case, the defence has not thought it fit to issue such a declaration but 

    has   tried   to   assert   its   right   under   the   provisions   of   the   MRTP   Act   and   the 

    Development Control Regulations by which they have not agreed to give NOC in 





    view of the security  reasons.  It, therefore, cannot be said that simply because no 

    declaration under
Section 3
of the Act  is issued, the defence was not entitled to 

    insist for their NOC.   It is not possible for us to agree with Mr. Kapadia that 

    unless notification under
Section 3
of the Act is issued, the  Respondents  have
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                           -22-                                       WP No. 2859 of 2006
no right whatsoever to object for the development carried and/or  for refusing to 




                                                                                                  
    grant NOC.  So far as
Section 3
of the Act is concerned, it has no relevancy so 




                                                                         
    far   as   insistence   of   the   planning   authority   regarding   no   objection   from   the 

    Defence   Department   is   concerned.     In   a   given   case,   even   if   there   is   no 

    notification   under
Section   3
of   the   Defence   Act,   the   planning   authority   can 




                                                                        
    always insist for NOC from the Defence Department, if the property is located 

    just   adjacent   to   the   premises     of   the   petitioner.     So   far   as
Section   3
of   the 




                                                        
    Defence Act is concerned, the planning authority nowhere figures in the picture 
                                    
    and   the   petition   has   been   filed   against   the   planning   authority   against   their 

    insistence of NOC from the   Defence Department.   While considering the said 
                                   
    aspect, it is not necessary to place any reliance on the provisions of
Section 3
of 

    the Act as in future if the Defence is of the opinion that if any declaration is 
       


    issued  for acquiring the property, it can always proceed on that basis.  In that 
    



    eventuality, the planning authority nowhere figures in the picture.   Today the 

    dispute of the petitioner is against   the planning authority as according to the 





    petitioner, the planning authority has no right whatsoever to insist for NOC from 

    the Defence Department. While considering the said aspect, it is not  necessary 

    that unless there is declaration under
Section 3
of the Act, the planning authority 





    cannot insist for any NOC or might even refuse to grant NOC on the ground of 

    public interest. It is not possible for us therefore to accept the argument of Mr. 

    Kapadia that unless there is a declaration under
Section 3
of the aforesaid Act, it 

    is not open for the Navy to raise the point of security which, according to him, is
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                          -23-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
nothing but a bogey and concocted version of the Navy.
21.             A strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Kapadia on the provisions 

    of
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India.  In order to substantiate his say that 

    the   property   of   the   citizen   cannot   be   taken   away   without   paying   any 




                                                                       
    compensation and that the action of Navy therefore is in violation of
Article 300-

    A
of the Constitution of India. In order to substantiate his say, Mr. Kapadia has 




                                                        
    relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of  Jilubhai Nanbhai  
                                    
    Khachar and others. Vs. State of Gujarat and another1.   The Supreme Court has 

    considered the provisions of
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India. It has 
                                   
    been held as under in paragraphs 42 and 48 of
the said judgment
as under:
"42.       Property   in   legal   sense   means   an   aggregate   of   rights 
       



               which   are   guaranteed   and   protected   by   law.   It   extends     to 
               every species of valuable right and interest, more particularly, 
               ownership and exclusive right to a thing, the right to dispose of 
               the  thing in every legal  way, to possess it, to  use it, and to 
               exclude everyone else from interfering with it.  The dominion 





               or indefinite right of use or disposition which one may lawfully 
               exercise over    particular  things  or  subject is  called property. 
               The exclusive right of possessing, enjoying, and disposing of a 
               thing   is   property   in   legal   parameters.   Therefore,   the   word 
               'property' connotes everything which is subject of ownership, 





               corporeal   or   incorporeal,   tangible   or   intangible,   visible   or 
               invisible, real or personal; everything that has an exchangeable 
               value   or   which   goes   to   make   up   wealth   or   estate   or   status. 
               Property,   therefore,   within   the   constitutional   protection, 
               denotes group of rights inhering citizen's relation to physical 
               thing, as right to possess, use and dispose of it in accordance 
               with law. In Ramanatha Aiyar's The Law Lexicon, Reprint Ed. 
               1987   at   p.   1031   it   is   stated   that   the   property   is   the   most 

    1     1995 Supp (1) SCC 596
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -24-                                       WP No. 2859 of 2006
comprehensive of all terms which can be used, inasmuch as it 




                                                                                             
          is indicative and descriptive of every possible interest which the 
          party   can   have.   The   term   property   has   a   most   extensive 
          signification, and, according to its legal definition, consists in 




                                                                    
          free   use,   enjoyment,   and   disposition   by   a   person   of   all   his 
          acquisitions, without any control or diminution, save only by 
          the laws of the land, in Dwarkadas Srinivas's case this Court 
          gave extended meaning to the word property. Mines, minerals 
          and quarries are property attracting
Article 300A.
48.   The   word   "property"   used   in
Article   300A
must   be 
          understood   in   the   context   in   which   the   sovereign   power   of 
          eminent   domain   is   exercised   by   the   State   and   Property 




                                                    
          expropriated. No abstract principles could be laid. Each case 
          must be considered in the light of its own facts and setting. The 
                               
          Phrase 'deprivation of the property of a person' must equally be 
          considered in the fact situation of a case. Deprivation connotes 
          different concepts.
Article 300A
gets attracted to an acquisition 
          or   taking   possession   of   private   property,   by   necessary 
                              
          implication   for   public   purpose,   in   accordance   with   the   law 
          made   by   the   Parliament   or   a   State   legislature,   a   rule   or   a 
          statutory   order   having   force   of   law.   It   is   inherent   in   every 
          sovereign State by exercising its power of eminent domain to 
       

          expropriate   private   property   without   owner's   consent.   Prima 
          facie, State would be the judge to decide whether a purpose is 
          a   public   purpose.   But   it   is   not   the   sole   judge.   This   will   be 
    



          subject  to   judicial   review   and   it  is   the   duty   of   the   Court   to 
          determine whether a particular purpose is a public purpose or 
          not.   Public   interest   has   always   been   considered   to   be   an 
          essential ingredient of public purpose. But every public purpose 





          does not fall under
Article 300A
nor every exercise of eminent 
          domain an acquisition or taking possession under
Article 300A.
Generally speaking preservation of public health or prevention 
          of   damage   to   life   and   property   are   considered   to   be   public 
          purposes.   Yet   deprivation   of   property   for   any   such   purpose 





          would   not   amount   to   acquisition   or   possession   taken   under
Article 300A.
It would be by exercise of the Police power of the 
          State. In other words,
Article 300A
only limits the powers of 
          the State that no person shall be deprived of his property save 
          by authority of law. There has to be no deprivation without any 
          sanction   of   law.   Deprivation   by   any   other   mode   is   not 
          acquisition or taking possession under
Article 300A.
In other 
          words, if there is no law, there is no deprivation. Acquisition of 
          mines,   minerals   and   quarries   is   deprivation   under
Article
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                        -25-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
300A."
The   Supreme   Court   has     held     that   deprivation   of   property   for   any   purpose 

    would   not   amount   to   acquisition   or   possession   under
Article   300-A
but   only 




                                                                   
    limits the powers of the State that no person shall be deprived of his property 

    save by authority of law. If there is no law, there is no deprivation. Acquisition of 




                                                     
    mines, minerals and quarries is deprivation under Article 300-A.   So far as the 

    facts of the present case is concerned, it is required to be note that it cannot be 
                                  
    said that the petitioner is deprived of its property or its rights in the property in 
                                 
    any manner. The Navy Department has refused to grant no objection which is 

    within their power and on the basis of which the Corporation has not granted 

    development   permission   as   per   the   provisions   of   the   MRTP   Act   and   D.C. 
       


    Regulations.  The petitioner is not deprived of the possession or the same is not 
    



    taken away without any authority of law. It is true that the petitioner has been 

    deprived of its right to develop the property. But if that is permissible in law, it 





    cannot be said that the petitioner has been deprived of its property without any 

    authority   of  law   in  any   manner.   The   only   restriction  is  that  by   virtue   of   the 

    aforesaid order of the Corporation, the petitioner is not permitted to develop its 





    property and it can enjoy its property as it is as on today. In our view, therefore, 

    decision   cited   by   Mr.   Kapadia   in   Jilubhai's   case   cannot   be   made   applicable 

    especially  when   the   Corporation   under   the   statutory   provision  as  refused   the 

    permission   in view of no objection from the Defence Department and the said
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -26-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
Act, therefore, is completely in consonance with the provisions of the MRTP Act 




                                                                                              
    and the D.C. Regulations.  In fact, when D.C. Regulations itself provide that in a 




                                                                      
    given case permission cannot be granted if it is in public interest and when these 

    Regulations are not under challenge the effect has to be to the provisions of the 

    said Regulation.
22.           On behalf of the petitioner, reference is made to the Division Bench 




                                                      
    judgment of this Court in the case of Sonam Properties vs. State of Maharashtra.
The Division Bench in Writ Petition No. 4497 of 1990 vide its judgment dated 8th 

    November, 1990 came to the conclusion that under sub-section (1)   of Section 
                                 
    154   of   the     MRTP   Act,   the   planning   authority   is   required   to   carry   out   such 

    directions and instructions as may be issued by the State Government   for the 
       


    efficient   administration   of   the   Act.   However,   the   Division   Bench   was   of   the 
    



    opinion  that  if   any   instruction   is  given   by  the   State   Government  which   is   in 

    violation  of   the   provisions  of  the   Act,  the   development  permission  cannot  be 





    refused on the said ground.  In the aforesaid case, development permission was 

    not   granted   on   the   ground   that   in   the   adjoining   vicinity   there   is   a   chemical 

    industry and it may have deleterious effect. The Division Bench of this Court held 





    that such insistence  was contrary to the provisions of the MRTP Act and Rules 

    framed thereunder and that the Planning Authority  should not have acted upon 

    some oral instructions issued by the State Government   and allowed the writ 

    petition   and   directed   the   planning   authority   to   process   the   development
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                          -27-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
permission   as   per   the   observations   made   in   the   judgment.   It   is,   however, 




                                                                                                
    required to be noted that, however, a review petition was filed against the said 




                                                                      
    judgment and the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Bayer (India) Ltd.
And others vs. State of Maharashtra
and others1 reviewed
the said judgment
and 




                                                                     
    gave certain directions. In para 93, the Division Bench observed as under.
"93.  In the result, the review petition succeeds and the rule is 
              made absolute in the following terms:-
(a)   The judgment and order dated 8-11-1990 in Writ Petition 
              No. 4497 of 1990 is set aside and this necessarily implies that 
                                     
              the consequent orders passed in other petitions on the basis of 
              this judgment are also set aside.
(b)     We refrain from directing that the building permissions 
                                    
              granted   pursuant   to   those   orders   in   respect   of   those   of   the 
              buildings   that   have   been   completed   or   that   were   under 
              constructions as on the date of  the  stay order  passed  by the 
              Supreme Court on 8-1-1991 be revoked. We, however, clarify 
          

              that no additions or modifications shall be permitted in respect 
              of any of these buildings. We also clarify that in respect of those 
              schemes   where   permissions   may   have   been   granted   but   no 
       



              actual construction has been commenced as on the date of the 
              Supreme   Court   order   i.e.     8-1-1991   that   the   prohibition   in 
              respect of a total ban on further construction within the 1 Km.
Radius from the chemical units shall apply."
23.             Against the aforesaid judgment, the matter was taken up before the 





    Supreme Court   and certain directions were given in clause (b).   The Supreme 

    Court   while disposing of the said matter in the case of
S.P. Taraporawala vs.  

    Bayer India2
gave certain directions as under in paragraphs 6 and 7 which read 

    as under.
1     1994 (4) Bombay C.R. 309
    2     1997 (2) Bom . C.R., 159
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -28-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
"6.  We, therefore, direct the constitution of an authority made 
           under
Section 3 (3)
of the Act by the Central Government who 




                                                                     
           shall   confer   all   the   necessary   powers   under   the   Act   on   the 
           authority, which shall be constituted within one month from 
           the receipt of this order. The authority shall submit its report to 
           the Central Government within three months after examining 
           and deciding all the relevant issues including those mentioned 




                                                                    
           by us. This would be done by affording reasonable opportunity 
           of hearing to the parties concerned. Follow-up  actions shall be 
           taken   by   all   concerned   as   per   the   recommendations   of   the 
           authority within reasonable time.
7.    As the constitution and deliberation of the authority would 
                                    
           take time  and  its ultimate  result   cannot be foreseen at this 
           stage, we have thought it fit to direct the Bombay Municipal 
           Corporation to proceed further with the plans which had been 
           submitted by the appellants, some of which also came to be 
                                   
           sanctioned. But then, as sanctioning in some cases was about a 
           decade back and as the scenario and thinking on the subject 
           has since then changed a lot, so also the building bye-laws, we 
           have thought it fit to direct the Corporation to re-examine the 
       

           question of grant of sanction  on the basis of the existing rules 
           and bye-laws. The Corporation may proceed with this exercise, 
           but   it   would   await   the   result   of   the   report   of   the   aforesaid 
    



           authority. We have desired the Corporation to undertake this 
           work at this stage itself because the matter has been delayed 
           already and the authority's deliberation would not be available 
           for quite some time."
24.         It   is   required   to   be   noted   that   the   judgment   given   in   the   review 





    petition has not been reversed nor the law
laid down by
the Division Bench in
the said judgment
is upset by the Supreme Court. In view of certain directions 

    the review petition was allowed to be withdrawn. Be that as it may, in our view, 

    the reliance placed by Mr. Kapadia on the Division Bench judgment of this Court 

    in  the  above  writ petition cannot  have  any  binding  effect  in view  of what is
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -29-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
stated i.e. Reversal of
the said judgment
and ultimate disposal of the petition by 




                                                                                           
    the Supreme Court.  In fact, direction has been given  by the Supreme Court in 




                                                                   
    that review petition itself and on the basis of such direction, the review petition 

    was ultimately dismissed.
25.           Mr. Kapadia thereafter relied upon the decision of the Madras High 

    Court in the matter of  Indian National Trust for
Art and Cultural Heritage vs.  




                                                    
    Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority1
. The said judgment is in connection 
                                 
    with
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India. The writ petition was filed before 

    the Madras High  Court to  restrain respondent No.3 from exercising  her  right 
                                
    over her property.  The Madras High Court has held that in view of
Article 300-A
of   the   Constitution,   no   person   shall   be   deprived   of   his   property   except   by 
       


    authority   of   law.
The   Madras   High   Court   has   considered   the   decision   of   the 
    



    Supreme Court in Jilubhai's case (supra) and rejected the writ petition which 

    was filed as a public interest litigation.  The fact situation in the present case, as 





    discussed above by us, is entirely different.
26.           Mr. Kapadia has relied upon another decision of the Madras High 





    Court in the case of
P.P.M. Thangaiah Nadar Firm vs. The Govt. of Tamil Nadu2
. It 

    has been held that merely because the right to property has been deleted from 

    the chapter of fundamental rights and has been recognised as a constitutional 


    1 2003 (4) CTC 513
    2 (2007) 2 MLJ 685
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -30-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
right,   it   does   not   disentitle   the   Court   to   examine   that   question.
In
the   said 




                                                                                              
    judgment
, reference is also made to Jilubhai's case (supra). The Madras High 




                                                                      
    Court held that the person cannot be deprived of his property without authority 

    of law in view of Article 300-A.
27.            Mr. Kapadia has relied upon  another decision of the Division Bench 

    of  this Court in the   case  of
Bharti  Tele-Ventures  Ltd.  and   another   vs.  State  of  




                                                      
    Maharashtra
and another1. The aforesaid matter was in connection with under
Section   4
of   the   Telegraph   Act,   regarding   installation   of   cellular   mobile 

    telecommunication   system   by   the   licensee.   A   demand   notice   in   terms   of 
                                  
    notification was held to be without authority of law under Section 154 of the 

    MRTP Act.
28.            Mr. Kapadia has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in 

    the case of
K.T. Plantation vs. State of Karnataka
delivered in Civil Appeal No. 





    6520 of 2003 and other cognate matters. The Supreme Court has considered the 

    provisions of
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India and held as under:
"121. We find no apparent conflict with the words used in Entry 
            42  List III  so  as to   infer  that the  payment  of  compensation  is 
            inbuilt   or   inherent   either   in   the   words   "acquisition   and 
            requisitioning"  under   Entry   42   List   III.   Right   to   claim 
            compensation  is,   therefore,   cannot  be   read   into   the   legislative 
            Entry 42 List III. Requirement of public purpose, for deprivation 
            of a person of his property under
Article 300A
, is a pre-condition, 

    1 2007 (4) Mh. L.J. 105
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -31-                                        WP No. 2859 of 2006
but no compensation or nil compensation or its illusiveness has 




                                                                                                 
          to   be   justified   by   the   state   on   judicially   justiciable   standards. 
          Measures designed to achieve greater social justice, may call for 
          lesser compensation and such a limitation by itself will not make 




                                                                        
          legislation   invalid   or   unconstitutional   or   confiscatory.   In   other 
          words, the right to claim compensation or the obligation to pay, 
          though not expressly included in
Article 300A
, it can be inferred 
          in   that   Article   and   it   is   for   the   State   to   justify   its   stand   on 
          justifiable grounds which may depend upon the legislative policy, 




                                                                       
          object and purpose of the statute and host of other factors.
122.
Article 300A
would be equally violated if the provisions of 




                                                       
          law authorizing deprivation of property have not been complied 
          with. While enacting
Article 300A
Parliament has only borrowed
Article 31(1) [
the "Rule of law " doctrine] and not
Article 31(2) 
                                  
          [
which had embodied the doctrine of Eminent Domain].
Article 
          300A
enables the State to put restrictions on the right to property 
          by law. That law has to be reasonable. It must comply with other 
                                 
          provisions   of   the   Constitution.   The   limitation   or   restriction 
          should not be arbitrary or excessive or what is beyond what is 
          required in public interest. The limitation or restriction must not 
          be disproportionate to the situation or excessive. The legislation 
          providing for deprivation of property under
Article 300A
must be 
       


          "just, fair and reasonable" as understood in terms of
Articles 14
, 
          19(1)(g)
, 26(b)
, 301
, etc. Thus in each case, courts will have to 
    



          examine the scheme of the impugned Act, its object, purpose as 
          also   the   question   whether   payment   of   nil   compensation   or 
          nominal   compensation   would   make   the   impugned   law   unjust, 
          unfair   or   unreasonable   in   terms   of   other   provisions   of   the 





          Constitution as indicated above. At this stage, we may clarify that 
          there   is   a   difference   between   "no"   compensation   and   "nil"
compensation.     A   law   seeking   to   acquire   private   property   for 
          public purpose cannot say that "no compensation shall be paid". 
          However, there could be a law awarding "nil" compensation in 





          cases   where   the   State   undertakes   to   discharge   the   liabilities 
          charged  on the property under  acquisition and  onus  is on the 
          government to establish validity of such law. In the latter case, 
          the   court   in   exercise   of   judicial   review   will   test   such   a   law 
          keeping in mind the above parameters.
123.   Right   to   property   no   more   remains   an   overarching 
          guarantee   in   our   Constitution,   then   is   it   the   law,   that   such   a 
          legislation   enacted   under   the   authority   of   law   as   provided   in
Article 300A
is immune from challenge before a Constitutional
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                        -32-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
Court for violation of
Articles 14
, 21
or the overarching principle 




                                                                                             
            of   Rule  of   Law,   a   basic   feature  of   our   Constitution,   especially 
            when such a right is not specifically incorporated in
Article 300A
, 
            unlike
Article 30(1A)
and the 2nd proviso to
Article 31A.
142.Let the message, therefore, be loud and clear, that rule of 
            law   exists   in   this   country   even   when   we   interpret   a   statute, 
            which has the blessings of
Article 300A.
Deprivation of property 




                                                                    
            may also cause serious concern in the area of foreign investment, 
            especially in the context of International Law and international 
            investment   agreements.   Whenever,   a   foreign   investor   operates 
            within   the   territory   of   a   host   country   the   investor   and   its 




                                                     
            properties   are   subject   to   the   legislative   control   of   the   host 
            country,   along   with   the   international   treaties   or   agreements. 
            Even, if the foreign investor has no fundamental right, let them 
                                  
            know, that the rule of law prevails in this country."
29.           Mr. Kapadia also relied upon the decision of Privy Council in the case 

    of
Nazir Ahmad vs. King Emperor1
.   It has been observed in the said order that 
       


    when power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be 
    



    done in that way or not at all. Other  method of performance  are  necessarily 

    forbidden. He has relied upon such passing observations made at pg. 257 of
the 





    said judgment
.
He has also relied upon another decision of the Supreme Court in 

    the case of
State of Gujarat vs. Shantilal Mangaldas
and others2.   It has been 

    observed in para 54   that the land required for any of the purpose of a town 





    planning scheme cannot be acquired otherwise than under the Act, for it is a 

    settled   rule   of   interpretation   of   statutes   that   when     power   is   given   under   a 

    statute to do a certain thing in a certain way the thing must be done in that way 

    or not at all.
1 AIR 1936 Privy Council 253 (2)
    2 AIR 1969 SC 634
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -33-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
30.           As pointed out earlier, the powers are exercised by the Corporation 




                                                                  
    as provided under the statute, MRTP Act and D.C. Regulations. Mr. Kapadia has 

    relied   upon   the   decision   of   the   Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of    Ramchandra 




                                                                 
    Keshav Adke (dead) by Lrs. vs. Govind Joti Chavare and others1  wherein it has 

    been held that a a century ago in Taylor v. Taylor (1875) 1 Ch D 426 Jessel M.R. 

    Adopted the rule that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain 




                                                   
    way, the thing must be done in that way or not at all and that other methods of 
                                 
    performance are necessarily forbidden.
Reference is also made to
Nazir Ahmad
's 
                                
    case in the aforesaid case.
31.           Reference is also made to the decision of the Division Bench of this 
    



    Court   in   the   case   of  Lok   Holding   and   Construction   Limited   vs.   Municipal  

    Corporation  of Gr. Bombay and others, which is an unreported decision dated 





    10th  August, 2011.   In the aforesaid case, the Division Bench has held that if 

    notification under
Section 3
is not issued, the Corporation should not have relied 

    upon the NOC from the Defence establishment. So far as the facts of the said 





    case are concerned, it is required to be noted that IOD and OC were already 

    issued in favour of the petitioner of that petition for construction of building and 

    the same were granted by the Corporation after the petitioner therein produced 

    a letter dated 23rd  January, 2009 signed by the Administrative Officer, Central 


    1 AIR 1975 SC 919
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -34-                                   WP No. 2859 of 2006
Ordnance   Depot   giving   no   objection   to   the   sanction   of   the   building   plan 




                                                                                         
    submitted by the petitioner. Subsequently it was pointed out that the said letter 




                                                                 
    was forged letter and the permission which was granted was withdrawn. The 

    action was challenged before this Court. The Division Bench in its judgment has 

    noted the fact that earlier a notification in relation to the defence establishment 




                                                                
    was   actually   issued   by   the   Collector   but   it   was   subsequently   cancelled.
Observing the said aspect, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that no 




                                                   
    notification, therefore, was in existence which was earlier issued. The Division 
                                
    Bench, therefor,e held that refusal of development permission on the basis of the 

    instructions  given by the State Government to to grant development permission 
                               
    without NOC from the defence is not just and proper especially when statutory 

    enactment is occupying the field i.e.
Works of  Defence Act
, the Government may 
       


    not   have   the   power   to   issue   such   instructions   in   respect   of   the   defence 
    



    establishment   wherein   there   was   no   notification   as   contemplated   by   the 

    provisions of the said Act. The Division Bench gave certain directions after taking 





    an overall view of the matter.  In the aforesaid case,  no law has been laid down 

    by the Division Bench in its unreported judgment.  In any case, on going through 

    the aforesaid judgment, we are of the opinion that  no law has been laid down 





    by this Court nor provisions of Section 46 of the MRTP Act nor D.C.
Regulation 

    16
were under consideration of the Division Bench. It, therefore, cannot be said 

    that any law has been laid down by the Division Bench while making certain 

    passing observations in the judgment. In the instant case, it is required to   be
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -35-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
noted   that   under   Section   154   of   the   MRTP   Act,   the   State   Government   is 




                                                                                          
    authorised   to   issue  directions   to   the    planning  authority.   The   said   provisions 




                                                                  
    have already been quoted above.  On the basis of the same, the State has issued 

    instructions on 4th  November, 2010 which read as under:
"                   Govt. Of Maharashtra
                                No. CRZ-2010/2634/C.N. 421/10/
               (Part-2)/UD-12
                                Urban Development Dept. 




                                                   
                                Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032.
                                  
                                 Date: 4th November, 2010
               To
               The Commissioner of Mahapalika,
                                 
               Brihanmumbai Mahanagarpalika,
               Mumbai-400 001.
       


                               Sub:   Regarding   development   permissions 
               sanction        in the area of Brihanmumbai Mahanagarpalika 
    



               by              various  Planning   Authorities/Special   Planning  
                               Authority. 
               Sir,





                           MMRDA, MIDC, SRA etc. Bodies are working as
Planning   Authority/Special   Planning   Authority   other   than 
               Brihanmumbai   Mahanagarpalika   in   the   area   of 
               Brihanmumbai Mahanagarpalika. To maintain uniformity in 





               the said planning   authority, the following instructions are 
               passed.
1. The   sanctioned   plans   of   CZMP   in   the   area   of 
                         Brihanmumbai   Mahanagarpalika   shall   be   made 
                         available immediately upto their field of activities to 
                         the   concerned   planning   authority/special   planning 
                         authority.  The said action should be completed upto 
                         date 30/11/2010.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -36-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
2. The xerox copies of circulars/orders received in view 




                                                                                             
                      of   CRZ   from   Urban   Development   Department, 
                      Environment Department of State Government, also 
                      Central   &   Forest   Environment   Department   may   be 




                                                                    
                      made   available   immediately   to   all   Planning 
                      Authorities/Special   Planning   Authority   working   in 
                      the area of Brihanmumabi Mahanagarpalika.
3. Before   sanctioning   any   development   permission   in 




                                                                   
                      the   area   of  Brihanmumbai   Mahanagarpalika,   firstly 
                      obtain   No   Objection   certificate   from   them     of 
                      Defence, Army, Navy or Security body lying in that 
                      region or nearly region.
It is requested to you as per order given to me 
                        to do implementation of said instructions urgently.
ig                                       Sd/-
                                                                              G.M. Wajpe,
                                                                             Desk Officer."
In   our   view,   such   direction   can   certainly   be   given   under   Section   154   of   the 
          


    MRTP Act and the State Government  is empowered to give such direction under 
       



    the aforesaid provision and, therefore, it cannot be said that such instruction is 

    administrative instructions or executive fiat and it is not binding on the planning 





    authority.
32.            Mr. Khambata, learned Additional Solicitor General, has relied upon 

    various decisions to substantiate his say.  He has relied upon the decision of the 





    Supreme Court in the case of
S.N. Rao and others vs. State of Maharashtra
and  

    others1.  In paragraphs 7 and 8, it has been  observed by the Supreme Court as 

    under:
1 AIR 1988 SC 712
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                    -37-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
"7.     In   allowing   the   appeal   of   the   respondent   No.   5   and 




                                                                                        
          directing 924 sanction of the development plan, the respondent 
          No. 2 observed that in view of the clear provisions of
sections 
          46
and
31(6)
of the Act and having regard to the position that 




                                                                
          in the sanctioned plan of 1966, the said land was included in 
          the residential zone and no proposal to exclude it therefrom in 
          the   draft   revised   development   plan   had   been   published,   the 
          Municipal   Commissioner   was   not   justified   in   rejecting   the 
          application   for   approval   of   the   plan   submitted   by   the 




                                                               
          respondent   No.  5   on  the   ground   that  the   Bombay  Municipal 
          Corporation had decided to revise the 1966 Development Plan.
We   have   already   referred   to
section   46
of   the   Act   which 
          provides   that   the   Planning   Authority   in   considering   the 




                                                 
          application   for   permission   shall   have   due   regard   to   the 
          provisions of any draft or final plan or proposals published by 
                              
          means   of   notice   submitted   or   sanctioned   under   the   Act.   It 
          seems   that   the   respondent   No.   2   was   of   the   view   that   the 
          Planning Authority could only take into its consideration any 
          draft or  final   plan  or   proposal  which   had  been published   by 
                             
          means   of   notice   or   sanctioned   under   the   Act   as   provided   in
section   46
.   There   is,   in   our   opinion,   some   force   in   the 
          contention made by Mr. Kalsekar, learned Counsel appearing 
          on   behalf   of   the   appellants,   that   the   respondent   No.   2   has 
       

          misunderstood the provisions of
section 46
. It is submitted by 
          the   learned   Counsel   that   the   Municipal   Corporation   was 
          entitled to take into consideration other relevant facts including 
    



          the   contemplated   revision   of   the   plan,   apart   from   those 
          mentioned   in
section   46
.
In   support   of   his   contention,   the 
          learned Counsel has placed reliance on an unreported decision 
          of a  learned  Single  Judge  of  the  Bombay High  Court in
Life 





          Insurance   Corporation   of   India   and   Another   v.   Municipal 
          Corporation of Greater Bombay and Others
, Writ Petition No. 
          2944   of   1932   disposed   of   on   6.3.1984.   In   that   case,   a 
          development   application   was   rejected   by   the   Municipal 
          Corporation on the ground that the property was proposed to 





          be reserved for public purposes or for recreational ground in 
          the   draft   revised   development   plan,   and   the   High   Court 
          repelled the challenge to the decision taking the view that even 
          the proposed revision could be taken into account as one of the 
          relevant factors.
8.    There can be no doubt that if there be any other material 
          or relevant fact,
section 46
does not stand in the way of such 
          material or fact being considered by the Municipal Corporation 
          for the grant or refusal to grant sanction of any development
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -38-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
plan. In the unreported decision of the High Court, the relevant 




                                                                                           
             fact   that   was   taken   into   consideration   was   the   draft   revised 
             development plan, even though the plan was not published. In 
             the   instant   case,   however,   at   the   time   the   Municipal 




                                                                   
             Commissioner  rejected  the  plan  submitted   by the  respondent 
             No.   5,   there   was   no   draft   revised   development   plan   in 
             existence.   It  was  in contemplation.  If   there   had   been  such   a 
             plan,   the   Municipal   Commissioner   would   be   entitled   to   rely 
             upon   the   same   in   rejecting   the   plan   submitted   by   the 




                                                                  
             respondent No.5. But, as there was no such draft revised plan 
             as has been stated before this Court even by the Counsel for the 
             Municipal   Corporation,   the   Municipal   Commissioner   was   not 
             justified in merely relying upon a proposal for the preparation 




                                                    
             of a draft revised plan. An order rejecting a development plan 
             submitted   by   the   owner   of   the   land   should   be   supported   by 
                                 
             some concrete material. In the absence of any such material, it 
             will be improper to reject the plan on the ground that there is a 
             proposal for revision of the draft plan or that such a revision is 
             under contemplation. We are, therefore, of the view that the 
                                
             ground for rejecting the plan submitted by the respondent No. 
             5 was not tenable and the appellate authority was justified in 
             allowing the appeal."
33.           Mr. Khambata has also strongly relied upon the decision in the case 

    of
Bayer India Ltd.
(supra) which we have
referred to above
.   He submitted that 





    in view of the same, the planning authority was justified in calling for certain 

    more information.
He has also relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in 

    the   case   of
F.B.   Taraporawala   and   others   vs.   Bayer   India   Ltd.
(supra)   and 





    submits that since the review judgment has not been disturbed , the same is 

    binding on this Court.
34.           Mr. Khambata also relied upon the decision of the Division Bench of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -39-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
this Court in the case of
Akbar Travel of India (Pvt.) Ltd. vs. Union of India and  




                                                                                            
    others
delivered in Writ Petition (L) No. 656 of 2009.   In paragraph 31,   the 




                                                                    
    Division Bench has observed thus:
"31.  We cannot transgress the limits of writ jurisdiction by sitting 
             in   judgment   over   the   actions   of   Intelligence   Agencies.     These 




                                                                   
             agencies are manned by experts, who are in the best position to 
             judge   the   security   interests.   Ultimately,   sensitive   and   vital 
             installations have to be safeguarded and protected from entry of 
             persons who are considered to be undesirable and a security risk. 
             Precisely,   such   are   the   inputs   in   the   reports   which   have   been 




                                                     
             received and if the   Bureau has acted upon the same, then, we 
             cannot sit in judgment over their decision. The writ Court does 
                                  
             not possess any expertise in such cases. The Court cannot indulge 
             in   guess   work   and   hold   that   the   inputs   do   not   endanger   the 
             security   of   the   Airport   nor   public   interest   demand   that   the 
                                 
             ground   handling   operations   of   the   petitioner   be   prohibited. 
             These   are   matters   which   are   better   left   to   the   authorities   in 
             charge of security of the vital installations as they are in charge 
             of   laying   down   standards   and   norms   for   protecting   and 
             safeguarding them. They act in public interest and when no mala 
       


             fides are alleged, their actions ought not be interfered."
Relying on the same, it is submitted by Mr. Khambata that once the competent 

    authority     i.e.   Navy   has   found   that   the   apprehension   of   security,   this   Court 





    cannot sit in appeal over the judgment of the said authority.
35.           Mr. Khambata also relied upon a decision of the Delhi High Court in 

    the case of
Federation of Indian Airlines and others vs. Union of India
delivered in 

    W.P (C) No. 8004 of 2010  on 4th March, 2011.  In paragraph 93, the Division 

    Bench has observed thus:
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -40-                                      WP No. 2859 of 2006
" 93.     The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners 
           is that the security facet has been introduced as a subterfuge to 




                                                                    
           curtail the commercial interests of the petitioners and gradually 
           destroy their existence. Per contra, the submission of the learned 
           Solicitor General is that strong steps have been taken to regulate, 
           protect and oversee the security measures regard being had   to 




                                                                   
           the  global  phenomena  and  the  security lapses  that have  taken 
           place at the airports. The factum of security cannot be gone into 
           by court of  law  and  more  so  when specific  aspects have  been 
           dwelled  upon  and   delved   into   by the  Bureau  of  Civil  Aviation 
           Security.   The   security   of   a   country   is   paramount.   It   is   in   the 




                                                    
           interest   of   the   nation.   There   is   no   question   of   any   kind   of 
           competition   between   the   commercial   interest   and   the   security 
                                
           spectrum. The plea that in the name of security the commercial 
           interest of the petitioners is infringed or abridged does not merit 
           consideration and in any case this Court cannot sit in appeal over 
                               
           the same. The individual interests of the petitioners must yield to 
           the larger public interest. Judged by these parameters and the 
           authorities which we have referred to hereinabove that lay down 
           the test under
Article 14
and the role of court while dealing with 
           policy decisions of the  State, we do  not remotely perceive  the 
       

           same to be arbitrary or unreasonable. It cannot be said that it is 
           not   based   on   well   defined   grounds.   The   very   purpose   of 
    



           perceptible   and   does   not   suffer   from   the   vice   of 
           unreasonableness.   Therefore,   we   hold   that   the   circular,   as   a 
           policy decision, is not arbitrary and unreasonable to invite the 
           frown of the said limb of
Article 14
of the Constitution."
I
36.         Mr. Khambata also relied upon the decision of  a Division Bench of 





    this Court in Writ Petition (L) No. 1105 of 2011 (
Narangs International Hotels  

    Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India and others
), decided on 17th June, 2011 wherein this 

    Court has observed in para 11 thus:
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -41-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
"   11.   Having   considered   the   rival   contentions,   we   are   of   the 




                                                                                            
             opinion that this is a case where this Court cannot interfere with 
             the impugned order which rejects the security clearance on the 
             basis of the report of the Intelligence Bureau. We have perused 




                                                                    
             the   report   of   the   Intelligence   Bureau.     We   have   no   reason   to 
             disbelieve it. We cannot sit in appeal over the said report. This 
             case   involves   the   security   of   India   and   more   particularly   the 
             security of the Airports. Intelligence Bureau is an expert body. 
             The petitioners have not alleged any mala fides. It is impossible 




                                                                   
             to   say   that   any   extraneous   reasons   have   persuaded   the 
             Intelligence Bureau to submit the report or that Respondent 1's 
             action is mala fide."
37.
                                 
                 Considering   the   case   law   cited   by   both   the   sides,   we   are   of   the 

    opinion that whether the security point raised by Navy is merely a bogey or is a 
                                
    matter of substance is not a question which we can decide in a petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India and this aspect should be squarely left to 
       


    the defence authority. It is not for this court to pronounce the aforesaid aspect as 
    



    it is completely in the realm of the defence department. It is also not for this 

    Court to pronounce upon the decision of the   Navy that the point of defence 





    raised by them is justified or not.   During the course of hearing Mr. Khambata 

    has pointed out that in the recent past Mumbai was attacked by terrorists on 26th 

    November, 2008 and from the said experience, there is nothing wrong if the 





    Department has become wiser by taking most stringent security measures. It is 

    submitted by Mr. Khambata that even if in the past in the nearby area high rise 

    buildings were permitted to come, that cannot be taken into consideration as a 

    basis   for   refusing   permission   to   the   petitioner's   development   especially   when 

    petitioner's property is just touching and  adjoining the property of Navy wherein
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                      -42-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
important armaments and missiles are kept there.     Even VVIPs helicopters are 




                                                                                          
    landing at the said place.   This Court cannot ignore all these facts and cannot 




                                                                  
    come to the conclusion  that the theory of security is nothing but an afterthought 

    and that it should be ignored. If element of security is involved and if there is a 

    clash   between   commercial   interest   and     national   interest,   it   is   always   the 




                                                                 
    national interest which should prevail and simply because the petitioner   may 

    not be allowed to develop   its property in a particular way, this Court cannot 




                                                   
    strike down the decision of the planning authority by which they have refused to 
                                 
    grant   permission     to   the   petitioner.     The   instructions   given   by   the   State 

    Government   cannot   be   ignored   by   the   planning   authority,   which   we   have 
                                
    incorporated above. The paramount interest is the security of the country and 

    the same cannot be ignored by anyone including the planning authority, State 
       


    Government or by any other authority.   Considering the submissions made by 
    



    the counsel appearing for the parties and considering the material on record, we 

    are of the view that the security aspect   which is pressed into service by Navy 





    cannot be said to be a mere  bogey or imaginary one, as appropriate material has 

    been placed on record to  buttress the stand of the Navy.   As pointed out earlier, 

    there   are   various   provisions   in   various   enactments   which   require   that   in   a 





    particular   area   certain  high  rise   buildings  or   developmental   activities   are   not 

    permitted, especially in the vicinity of  refinery or chemical industries which may 

    affect health hazards to the persons staying nearby.
In the instant case simply 

    because construction activity is not permitted, it cannot be said that such action
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                         -43-                                     WP No. 2859 of 2006
is violative of
Article 300-A
of the Constitution of India.   Even at the cost of 




                                                                                              
    repetition, we may say that under  D.C.
Regulation 16
, no development activity 




                                                                      
    is permissible in certain eventuality which includes public interest also.   The said 

    Regulation is not challenged before us. Therefore, in our view, the Corporation 

    has  acted  within  its  authority   and  in   view   of   that   it  cannot   be   said   that  the 




                                                                     
    petitioner   is   deprived   of   its   property   without   any   authority   of   law.   Even   the 

    Supreme Court, as pointed out earlier, in the case of
S.N. Rao
(supra) has clearly 




                                                      
    held that there could be no doubt that if there be any other material or relevant 
                                  
    fact, Section 46 of the MRTP Act does not stand in the way of such material or 

    fact being considered by the Municipal Corporation for the grant or refusal to 
                                 
    grant sanction of any development plan.
In view of the same, the reliance placed 

    on the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Lok Holding (supra) 
       


    has no application to the facts of the present case.
38.           Considering  all  these  aspects,  we  do not find  any illegality in  the 





    action of the  Corporation in refusing development permission to the petitioner 

    in   a   sensitive   area   which   is   just   located   adjoining   to   INS   Shikra   and   which, 





    according to the Corporation, cannot be allowed to be developed without the 

    permission of the Navy. When Navy has refused No Objection on the ground of 

    security aspect, this Court may not interfere with such decision.
39.           In view of what is stated above, we do not find any substance in this
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
KPP                                       -44-                                    WP No. 2859 of 2006
petition. It is accordingly dismissed. Rule is discharged. No other arguments are 




                                                                                           
    canvassed     before   us   except   the   one   which   we   have   dealt   with.   The   interim 




                                                                   
    orders/directions issued from time to time stand vacated.
P. B. MAJMUDAR, J.
MRS. MRIDULA BHATKAR, J.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:01:09 :::
