Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 14 of 2019
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/145540660/

[Cites
21
, Cited by
32
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Sanjeev Kumar vs State Of Himachal Pradesh And Another on 19 July, 2019
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH,
               SHIMLA




                                                                              .
Cr.MMO No.387/2019
Date of decision : 19th July, 2019





    Sanjeev Kumar
                                                                   ... Petitioner.
Versus

    State of Himachal Pradesh and another




                                                                   ...Respondents
    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 No.

    For the Petitioner        :      Mr. Vivek Sharma and Mr. Varun Chauhan,
                                     Advocates.
For the Respondent :             Mr. Ashwani K. Sharma, and Mr. Nand Lal Thakur,
                                     Additional Advocate Generals, for the State.
Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Advocate, for Respondent
                                     No.2/ complainant.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge





                      The present petition is under
Section 482
of the Code of

    Criminal Procedurefor quashing of F.I.R. No. 221/2018, dated





    19.11.2018, registered at Police Station, Dharamshala, District

    Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, under
Sections 279
,
337
&
338
of the

    Indian Penal Code and
Sections 181
&
185
of the Motor Vehicles Act

    and for quashing of all consequent criminal proceedings.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...2...
2.           The present F.I.R. stands registered on the basis of




                                                                    .
information given by Ms. Rekha Devi, who has been arrayed as





respondent No. 2 in the present petition.
FACTS:
3.           The gist of the entire case is as follows:
(a)     The present FIR was registered on the basis of





            information given by Ms. Rekha Devi (respondent No.2),
            to    Police   Station,   Dharamshala,     District    Kangra,
            Himachal Pradesh.
(b)

                    She has stated in her complaint that on

            19.11.2018, she alongwith her sister Nidhi, had gone to
            JBT College, Dharamshala. At around 1:15 p.m., when
            they reached near the gate of Central University, then


            one car came from the back side and hit her. Due to
            impact, she fell down. At that time, some University
            students came there and provided her first aid.
(c)     She further submitted that she read the number
            of the car as: HP-14B-3689 and came to know that the





            driver was Sanjeev Kumar, son of Shri Sohan Lal, the
            present petitioner. She further submitted that the driver





            was under the influence of liquor.
(d)     The complainant received injuries on her leg and
            left shoulder due to the impact of the accident.
(e)     The complainant      has put in appearance and
            made a statement on oath that she has compromised
            the entire matter with the petitioner. She stated that the
            accident took place due to error in judgment of the road
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...3...
situation by the driver and that it was unintentional.       She
                 further stated that the accused/petitioner was neither rash




                                                                          .
nor negligent. She declared that this compromise has been





                 entered by her without any coercion, duress, pressure or any
                 wrong tactics. She stated that she has made the statement





                 in her full conscious state of mind and that she is aware of
                 the fact that once this statement is recorded then it will result
                 in closure of the present case to which she has no objection.
REASONING:
4.           The following aspects would be relevant to arrive at a

    final conclusion in this petition:-
(a)          The injured person has amicably settled the
                   matter with the accused and specifically stated in her
                   statement that this compromise is without any coercion,



                   duress, pressure or any wrong tactics.
(b)          A compromise has been placed on record vide




                   Annexure P-2. As per the compromise, the accused has
                   incurred all the medical expenses of the complainant and





                   agreed to pay an amount of Rs.2,75,000/- to the
                   complainant.
(c)          The complainant also undertook not to file any
                   civil suit, MACT petition or any other legal proceedings
                   against the petitioner/accused.
(d)          The respondent No.2, as per the terms of the
                   compromise, has settled all such claims by way of compromise
                   deed Annexure P-2. Therefore, it cannot be said that this money
                   of compensation amounts to buying the justice.
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...4...
(e)        The respondent is also represented by Mr. Gaurav
              Sharma, learned counsel, who did not dispute such compromise.
.
(f)        The entire facts and evidence, point out              that





              accident just happened due to factors beyond the control of
              humans and not because of the fault of any of the driver,





              certainly not because of the petitioner/accused.
(g)        Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through
              District Magistrate as a normal procedure. However, there is
              inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of





              the Code of Criminal Procedure to intervene in such kind of
              matter. It is not the requirement of law that the cancellation
              has to be approved only through the District Magistrate.
Inherent Jurisdiction of High Court under
Section 482
of the

              Code of Criminal Procedure can always be exercised,
              depending upon the facts and circumstances of each and
              every case.
(h) Even if, this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to
              maintain the stand which they have taken in this




              compromise, which is likely to result in the acquittal of the
              accused.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
5.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H. Chanchani

and another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the

determination of the question as regards the propriety of the order of

the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need not
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...5...
necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court




                                                                .
observed thus :-
".... .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to us
              inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to





              plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no
              sufficient material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred
              from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic earlier)





              point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the
              offence and summons the accused to appear to contend
              that the very issuance of the order of taking cognizance is

              invalid on the ground that no offence can be said to have

              been made out on the allegations made in the complaint
              petition. It has been held in a number of cases that power
              under Section 482 has to be exercised sparingly and in the



              interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to
              continue even where the allegations in the complaint petition




              do not make out any offence would be tantamount to an
              abuse of the process of court, and therefore, there cannot





              be any dispute that in such case power under section 482 of
              the Code can be exercised."
6.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd
.
and another, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as

under:-
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...6...
"8.   ....    ....     ....There is no hard and fast rule that the
             objection as to cognizability of offence and maintainability of




                                                                       .
the complaint should be allowed to be raised only at the time





             of framing the charge."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
7.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a

three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of the
              High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case
              either to prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to

              secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted

              against an accused person must be tried under the provisions of the
              Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said
              proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or
              expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the


              exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
              categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be
              exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be cases where it




              may be possible for the High Court to take the view that the institution
              or continuance of criminal proceedings against an accused person may





              amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of
              the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the
              criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to





              have been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears
              that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the said
              proceeding, the High Court would be justified in quashing the
              proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may, for
              instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise
              where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint,
              even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety,
              do not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question of
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...7...
appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the
        complaint or the First Information Report to decide whether the offence




                                                                 .
alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate for the





        High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the
        process of the criminal Court to be issued against the accused person.
        A third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High





        Court can be successfully invoked may also arise. In cases falling
        under this category the allegations made against the accused person
        do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence
        adduced in support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or





        manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases,
        it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where
        there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
        manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and cases

        where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not

        support the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S.
        561-A, the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether
        the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the function of the
        trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to



        invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a
        reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against
        the accused would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature




        and scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A
        in the matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of





        the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G.
        Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen





        Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun
        LR 54 : (
AIR 1954 Punj 193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu
        Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama
        Subramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...8...
8.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao
.
Chandrojirao Angre, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges bench of the





Hon'ble Supreme Court holds:-
"7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution





             at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be
             applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted
             allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is





             also for the court to take into consideration any special
             features which appear in a particular case to consider
             whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit

             a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the

             court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where
             in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction
             is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be


             served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the
             court may while taking into consideration the special facts of
             a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at




             a preliminary stage."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
9.         A three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on

quashing on account of compromise/compounding, in the following

terms:-
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...9...
"53. Section 482 of the Code, as its very language suggests,
     saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by




                                                        .
virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the





     process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
     justice. It begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which





     means that the provision is an overriding provision. These
     words leave no manner of doubt that none of the provisions
     of the Code limits or restricts the inherent power. The





     guideline for exercise of such power is provided in Section
     482 itself i.e., to prevent abuse of the process of any court
     or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. As has been
     repeatedly stated that Section 482 confers no new powers

     on High Court; it merely safeguards existing inherent powers

     possessed by High Court necessary to prevent abuse of the
     process of any Court or to secure the ends of justice. It is
     equally well settled that the power is not to be resorted to if



     there is specific provision in the Code for the redress of the
     grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be exercised very




     sparingly and it should not be exercised as against the
     express bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the





     Code.
.....57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the
     ground of settlement between an offender and victim is not
     the same thing as compounding of offence. They are
     different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the
     power of compounding of offences given to a court under
     Section 320 is materially different from the quashing of
     criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...10...
inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a
     criminal court is circumscribed by the provisions contained




                                                        .
in Section 320 and the court is guided solely and squarely





     thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by
     the High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal





     proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the material
     on record as to whether the ends of justice would justify
     such exercise of power although the ultimate consequence





     may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having
     regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and

     victim   has   been   settled   although    offences      are    not

     compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, continuation of
     criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice
     in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is


     put to an end and peace is restored; securing the ends of
     justice being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes
     are acts which have harmful effect on the public and consist




     in wrong doing that seriously endangers and threatens well-
being of society and it is not safe to leave the crime- doer
     only because he and the victim have settled the dispute





     amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet
     certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
     or without permission of the Court. In respect of serious
     offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of
     mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of
     moral turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of
     Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...11...
while working in that capacity, the settlement between
              offender and victim can have no legal sanction at all.
.
However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and





              predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil,
              mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or such like





              transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony,
              particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute,
              where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender and





              victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
              irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been
              made compoundable, the High Court may within the
              framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal

              proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that

              on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood
              of offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
              proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice



              shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and not
              exhaustive. Each case will depend on its own facts and no




              hard and fast category can be prescribed."
10.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur

and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr., Criminal Appeal No. 1723 of





2017, decided on 4.10.2017, a Three Judges Bench of Hon'ble

Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for quashing of FIR,

which are reproduced as follows:
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...12...
"15. The broad principles which emerge from the
     precedents on the subject, may be summarised in the




                                                            .
following propositions :
(i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the
     High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any





     court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision
     does not confer new powers. It only recognises and
     preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
     quash a First Information Report or a criminal
     proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been
     arrived at between the offender and the victim is not the

     same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of

     compounding an offence. While compounding an
     offence, the power of the court is governed by the
     provisions of
Section 320
of the Code of Criminal



     Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section
     482   is   attracted   even   if   the   offence     is   non-
compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding





     or complaint should be quashed in exercise of its
     jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court must





     evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the
     exercise of the inherent power;
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a
     wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to
     secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of
     the process of any Court;
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...13...
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
     Information Report should be quashed on the ground




                                                          .
that the offender and victim have settled the dispute,





     revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances of
     each case and no exhaustive elaboration of principles





     can be formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and
     while dealing with a plea that the dispute has been





     settled, the High Court must have due regard to the
     nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious
     offences involving mental depravity or offences such as
     murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be

     quashed though the victim or the family of the victim

     have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
     speaking, not private in nature but have a serious
     impact upon society. The decision to continue with the



     trial in such cases is founded on the overriding element
     of public interest in punishing persons for serious




     offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may





     be criminal cases which have an overwhelming or
     predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a





     distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the inherent
     power to quash is concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
     commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
     transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in
     appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties
     have settled the dispute;
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...14...
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the
             criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise




                                                                     .
between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is





             remote and the continuation of a criminal proceeding
             would cause oppression and prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
             propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences
             involving the financial and economic well-being of the





             state have implications which lie beyond the domain of
             a mere dispute between private disputants. The High
             Court would be justified in declining to quash where the

             offender is involved in an activity akin to a financial or

             economic fraud or misdemeanour. The consequences
             of the act complained of upon the financial or economic
             system will weigh in the balance."
11.          In the present case, the offences are not compoundable




under
section 320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. However, in

view of the entire facts and circumstances of the case, the inherent





jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure can





be invoked to quash the FIR and subsequent proceedings.
12.          A Full Bench of Madhya Bharat High Court, in State v.
Gulam Meer (Madhya Bharat), AIR 1956 (Madhya Bharat) 141, holds

as under:-
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...15...
.
"16. An offence under
Section 279
, I.P.C. is





                 distinct from an offence under Section 337 or
Section 338
, I.P.C. and, therefore, a person





                 convicted of an offence under Section 337 or
Section 338
, I.P.C. can also be convicted for
                 an offence under
Section 279
, I.P.C. If,





                 however, the two offences are committed in
                 the same transaction,
Section 71
, I.P.C. will
                 govern the assessment of punishment."
13.         A Co-ordinate Bench of this High Court, in
Vinod Kumar

Vs. State of HP
in Cr. M.M.O No. 14 of 2019 decided on 8-01-2019

held as under:
"11.            In the case at hand also, the offences




            alleged against the accused do not involve offences





            of mental depravity or of heinous nature like rape,
            dacoity or murder and as such, with a view to





            maintain harmony and peace in society, this court
            deems it appropriate to quash the FIR as well as
            consequential proceedings, especially keeping in
            view      the    fact   that    the     complainant          has
            compromised the matter and he is no longer
            interested      in   carrying   on     with     the     criminal
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...16...
proceedings against the accused. Otherwise also,
            possibility of conviction in the case is bleak and




                                                               .
remote, since complainant himself is not interested
            in carrying on with the criminal proceedings initiated
            at his behest."
14.         In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as

judicial precedents, a few of which have been mentioned hereinabove,





I am of the considered opinion that continuation of these proceedings

will only cause unnecessary burden on the trial Courts but in all

likelihood is going to cause distressing hardship on both the victim as

well as the accused, without resulting into any fruitful purpose

whatsoever. Moreover, our trial Courts are already burdened with so



many cases and it will be a total wastage of the valuable time of the

Courts. If these types of proceedings are permitted to be continued




and the accused are prosecuted, it will serve no purpose whatsoever.
Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that this is a fit case where





the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the above mentioned

FIR and consequent proceedings.
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...17...
15.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State
of




                                                               .
Himachal Pradesh (SC); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court





holds as under:-
"47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is





              concerned,    the    appellants     came     to    this     Court
              challenging the order of cognizance only because of the
              reason that matter was already pending as the





              appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against
              the order of the High Court rejecting their petition for
              quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to

              these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been

              entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs
              to be quashed, order of cognizance would automatically


              stands vitiated."
CONSEQUENCES:
16.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3





SCR 639, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
"The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when





              parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and
              weave a sense of fellowship or reunion."
17.     Consequently, this petition is allowed and the F.I.R. No.

221/2018,   dated    19.11.2018,     registered    at     Police        Station,
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
...18...
Dharamshala, District Kangra, Himachal Pradesh for commission of




                                                                 .
offences punishable under
Sections 279
,
337
&
338
of the Indian





Penal Code and
Sections 181
&
185
of the Motor Vehicles Act, is

quashed.      Since FIR has been quashed, all the consequential





proceedings, if any, are also quashed and set aside.
18.           The bail bonds are accordingly discharged.
Petition is allowed. All pending application(s), if any, also

stand disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),

                                                   Judge.
19th July, 2019(KS)
::: Downloaded on - 29/09/2019 00:59:52 :::HCHP
