Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 7
AIR 2007
Citation: SCC 106
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/152062340/

[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Sri Prasad S Rajanalli vs Sri B Shiva Kumar on 5 January, 2023
Author:
P.N.Desai
Bench:
P.N.Desai
-1-
                                               CRL.A No. 169 of 2012




              IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

                    DATED THIS THE 5TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2023

                                    BEFORE
                       THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE P.N.DESAI
                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 169 OF 2012
             BETWEEN:

             SRI. PRASAD S. RAJANALLI
             S/O. SRI. R.L.S. SETTY,
             AGED ABOUT 48 YEARS
             R/AT NO.175, 2ND CROSS
             AECS LAYOUT, RMV II STAGE
             SANJAYA NAGARA
             BANGALORE-560094

                                                        ...APPELLANT
             (BY SRI. G.S.VENKAT SUBBARAO.,ADVOCATE)
             AND:

             SRI. B. SHIVA KUMAR
             S/O. SRI. BASAPPA
             AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS
             R/O.NAGARAKATTE GRAMA
             KADAJJI POST
Digitally
signed by
             DAVANAGERE TQ & DIST
NAGARATHNA
M
Location:                                              ...RESPONDENT
HIGH COURT
OF
KARNATAKA    (BY SRI. HAREESH BHANDARY T.,ADVOCATE)

                  THIS CRL.A. FILED U/S.378(4) CR.P.C BY THE ADV.,
             FOR THE APPELLANT PRAYING THAT THIS HON'BLE COURT
             MAY BE PLEASED TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT OF
             ACQUITTAL DT.28.12.2011 PASSED BY THE XII ADDL. CMM.,
             BANGALORE IN C.C.NO.2427/2009 - ACQUITTING THE
             RESPONDENT/ACCUSED FOR THE OFFENCE P/U/S 138 OF N.I.
             ACT.
                                     -2-
                                                CRL.A No. 169 of 2012




     THIS APPEAL, COMING ON FOR FURTHER ARGUMENTS,
THIS DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

                             JUDGMENT
This appeal arises out of the judgment of acquittal dated

28.12.2011 passed in C.C.No.2427/2009 by XII Additional

Chief Metropolitan Magistrate at Bengaluru City, for the

offences       punishable   under
Section     138
of     Negotiable

Instruments Act, 1881, (for short hereinafter referred to as

'
N.I. Act
.).
2.       The   appellant   was      the   complainant    and   the

respondent was the accused before the Trial Court and they

will be referred as per their respective ranks held before the

Trial Court for the sake of convenience in this appeal.
3.       The complainant filed a complaint before the Trial

Court for the offences punishable under
Section 138
of N.I.

Act against the accused. It is alleged by the complainant that

the complainant and accused were friends since many years.

On the basis of the said friendship accused approached the

complainant for financial assistance on 09.5.2008 for lending

a loan of Rs.12,00,000/- stating that he will pay the same in
-3-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
two weeks. Accordingly, the complainant lend a sum of

Rs.12,00,000/- to the accused. Towards the discharge of the

said   legal   liability,   the   accused         issued    cheque    bearing

No.0798186 dated 26.05.2008 for Rs.12,00,000/- drawn on

Chitradurga     Gramina       Bank,     Rampura,         Davangere     Taluk.

When     the    complainant       presented        the     said   cheque   for

encashment, the same came to be disnourned with an

endorsement 'insufficient funds' in the account of accused.

Then the complainant got issued statutory notice to the

accused dated 02.07.2008 through RPAD. The said notice was

served on the accused. But the accused neither gave reply to

the    said    notice   nor    repaid       the    amount.        Hence,   the

complainant filed a complaint.
4.      In order to prove his case, the complainant got

examined himself as PW.1 and got marked nine documents as

Exs.P1 to P9. On behalf of respondent/accused, accused got

examined himself as DW.1 and one Jagadish B.N., got

examined as DW.2 and got marked two documents as Exs.D1

and D2. After hearing the arguments, learned ACMM has

acquitted the accused. Hence, this appeal.
-4-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
5.   Heard Sri. G.S.Venkat Subba Rao, learned counsel

for the appellant and Sri. Hareesh Bhandary, T, learned

counsel for the respondent.
6.   Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the

Trial Court has not properly appreciated the evidence on

record. Therefore, the impugned judgment of acquittal needs

to be set aside. The learned counsel further argued that the

Trial   Court   has   not   at   all    framed   proper   points   for

consideration and not considered the fact that as to whether

the ingredients of
Section 138
of N.I. Act are proved or not.

The Trial Court never referred in its judgment regarding the

presumption arising under
Sections 118
and
139
of N.I. Act.

In spite of complainant proving his financial capacity, only

based on the defence evidence of accused, acquitted the

accused, which has resulted in miscarriage of justice. The

Trial Court failed to consider the fact that the accused has

failed to rebut the presumption by adducing legally admissible

evidence. Learned counsel argued that the Trial Court has not

properly read the evidence of the complainant as a whole, but

only on considering the statement of the complainant that he

has paid the amount through a cheque has dismissed the
-5-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
complaint which is not correct. The learned counsel argued

that   the    appellant       and   accused     are   friends    and      the

complainant himself withdrawn the amount through a 'self

cheque'      which      is    evident    from   Ex.D2,     whereby        the

complainant has withdrawn a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- on

09.05.2008 and given to the accused on the same day.

Simply because, the complainant has stated that the amount

paid through cheque and given to the accused, does not mean

that amount was paid through cheque to the accused, but it is

his self drawn cheque, which was encashed by him and paid

to the accused.              In that context, the evidence of the

complainant has to be appreciated.
7.     Learned counsel argued that the defence of the

respondent/accused that he has given the cheque as a

security     to   one    R.B.Rehmathulla        who   is   his   friend    in

connection with chit business run by the complainant and the

complainant has misused the same. But the said Rehmathulla

was not examined on behalf of the respondent/accused.

Learned counsel argued that the complainant has discharged

his initial burden and accused has failed to rebut the said

presumption by preponderance of probability. But the Trial
-6-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
Court wrongly acquitted the accused. With these main

arguments, learned counsel prayed to convict the accused

and to allow the petition.   In support of his arguments the

learned counsel relied on the following decisions:
1)    Rohitbhai Jivanlal Patel Vs. State of Gujarat and
           another - (2019) 18 SCC 106
2)    Shree Daneshwari Traders Vs. Sanjay Jain and
            another
- (2019) 16 SCC 83
3)    Bir Singh Vs. Mukesh Kumar
- (2019) 4 SCC 197
4)    Sumeti Vij Vs. Paramount Tech Fab Industries
-
2021 SCC Online SC 201
5)    M/s.
Kalamani Tex & Anr. Vs. P.Balasubramanian
- Crl.A.No.123/2021 dated 10.02.2021
6)    P. Rasiya Vs. Abdul Nazer and another
- (2022)
            SCC Online SC 1131
8.   Against   this,   the     learned   counsel   for   the

respondent/accused argued that no where either in the

complaint or in the legal notice, the complainant has stated

about the mode of payment. No documents are produced to

show that as to whether the amount paid by way of cash or

through cheque. Therefore, there is no proof for payment of
-7-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
consideration amount. The learned                counsel drawn attention

of the Court to the cross-examination of complainant, wherein

he has clearly stated that the amount was paid through

cheque. But no documents are produced to prove that the

accused has issued cheque to the complainant. The accused

has given his defence evidence and has examined the

manager of the bank and got secured cheque of the

complainant through which the complainant has withdraw the

amount and on that cheque also there is no signature of the

accused stating that the amount is paid to the accused.

Therefore, in the absence of any such signature of the

accused appearing on the said cheque, the Court cannot

presume that the payment was made through cheque to the

accused. Therefore, the complainant has failed to prove the

mode of payment through cheque.                  On the other hand, the

accused has given probable defence by leading his defence

evidence   that    there      was   a     chit    transaction   with     one

Rehamuthulla and the complainant and in that connection at

the   request     of   said   Rehamathulla,         as   the    surety    to

Rehamathulla, the accused has issued a said cheque for
-8-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
Rs.12,00,000/- to the Rehamathulla. The complainant has

misused the same and filed this case.
9.     Learned   counsel     further     argued   that,   the

complainant has failed to prove as to how the payment was

made and has not produced any document to show that the

accused has received any such amount and there is no

necessity to the accused to borrow such huge amount. The

defence set up by the respondent/accused is probable one. On

the other hand, the complainant has failed to prove that the

accused borrowed any amount from him. Therefore, there is

no question of any legally recoverable debt due by the

accused.
In support of his arguments, learned counsel relied

on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Kamala S. Vs. Vidyadharan M.J.
- AIR 2007 SC (SUPP)

1142.     Further the learned counsel argued that the Trial

Court has appreciated the defence evidence of the accused in

a proper perspective and has rightly come to the conclusion

that the complainant has failed to discharge his initial burden

and the complainant has failed to prove that he has lend the

amount to the accused. Therefore, the Trial Court has rightly

acquitted the accused and dismissed the appeal. With these
-9-
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
main arguments learned counsel prayed to dismiss the

appeal.
10.   I have perused the judgment of acquittal passed

by the Trial Court and other material placed on record.
11.   Learned ACMM in his judgment has rasied three

points for consideration which are as under:
1)    Whether complainant proves that accused
     has issued three cheques in different dates so as
     to discharge the legal debt of Rs.12,00,000/- in
     favour of the Complainant which came to be
     bounced?
2)    Whether complainant further proves that
     she issued legal notice to accused which came to
     be served on her. Despite the accused has not
     paid cheque amount. Thereby accused committed
     an offence punishable under
Sec.138
of N.I Act?
3)    To what order?
12.   On perusing the first point framed by the Trial

Court for consideration, it is evident that the learned ACMM

has mistook the complaint and evidence. Neither it is the

evidence of the complainant, nor it is the defence of the

accused that three cheques on different dates were issued by
- 10 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
the accused to the complainant. Therefore, the first point

framed by the Trial Court for consideration is not correct. In a

cases filed under
Section 138
of N.I. Act, firstly, the

complainant is required to prove that there was a legally

enforceable debt or liability which is recoverable by him. Then

the Court has to see whether the complainant has discharged

his initial burden, then the Court has to consider that whether

the accused has discharged his burden either by way of cross-

examining the complainant or by way of leading the defence

evidence and to ascertain who has      discharged onus casted

upon them. Instead of that, the Trial Court misdirected itself

and not framed proper points for consideration. The second

point for consideration is also regarding the service of legal

notice on the accused and no where it is stated that either

legal notice was not issued or it was served on the accused.

The   learned ACMM has misdirected himself and raised

irrelevant points for consideration and acquitted the accused.
13.   I have also perused the reasons assigned by the

learned ACMM for acquittal of the accused. The learned ACMM

has referred to the affidavit filed by the complainant, defence

of the accused and evidence of PWs.1 and 2 and referred to
- 11 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
Ex.P1/cheque. Learned ACMM has referred to the evidence of

the bank manager/DW.2 and found that the said cheque is a

self cheque of the complainant for a sum of Rs.12,00,000/-

and there is no signature of the accused/withdrawer on the

back side of the said cheque. It is only the signature of the

complainant appearing on the said cheque. The learned ACMM

has held that the complainant has failed to prove that he has

lend a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- through EX.D2-cheque. The

learned ACMM has further held at paragraph No.9 that the

accused has issued Ex.P1/cheque to one Rehamathulla who is

having a chit transaction with complainant and the same is

reiterated by the accused in his defence evidence and the

learned ACMM has held that it appears to be true facts and

referred to the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case

of
Rangappa     Vs. Mohan
reported in AIR 2010 SC 1898

and held that the complainant has failed to prove that he has

lend the amount to the accused and accused has rebutted the

presumption arising under
section 138
of N.I. Act and

acquitted the accused.
14.   I have considered the evidence on record and

perused the complaint filed before the Trial Court.
- 12 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
15.    This Court being the First Appellate Court has to

re-appreciate evidence on record.
16. As stated above, the initial burden of proving the

ingredients of
Section 138
of N.I. Act is on the complainant

only. In order to prove the same, the complainant has filed

his examination-in-chief affidavit and sworn statement,

wherein he has reiterated the complaint averments and at

paragraph No.4 of the affidavit, he has stated that on

09.05.2008, the accused borrowed a sum of Rs.12,00,000/-

and has promised to pay the same within two weeks. He has

also stated that the accused is his friend and he has

requested    for   financial   assistance    to   meet   his   legal

necessities. The complainant has stated that towards the

discharge of the said legal liability, the accused in turn has

issued a cheque bearing No.0798186 dated 26.05.2008 for a

sum of Rs.12,00,000/- and when the complainant presented

the cheque for encashment, the same came to be dishonored

with an endorsement that 'funds insufficient'. Therefore, the

complainant issued a legal notice.       Hence, he has filed the

complaint. In support of his oral evidence, he has produced
- 13 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
documents as per Exs.P1 to P9. Ex.P1 is the cheque wherein

the said cheque shows that it was issued in favour of the

complainant and it is signed by the accused.                Ex.P2 is the

bank endorsements wherein it is stated that the cheque

came to be dishonored, as the 'funds were insufficient'. Ex.P3

is the legal notice dated 02.07.2008, wherein it is stated that

the complainant has lend a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- and

issuance of cheque bearing No.0798186 by the accused and

the said cheque came to be dishonored. Ex.P3(a) is the

postal acknowledgment.          It is stated that the said notice is

served on the complaint. Ex.P4 is the certificate of posting.

Ex.P5 is the intimation issued by the bank wherein it is

stated that the cheque has come back with an endorsement

'funds insufficient'. Ex.P6 is the pass book of the complainant

wherein     the   entry    at   Ex.P6A     shows     that    a    sum    of

Rs.12,00,000/- was withdrawn through a self cheque on

9.5.2008.     From      these    documents         produced       by    the

complainant and also on perusing the examination-in-chief

affidavit and other documentary evidence, at this stage, it is

evident   that    the     complainant      has    complied       with   the

ingredients of
Section 138
of N.I. Act. From the perusal of
- 14 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
the complaint averments, oral evidence and documentary

evidence, the presumption under
Sections 118
and
139
of

N.I. Act arise in favour of holder of the cheque. The Hon'ble

Supreme Court in the above referred decisions relied on by

the learned counsel for the appellant, has discussed in detail

as to how the presumption can be rebutted. It is the settled

principles of law that the accused can rebut the said

presumption    either    by    way      of   cross-examining      the

complainant or by leading defence evidence and to show

before the Court by preponderance of probability that the

case made out by the complainant is not probable and

cannot be believed and accused defence is probable.
17. In    order     to   appreciate     the   same,   I     have

considered the cross-examination of PW.1 and it is no doubt

true that the complainant neither in his examination-in-chief

nor in complaint or legal notice has stated as to how a sum

of Rs.12,00,000/- was paid. But from Ex.P6/pass book of the

complainant,   it   is   evident     that    the   complainant    on

09.05.2008 through a self cheque has withdrawn the said

amount.
- 15 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
18.    Learned      counsel       for     the   respondent     drawn

attention   of   the    Court     to     the     cross-examination       of

PW.1/complainant       and   at   page       No.6    of   his   deposition,

PW.1/complainant has stated that the accused has approached

him and out of the friendship to meet the personal problems of

the accused, the complainant has lend the amount. The

complainant has lend a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- and he has

stated that he has lend the said sum through cheque and he

has produced the document to that effect. Further PW.1 has

stated that on the basis of cheque, he has paid a sum of

Rs.12,00,000/- to the accused. PW.1/complainant has not

taken any other document from the accused for lending the

said amount, except the cheque and it is only out of friendship,

he has lend the amount to the accused. PW.1 has stated that

he could not explain how much income, he had in the year

2008, when he lend loan to accused and he further stated that

he has to enquire his auditor about his source of income and

he has stated that he could produce documents to that effect.

PW.1 has stated that he is an income tax assessee and he can

produce documents pertaining to his assessment or income tax

returns to the Court if required. PW.1 has stated that he got
- 16 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
sufficient source of income from agriculture and estate

business. He has also stated that he has let his property on

rent basis to run factory and have sufficient source of income

from said rent also. Even PW.1 has got dry lands. PW.1 stated

that he has not produced documents pertaining to above said

source of income and he states that he would produce the

documents to that effect. A suggestion was made to PW.1 that

he has filled the cheque of accused to his convenience which is

denied by PW.1. It is suggested as accused has no capacity to

repay Rs.12,00,000/- Even accused has no property worth of

Rs.5,00,000/-. It is also suggested that he has filled the blank

cheque and filed false complaint. It is suggested that PW.1

used to lend amount and take cheque from concerned person

as security and used to misuse such blank cheques and used

to    file   false   complaint on his whims and fancies.          But

PW.1/complainant denied the all such suggestions. Then again

in the cross-examination he was confronted with Ex.P6/pass

book. The complainant denied the suggestions that he has

kept other two blank cheques of accused and the accused has

not     borrowed      any   amount     from   him   and   not   issued

Ex.P1/cheque to discharge said debt. In the further cross-
- 17 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
examination of PW.1, he has also produced his income tax

returns as per Exs.P8 and P9. Further PW.1 has denied the

suggestion that he has prepared and created Ex.P8 for the

convenience of this case by colluding with his auditor.
19.     Therefore, on perusing the evidence of PW.1 and

reasons assigned by the learned ACMM, it is evident that the

accused has not rebutted presumption in favour of complainant

and not discharged his burden in cross-examination of PW.1.

The defence evidence lead by the accused is that the cheque in

question was given by the accused as a security to one

Rehamuttala, who was the subscriber of chit business run by

the complainant and in turn the complainant has misused the

same and filed a false complaint.       With regard to the said

aspect,     while cross-examining the complainant, the accused

has neither put any suggestions regarding the same and no

such answers were elicited from the complainant. On the other

hand, contradictory suggestions were made stating that a

blank cheque was given to complainant and the complainant

has also kept other two to three cheques of accused and the

complainant has misused them. For what purpose the blank

cheque was given and why other two to three cheques were
- 18 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
given to complainant is not forthcoming. If at all the accused

has issued a blank cheque and the complainant has misused

the same, why the accused has not taken any action against

the complainant is not forthcoming. Absolutely nothing is

elicited from the cross-examination of complainant to show

that the accused has rebutted the presumption.
20.   The complainant has stated that on 09.05.2008,

he has lend the amount to the accused by withdrawing the

said   amount   through   a   self      drawn   cheque,   but   the

complainant has not issued cheque in favour of the accused

and that does not mean that the amount was not lent to the

accused. On the other hand, it is evident from Ex.P6-pass

book and Ex.P1/cheque that the complainant has withdrawn

the amount through his self cheque on 09.05.2008 and lend

to the accused. There is some force in the argument of

learned counsel of the appellant that the complainant and the

respondent being friends, out of friendship, the complainant

has withdrawn the amount and lend the same to the accused.
21.   If the cross-examination of complainant and the

defence put forth by the accused is considered, there is

absolutely nothing to show that the accused has not received
- 19 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
the said amount. If he has not received the amount, then why

he has given cheque in the name of complainant is not

forthcoming. On the other hand, totally contradictory and

inconsistent defence is set up by the accused which cannot be

believed at all.
22.   Therefore,    on     perusing   the   evidence   of   the

complainant, it is evident that the complainant has issued

legal notice which is served on the accused, but the accused

has not replied to the said notice. If at all the accused has

issued cheque to one Rehamathulla, if at all the complainant

has   misused      the   blank    cheque    issued   to   the     said

Rehamathulla, issued in his name, if at all he has issued two

or three cheques to the complainant, accused could have

replied to the legal notice issued by the complainant. Even the

legal notice is served on the accused. The notice has got its

own importance and it is the statutory notice which is to be

issued mandatorily before instituting any such complaint.
23.   I have perused the evidence adduced by the

accused. In his examination-in-chef-affidavit, he has stated

that he has not borrowed a sum of Rs.12,00,000/- from the

complainant. The accused has stated that the complainant
- 20 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
was conducting the chit business and one Rehamathulla was

the subscriber to the said chit and the chit amount was

Rs.5,00,000/- The said Rehamathulla had participated in the

chit transaction which is stated to have been conducted in the

year 2001 and he won the bid amount and at the time of

payment of chit amount, the complainant insisted for one

surety and Rehamathulla who is the close friend of accused

requested him to sign the surety, hence the accused agreed

and issued blank cheque to Rehamathulla in the year 2001

and the said cheque is misused by the complainant and he got

presented the same for encashment in the year 2008.
24.   Therefore, this defence of accused has no basis at

all.   According to the accused, the said Rehamathulla is no

more. The legal representatives if any of Rehamathulla are

examined. Accused has failed to prove that said Rehamathula

had such transaction with the complainant. When there being

no evidence placed by the accused by way of reply or by

proving the same by preponderance of probability, it is

evident that the accused has failed to rebut the presumption.
25.   It is not the defence of the accused that the hand

writing in the cheque is not his writing or signature is not his
- 21 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
signature. Therefore, an adverse inference will have to be

drawn against the accused for not producing any such

evidence to believe that the accused has rebutted the

presumption arising in favour of complainant by way of

preponderance of probability. In the cross-examination, the

accused has clearly admitted that himself and the complainant

are friends. He know the complainant since the year 2000.

Even when the complainant shifted to Bangalore his friendship

continues with him and the accused has also admitted that

the complainant used to visit him. Accused has clearly stated

that he does not know the name of chit business run by the

complainant and he has stated that the complainant was

running chit business from the year 2001 and 2003, then how

in the year 2008, the complainant filed the complaint is not

forthcoming. Accused has admitted that he has no document

to show that the complainant was running such chit business.

He again stated that he came to know about Rehamathulla

only through the complainant. On the other hand, in the

examination-in-chief, he has stated that Rehamathulal is his

friend and he cannot say when the Rehamathulla become

highest bidder in the chit and when he has taken chit amount
- 22 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
and even he cannot say when he stood as surety to the said

Rehamathulla. Again accused stated in his cross-examination

that he has not issued the cheque to Rehamathulla and this

again goes against the accused. At one instance the accused

stated that he has issued cheque to Rehamathulla. Then the

defence of the accused is that he has issued blank cheuqe to

Rehamathull is falsified and the rest of the cross-examination

of accused is one of denials.
26.   Learned counsel for the appellant has relied on the

decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
ROHITBHAI

JIVANLAL      PATEL     VS.     STATE    OF   GUJARAT        AND

ANOTHER1
and at paragraph Nos.15, 17, 18, 19.6, 20, 21

and 22 held as under:
15. So far the question of existence of basic
       ingredients for drawing of presumption under
Sections 118
and
139
the NI Act is concerned,
       apparent it is that the appellant-accused could not
       deny his signature on the cheques in question
       that had been drawn in favour of the complainant
       on a bank account maintained by the accused for
1
(2019) 18 SCC 106
- 23 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
a sum of Rs.3 lakhs each. The said cheques were
presented to the bank concerned within the period
of their validity and were returned unpaid for the
reason of either the balance being insufficient or
the account being closed. All the basic ingredients
of
Section 138
as also of
Sections 118
and
139
are apparent on the face of the record. The Trial
Court had also consciously taken note of these
facts and had drawn the requisite presumption.
Therefore, it is required to be presumed that the
cheques in question were drawn for consideration
and    the   holder    of    the      cheques    i.e.,   the
complainant received the same in discharge of an
existing debt. The onus, therefore, shifts on the
accused-appellant to establish a probable defence
so as to rebut such a presumption.
17. On the aspects relating to preponderance of
probabilities, the accused has to bring on record
such facts and such circumstances which may
lead   the   Court    to    conclude    either   that    the
consideration did not exist or that its non-
existence was so probable that a prudent man
would, under the circumstances of the case, act
upon the plea that the consideration did not exist.
This Court has, time and again, emphasized that
though there may not be sufficient negative
evidence which could be brought on record by the
accused to discharge his burden, yet mere denial
- 24 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
would not fulfil the requirements of rebuttal as
envisaged under
Section 118
and
139
of the NI
Act. This court stated the principles in the case of
Kumar Exports
(supra) as follows:
"20. The accused in a trial under
Section
  138
of the Act has two options. He can
  either show that consideration and debt did
  not   exist     or     that   under      the   particular
  circumstances of the case the non-existence
  of consideration and debt is so probable that
  a prudent man ought to suppose that no
  consideration and debt existed. To rebut the
  statutory presumptions an accused is not
  expected      to     prove     his     defence   beyond
  reasonable doubt as is expected of the
  complainant in a criminal trial. The accused
  may adduce direct evidence to prove that
  the note in question was not supported by
  consideration and that there was no debt or
  liability to be discharged by him. However,
  the court need not insist in every case that
  the   accused        should      disprove      the   non-
  existence of consideration and debt by
  leading       direct     evidence        because      the
  existence of negative evidence is neither
  possible nor contemplated. At the same
  time, it is clear that bare denial of the
  passing of the consideration and existence
- 25 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
of debt, apparently would not serve the
purpose of the accused. Something which is
probable has to be brought on record for
getting the burden of proof shifted to the
complainant. To disprove the presumptions,
the accused should bring on record such
facts and circumstances, upon consideration
of which, the court may either believe that
the consideration and debt did not exist or
their non-existence was so probable that a
prudent man would under the circumstances
of the case, act upon the plea that they did
not    exist.   Apart   from       adducing      direct
evidence to prove that the note in question
was not supported by consideration or that
he had not incurred any debt or liability, the
accused may also rely upon circumstantial
evidence and if the circumstances so relied
upon    are     compelling,       the   burden    may
likewise shift again on to the complainant.
The     accused      may       also      rely    upon
presumptions of fact, for instance, those
mentioned in
Section 114
of the Evidence
Act to rebut the presumptions arising under
Sections 118
and
139
.
21. The accused has also an option to prove
the non-existence of consideration and debt
or liability either by letting in evidence or in
- 26 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
some clear and exceptional cases, from the
     case set out by the complainant, that is, the
     averments in the complaint, the case set
     out in the statutory notice and evidence
     adduced by the complainant during the trial.
     Once such rebuttal evidence is adduced and
     accepted by the court, having regard to all
     the circumstances of the case and the
     preponderance       of          probabilities,           the
     evidential    burden       shifts      back      to      the
     complainant         and,            therefore,           the
     presumptions under
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act will not again come to the
     complainant's rescue."
18. In the case at hand, even after purportedly
drawing the presumption under
Section 139
of the
NI Act, the Trial Court proceeded to question the
want of evidence on the part of the complainant
as regards the source of funds for advancing loan
to the accused and want of examination of
relevant witnesses who allegedly extended him
money for advancing it to the accused. This
approach of the Trial Court had been at variance
with the principles of presumption in law. After
such presumption, the onus shifted to the accused
and unless the accused had discharged the onus
by      bringing    on      record         such       facts     and
circumstances as to show the preponderance of
- 27 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
probabilities tilting in his favour, any doubt on the
complainant's case could not have been raised for
want of evidence regarding the source of funds
for advancing loan to the accused-appellant. The
aspect relevant for consideration had been as to
whether the accused-appellant has brought on
record such facts/material/circumstances which
could be of a reasonably probable defence.

19.6 The fact of the matter remains that the
appellant could not deny his signatures on the
said writing but attempted to suggest that his
signatures were available on the blank stamp
paper with Shri Jagdishbhai. This suggestion is
too remote and too uncertain to be accepted. No
cogent reason is available for the appellant
signing   a    blank     stamp          paper.    It   is   also
indisputable    that    the     cheques      as    mentioned
therein with all the relevant particulars like
cheque numbers, name of Bank and account
number are of the same cheques which form the
subject matter of these complaint cases. The said
document bears the date 21.03.2007 and the
cheques       were     post-      dated,     starting       from
01.04.2008 and ending at 01.12.2008. There
appears absolutely no reason to discard this
writing from consideration.
- 28 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
20. Hereinabove, we have examined in detail the
findings of the Trial Court and those of the High
Court and have no hesitation in concluding that
the present one was clearly a case where the
decision   of   the   Trial   Court    suffered   from
perversity and fundamental error of approach;
and the High Court was justified in reversing the
judgment of the Trial Court. The observations of
the Trial Court that there was no documentary
evidence to show the source of funds with the
respondent to advance the loan, or that the
respondent did not record the transaction in the
form of receipt of even kachcha notes, or that
there were inconsistencies in the statement of the
complainant and his witness, or that the witness
of the complaint was more in know of facts etc.
would have been relevant if the matter was to be
examined with reference to the onus on the
complaint to prove his case beyond reasonable
doubt. These considerations and observations do
not stand in conformity with the presumption
existing in favour of the complainant by virtue of
Sections 118
and
139
of the NI Act. Needless to
reiterate that the result of such presumption is
that existence of a legally enforceable debt is to
be presumed in favour of the complainant. When
such a presumption is drawn, the factors relating
to the want of documentary evidence in the form
- 29 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
of receipts or accounts or want of evidence as
regards source of funds were not of relevant
consideration while examining if the accused has
been able to rebut the presumption or not. The
other observations as regards any variance in the
statement of complainant and witness; or want of
knowledge about dates and other particulars of
the cheques; or washing away of the earlier
cheques in the rains though the office of the
complainant being on the 8 th floor had also been
of   irrelevant   factors   for      consideration   of   a
probable defence of the appellant. Similarly, the
factor that the complainant alleged the loan
amount to be Rs. 22,50,000/- and seven cheques
being of Rs. 3,00,000/- each leading to a deficit of
Rs. 1,50,000/-, is not even worth consideration
for the purpose of the determination of real
questions involved in the matter. May be, if the
total amount of cheques exceeded the alleged
amount of loan, a slender doubt might have
arisen, but, in the present matter, the total
amount of 7 cheques is lesser than the amount of
loan. Significantly, the specific amount of loan (to
the tune of Rs. 22,50,000/-) was distinctly stated
by   the   accused-appellant          in    the   aforesaid
acknowledgment dated 21.03.2017.
21. On perusing the order of the Trial Court, it is
noticed that the Trial Court proceeded to pass the
- 30 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
order of acquittal on the mere ground of 'creation
of doubt'. We are of the considered view that the
Trial Court appears to have proceeded on a
misplaced assumption that by mere denial or
mere    creation    of   doubt,       the    appellant   had
successfully      rebutted      the     presumption       as
envisaged by
Section 139
of the NI Act. In the
scheme of the
NI Act
, mere creation of doubt is
not sufficient.
22. The result of discussion in the foregoing
paragraphs is that the major considerations on
which the Trial Court chose to proceed clearly
show its fundamental error of approach where,
even after drawing the presumption, it had
proceeded as if the complainant was to prove his
case beyond reasonable doubt. Such being the
fundamental flaw on the part of the Trial Court,
the High Court cannot be said to have acted
illegally or having exceeded its jurisdiction in
reversing the judgment of acquittal. As noticed
hereinabove, in the present matter, the High
Court has conscientiously and carefully taken into
consideration the views of the Trial Court and
after examining the evidence on record as a
whole, found that the findings of the Trial Court
are vitiated by perversity. Hence, interference by
the High Court was inevitable; rather had to be
made for just and proper decision of the matter.
- 31 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
27.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
SHREE

DANESHWARI               TRADERS        VS.         SANJAY    JAIN         AND

ANOTHER2
at paragraph Nos.17, 18 and 20 held as under:
17.    Under
Section     138
of    the   Negotiable
         Instruments Act, once the cheque is issued by the
         drawer, a presumption under
Section 139
of the
         Negotiable Instruments Act in favour of the holder
         would     be    attracted.
Section        139
creates    a
         statutory presumption that a cheque received in
         the nature referred to under
Section 138
of the
         Negotiable Instruments Act is for the discharge in
         whole or in part of any debt or other liability. The
         initial burden lies upon the complainant to prove
         the circumstances under which the cheque was
         issued in his favour and that the same was issued
         in discharge of a legally enforceable debt.
18. It is for the accused to adduce evidence of
         such    facts    and   circumstances         to   rebut     the
         presumption that such debt does not exist or that
         the cheques are not supported by consideration.
20. In the present case, by examining himself as
         PW-1, the complainant has discharged the initial
         burden cast upon him that the cheques were
         issued for the rice bags purchased on credit. With
2
(2019) 16 SCC 83
- 32 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
the   examination    of      PW-1,    the      statutory
presumption under
Section 139
of the Act arises
that the cheques were issued by the respondent-
accused for the discharge of any debt or other
liability in whole or in part. The courts below
disbelieved the evidence of the complainant on
the ground that there are no averments in the
complaint that the commodities were sold for cash
and that the rice bags were sold on credit and the
cheques were issued for the goods sold on credit.
Though    the   complaint      contains   no    specific
averments that the cheques were issued for the
purchase made on credit, in his evidence, PW-1
clearly stated that the cheques were issued for
the commodities purchased on credit. The courts
below erred in brushing aside the evidence of PW-
1 on the ground that there were no averments in
the complaint as to the purchases made by cash
and purchase. The courts below also erred in not
raising the statutory presumption under
Section
139
of the Act that the complainant received the
cheques to discharge the debt or other liability in
whole or in part."
- 33 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
28.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
BIR

SINGH VS. MUKESH KUMAR3
held at paragraph Nos.32, 33,

37 and 38 as under:
32. The proposition of law which emerges from
         the
judgments
referred to above
is that the onus
         to rebut the presumption under
Section 139
that
         the cheque has been issued in discharge of a debt
         or liability is on the accused and the fact that the
         cheque might be post dated does not absolve the
         drawer of a cheque of the penal consequences of
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
33. A meaningful reading of the provisions of the
Negotiable    Instruments          Act
including,   in
         particular,
Sections 20
,
87
and
139
, makes it
         amply clear that a person who signs a cheque and
         makes it over to the payee remains liable unless
         he adduces evidence to rebut the presumption
         that the cheque had been issued for payment of a
         debt or in discharge of a liability. It is immaterial
         that the cheque may have been filled in by any
         person other than the drawer, if the cheque is
         duly signed by the drawer. If the cheque is
         otherwise valid, the penal provisions of
Section
         138
would be attracted.
3
(2019) 4 SCC 197
- 34 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
37. The fact that the appellant-complainant might
have been an Income Tax practitioner conversant
with knowledge of law does not make any
difference to the law relating to the dishonour of a
cheque. The fact that the loan may not have been
advanced by a cheque or demand draft or a
receipt might not have been obtained would make
no difference. In this context, it would, perhaps,
not be out of context to note that the fact that the
respondent-accused should have given or signed
blank cheque to the appellant- complainant, as
claimed by the respondent-accused, shows that
initially there was mutual trust and faith between
them.
38. In the absence of any finding that the cheque
in question was not signed by the respondent-
accused or not voluntarily made over to the payee
and in the absence of any evidence with regard to
the circumstances in which a blank signed cheque
had been given to the appellant-complainant, it
may reasonably be presumed that the cheque was
filled in by the appellant-complainant being the
payee in the presence of the respondent-accused
being the drawer, at his request and/or with his
acquiescence. The subsequent filling in of an
unfilled signed cheque is not an alteration. There
was no change in the amount of the cheque, its
date or the name of the payee. The High Court
- 35 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
ought not to have acquitted the respondent-
         accused of the charge under
Section 138
of the
         Negotiable Instruments Act.
29.    Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
SUMETI VIJ Vs. PARAMOUNT TECH FAB INDUSTRIES4
held at paragraph Nos.22, 23 and 25 as under:
22. That apart, when the complainant exhibited
         all these documents in support of his complaints
         and recorded the statement of three witnesses in
         support thereof, the appellant has recorded her
         statement under Section 313 of the Code, but
         failed to record evidence to disprove or rebut the
         presumption in support of her defence available
         under
Section 139
of the Act. The statement of
         the accused recorded under Section 313 of the
         Code is not a substantive evidence of defence, but
         only an opportunity to the accused to explain the
         incriminating       circumstances    appearing   in   the
         prosecution case of the accused. Therefore, there
         is no evidence to rebut the presumption that the
         cheques were issued for consideration.
23. The judgment on which learned counsel for
         the appellant has placed reliance i.e.
K. Prakashan
         vs.   P.K.   Surenderan6
may    not   be   of   any
4
2021 SCC Online SC 201
- 36 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
assistance for the reason that in the case dealing
under
Section 138
of the Act, the prosecution has
to prove the case and these cases being quasi-
criminal in nature are to be proved on the basis of
the principles of "preponderance of probabilities",
and not on the principles as being examined in
the criminal case to prove the guilt of the accused
beyond reasonable doubt. So far as other case
cited by the learned counsel for the appellant i.e.
Indus Airways Private Limited and Others Vs.
Magnum Aviation Private Limited
, (2014) 12 SCC
539 there was sufficiency of material on record to
justify that the cheques were issued as advance
payment for purchase of goods, and one of the
terms and conditions of the contract was that the
entire payment would be made to the supplier in
advance. However, much within the time, the
supplier complainant received the letter from the
purchasers cancelling the purchase orders and
requested   the   supplier   to   return   both   the
cheques. The supplier pursuant thereto, sent
response asking the purchasers as to when the
supplier could collect the payment, and only
thereafter, the suppler sent a legal notice to the
purchasers and filed a complaint under
Section
138
of the Act. In the given circumstances, it was
observed by this Court that the complainant had
failed even primafacie that there was a legally
- 37 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
enforceable debt or other liability subsisting on
         the date of drawal of the cheque as contemplated
         under
Section 138
of the Act. This judgment
         would not be of any help to the appellant in the
         instant case.
25. In the given circumstances, the High Court, in
         our    view,    has    not      committed     any   error   in
         recording the finding of guilt of the appellant and
         convicting her for an offence being committed
         under
Section 138
of the Act under its impugned
         judgment, which in our considered view, needs no
         further interference. Consequently, the appeals
         are without any substance, and are accordingly
         dismissed.
30.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M/S

KALAMANI TEX AND AN VS P. BALASUBRAMANIAN5 held

at paragraph No.14 as under:
14. Adverting to the case in hand, we find on a
         plain reading of its judgment that the trial Court
         completely overlooked the provisions and failed to
         appreciate       the    statutory        presumption   drawn
         under
Section 118
and
Section 139
of NIA. The
         Statute mandates that once the signature(s) of an
         accused on the cheque/negotiable instrument are
5
Crl.A.No.123/2021 dated:10.02.2021
- 38 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
established, then these 'reverse onus' clauses
become operative. such a situation, the obligation
shifts     upon     the   accused      to    discharge   the
presumption imposed upon him. This point of law
has been crystalized by this Court in
Rohitbhai
Jivanlal    Patel    v.   State   of   Gujarat10
in   the
following words:
"In the case at hand, even after purportedly
    drawing the presumption under
Section 139
of
    the NI Act, the trial court proceeded to
    question the want of evidence on the part of
    the complainant as regards the source of
    funds for advancing loan to the accused and
    want of examination of relevant witnesses who
    allegedly extended him money for advancing it
    to the accused. This approach of the trial court
    had been at variance with the principles of
    presumption in law. After such presumption,
    the onus shifted to the accused and unless the
    accused had discharged the onus by bringing
    on record such facts and circumstances as to
    show the preponderance of probabilities tilting
    in his favour, any doubt on the complainant's
    case could not have been raised for want of
    evidence regarding the source of funds for
    advancing loan to the appellant accused....."
15. Once the 2nd Appellant had admitted his
signatures on the cheque and the Deed, the trial
Court ought to have presumed that the cheque
- 39 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
was    issued    as     consideration       for    a   legally
         enforceable debt. The trial Court fell in error when
         it called upon the Complainant Respondent to
         explain    the   circumstances           under    which   the
         appellants were liable to pay. Such approach of
         the trial Court was directly in the (2019) 18 SCC
         106, 18. teeth of the established legal position as
         discussed above, and amounts to a patent error
         of law.
31.    Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of

P. RASIYA VS ABDUL NAZER AND ANOTHER6 at paragraph

No.7 as under:
7 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
         judgment and orders passed by the Appellate
         Court affirming the conviction of the accused
         under
Section 138
of the N.I. Act, the accused
         preferred three different Revision Applications
         before the High Court. By the impugned common
         judgment and order, the High Court has reversed
         the concurrent findings recorded by both the
         courts below and has acquitted the accused on
         the    ground        that,   in    the     complaint,     the
         Complainant has not specifically stated the nature
         of transactions and the source of fund. However,
         the High Court has failed to note the presumption
6
2022 SCC Online SC 1131
- 40 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
under
Section 139
of the N.I. Act. As per
Section
     139
of the N.I. Act, it shall be presumed, unless
     the contrary is proved, that the holder of a
     cheque received the cheque of the nature referred
     to in
Section 138
for discharge, in whole or in
     part, of any debt or other liability. Therefore, once
     the   initial   burden   is        discharged   by    the
     Complainant that the cheque was issued by the
     accused and the signature and the issuance of the
     cheque is not disputed by the accused
,
in that
     case
, the onus will shift upon the accused to
     prove the contrary that the cheque was not for
     any debt or other liability. The presumption under
Section 139
of the N.I. Act is a statutory
     presumption and thereafter, once it is presumed
     that the cheque is issued in whole or in part of
     any debt or other liability which is in favour of the
     Complainant/holder of the cheque
,
in that case
, it
     is for the accused to prove the contrary. The
     aforesaid has not been dealt with and considered
     by the High Court. The High Court has also failed
     to appreciate that the High Court was exercising
     the   revisional   jurisdiction      and   there     were
     concurrent findings of fact recorded by the courts
     below.
32.   The learned counsel for the respondent has relied

on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
- 41 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
KAMALA S Vs. VIDHYADHARAN M J7
and at paragraph

Nos.15 and 16 it is held as under:
15.
The      Act
contains        provisions       raising
         presumption            as     regards          the        negotiable
         instruments under
Section 118(a)
of the Act as
         also     under
Section         139
thereof.      The        said
         presumptions         are      rebuttable          ones.    Whether
         presumption stood rebutted or not would depend
         upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
The nature and extent of such presumption came
         up for consideration before this Court in
M.S.
         Narayana Menon Alias Mani V. State of Kerala and
         Anr.
[(2006) 6 SCC 39] wherein it was held :
"30.    Applying       the     said    definitions        of
               "proved" or "disproved" to the principle
               behind
Section 118(a)
of the Act, the court
               shall presume a negotiable instrument to
               be for consideration unless and until after
               considering the matter before it, it either
               believes that the consideration does not
               exist or considers the non-existence of the
               consideration so probable that a prudent
               man ought, under the circumstances of
               the    particular     case,      to   act    upon     the
7
AIR 2007 SC (SUPP) 1142
- 42 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
supposition that the consideration dos not
      exist. For rebutting such presumption,
      what is needed is to raise a probable
      defence. Even for the said purpose, the
      evidence         adduced       on      behalf    of     the
      complainant could be relied upon."
16.     This Court clearly laid down the law that
standard of proof in discharge of the burden in
terms       of
Section       139
of    the     Act    being    of
preponderance of a probability, the inference
therefor can be drawn not only from the materials
brought on record but also from the reference to
the circumstances upon which the accused relies
upon. Categorically stating that the burden of
proof on accused is not as high as that of the
prosecution, it was held;
"33. Presumption drawn under a statute
      has        only         an     evidentiary            value.
Presumptions are raised in terms of the
Evidence         Act
.    Presumption           drawn      in
      respect of one fact may be an evidence
      even       for     the       purpose      of     drawing
      presumption         under        another."       It     was
      further observed that ;
"38. If for the purpose of a civil litigation,
      the    defendant         may       not    adduce        any
- 43 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
evidence to discharge the initial burden
        placed on him, a "fortiori" even an accused
        need not enter into the witness box and
        examine other witnesses in support of his
        defence. He, it will bear repetition to state,
        need not disprove the prosecution case in
        its entirety as has been held by the High
        Court.
39. A presumption is a legal or factual
        assumption drawn from the existence of
        certain facts."
33.   But the decision relied on by the learned counsel

for the respondent will not help the accused.         On the other

hand, it strengthens the case of complainant.
34.   Therefore, if the evidence in this case is tested

with the principles stated in the above referred decisions, it

shows   that   accused    has    not     rebutted    the   statutory

presumption in favour of the complainant.           The evidence of

DW.2 the manager which shows that he has produced the

account statement of complainant which is at Ex.D1 and he

brought cheque-Ex.D2 and he has stated that they have

nothing to do with encashment of any cheqque after due
- 44 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
payment to concerned holder of cheque. His evidence either

in no way rebut or falsify the case of the complainant.
35.   Therefore, considering the entire evidence on

record, it is evident that the complainant has satisfactorily

proved by legally admissible evidence and discharged his

initial burden that accused has borrowed Rs.12,00,000/- and

in consideration of the same he has issued cheque and he did

not repay the same and not replied the notice. On the other

hand, the accused took false defence and which has no basis

at all.
36.   Learned   ACMM      by       raising   wrong    points   for

consideration and without appreciating the ingredients of
Section 138
of N.I. Act and considering the presumption and

not discussing as to how the presumption is to be rebutted by

the   accused,     has    wrongly     acquitted        the   accused.    The

judgment of acquittal passed by the learned ACMM being

illegal, erroneous perverse needs to be set aside as held by

Hon'ble Supreme Court in the catena of judgments rendered

on cheque bounce cases.
- 45 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
37.
The Negotiable Instruments Act
was amended

with an intention to honur the cheuqe transaction in view of

large number of disputes arising, stringent punishment is

provided by directing the accused to pay double cheque

amount so that some sanctity is attached to the transaction

through cheque. Therefore, keeping in mind the object of

enacting the
N.I. Act
and the amendment brought to it and in

the light of the settled principles discussed above, if the

evidence on record is appreciated in my considered view, the

complainant has discharged his initial burden and proved

offence under
Section 138
of N.I. Act and the accused has

failed    to   discharge   his   burden   or   rebutted   statutory

presumption in favour of complainant by            way of cross-

examination of complainant or by his defence evidence.

Hence, the appeal deserved to be allowed.
38.   According, I pass the following:
ORDER
1)    The appeal is allowed.
- 46 -
CRL.A No. 169 of 2012
2)       The     judgment   of   acquittal    dated    28.12.2011

passed in C.C.No.2427/2009 by the XII Additional Chief

Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru is hereby set aside.
3)       The     accused/respondent    is    convicted     for    the

offences under
Section 138
of N.I.Act and accused is

sentenced to pay a fine of Rs.12,25,000/-. Out of the fine

amount,        a    sum    of   Rs.12,00,000/-       shall    be   paid   as

compensation to the complainant and a sum of Rs.25,000/-

shall be deposited to the State as expenses of litigation.
4)       In default of payment of fine, the accused shall

undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one year.
5)       Send back the records to the Trial Court.
4)       No order as to costs.




                                                Sd/-
                                               JUDGE



HJ
List No.: 1 Sl No.: 33
