Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 96, wherein the prosecution case has been discarded on
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/15256613/

[Cites
32
, Cited by
0
]
Bombay High Court
The State Of Mah. Thr. Psops Hivarkhed ... vs Haribhau Rajaram Telgote And 2 Others on 13 November, 2024
Author:
Vinay Joshi
Bench:
Vinay Joshi
2024:BHC-NAG:12437-DB




               Judgment                                                         con4.24

                                                   1


                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY :
                               NAGPUR BENCH : NAGPUR.



                          CRIMINAL CONFIRMATION CASE No. 4/2024
                                                WITH
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 316/2024.
                                                  ....
              CRIMINAL CONFIRMATION CASE No. 4/2024.


              State of Maharashtra,
              through Police Station Officer,
              Police Station Hivarkhed, Tahsil
              Talhara, District Akola.                       ...     APPELLANT.


                                               VERSUS

              1.Haribhau Rajaram Telgote.
              2.Mrs.Dwarkabai Haribhau Telgote,
              3.Shyam @ Kundan Haribhau Telgote,

              All residents of Rahul Nagar, Akot,
              District Akola.                                ...   RESPONDENTS.

                                       ---------------------------------
                     Mr. S.S. Doifode, Addl.P.P. with Mr.A.M. Badar, A.P.P. for the
                                              Appellant/State.
                          Mr. R.M. Daga, Advocate for Respondents/Accused.
                                      ----------------------------------



              Rgd.
 Judgment                                                          con4.24

                                     2


                                  WITH


CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 316/2024.


1.Haribhau s/o Rajaram Telgote,
Aged 66 years, Occupation Labour,

2.Mrs.Dwarkabai w/o Haribhau Telgote,
Aged about 55 years, Occupation Labour,

3.Shyam @ Kundan s/o Haribhau Telgote,
Aged about 35 years, Occupation - Labour,

All residents of Rahul Nagar, Akot,
District Akola. (All in jail)                   ...    APPELLANTS.


                                 VERSUS

State of Maharashtra,
through Police Station Officer,
Police Station Hivarkhed, Tahsil
Telhara, District Akola.                        ...   RESPONDENT.


                         ---------------------------------
             Mr. R.M. Daga, Advocate for Appellants/Accused.
       Mr. S.S. Doifode, Addl.P.P. with Mr.A.M. Badar, A.P.P. for the
                              Respondent/State.
                        ----------------------------------

                         CORAM :         VINAY JOSHI AND
                                         ABHAY J. MANTRI, JJ.

Rgd.
 Judgment                                                         con4.24

                                   3




RESERVED FOR JUDGMENT ON                     : 17.10.2024
JUDGMENT PRONOUNCED ON                       : 13.11.2024.



JUDGMENT (PER VINAY JOSHI, J.) :
Extreme penalty provided under the
Indian Penal Code
(
IPC
) i.e. Death Penalty imposed by the Sessions Judge is placed

before us for scrutiny due to mandate of
Section 366
of the Code, as

well as by virtue of appeal preferred by the accused in terms of
Section

374
[2] of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
(
Cr.P.C
.)
2.         Appellant Nos.1 to 3 were tried and convicted by the

Additional Sessions Judge, Akot        vide judgment and order dated

17.05.2024 in Sessions Case No.57/2015 for the offence punishable

under
Sections 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC and
Section 506
[Part-II] read with
Section 34
of the IPC. Though they have also been

charged for the offence punishable under
Section 323
of the Indian

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
4
Penal Code, however, they were acquitted for the said charge. For

offence punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the

IPC, accused nos.1 to 3 have been sentenced to death penalty along

with fine of Rs.50,000/- each, with stipulation of default. For offence

punishable under
Section 506
[Part-II], read with
Section 34
of the

IPC, they have been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

7 years along with fine of Rs.10,000/- each. Both sentences were

directed to run concurrently. The trial Court has accorded benefit of

set off to accused in terms of
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C.
3.         Accused were related to each other.              Accused no.1

Haribhau and accused no.2 Dwarkabai are husband and wife, whilst

accused no.3 Shyam @ Kundan is their son. They have been charged

for committing murder of 4 persons namely Shubham, Dhanraj,

Gaurav and Baburao.       The deceased are also interrelated to each

other. Shubham and Gaurav were sons of Dhanraj, whilst 4 th deceased

Baburao was real brother of Dhanraj. Not only that rival parties are

also related to each other.   Accused no.2 Dwarkabai is real sister of


Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
5
deceased Dhanraj and Baburao, and thus, all are in relations.
4.         It is the prosecution case that family of deceased Dhanraj

and Baburao had 29 Acres of ancestral agricultural land at village

Malpura.    Accused no.2 Dwarkabai, who was real sister of both

brothers [Dhanraj and Baburao] was insisting for share in the said

agricultural land. For the said purpose, accused no.2 Dwarkabai has

filed a civil suit for partition long back in the Civil Court at Telhara.

On account of allotment of share to accused no.2 Dwarkabai in

ancestral land, there happened to be a dispute in between two brothers

and sister Dwarkabai [accused no.2]. One month preceding to the

incident accused no.2 Dwarkabai had sown cotton in 2 acres of

ancestral land in between the field of two brothers Dhanraj and

Baburao.    For the reason of sowing in the land, accused no.2

Dwarkabai used to pick up quarrel with her two brothers.
5.         On 28.06.2015 around 3 p.m., accused no.2 Dwarkabai

was sowing cotton crop in the field to which Dhanraj and his son


Rgd.
Judgment                                                      con4.24
6
Shubham objected.     There was oral altercation in between them.
Dwarkabai rushed on the person of Dhanraj on which Shubham

intervened to pacify. Dwarkabai got annoyed and said to Shubham as

to how he has touched her. Gaurav also arrived on the spot and tried

to convince Dwarkabai. Then Dwarkabai came to the village Malpura

by hurling abuses to Dhanraj and his two sons Shubham and Gaurav.

Dwarkabai informed on mobile about the said quarrel to her two sons

i.e. accused no.3 Shyam and Mangesh, who is child in conflict with

law (CCL).
Within short time i.e. around 5 p.m. accused no.1

Haribhau, accused no.3 Shyam and Mangesh [CCL] arrived on the

spot by giving abuses. Accused no.2 Shyam was armed with a knife,

CCL- Mangesh was armed with sickle, whilst accused no.1 Haribau

was armed with an axe. All of them went towards the ota [platform]

where Shubham was seated.      Accused no.3 Shyam and Mangesh

[CCL] rushed on the person of Shubham and started assaulting him.

Since Subham raised alarm, Dhanraj and Gaurav came to his rescue.

Accused no.3 Shyam, CCL- Mangesh and accused no.1 Haribhau

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
7
assaulted all of them. Baburao also arrived and intervened to separate

the quarrel.   Accused no.1 Shyam inflicted a knife blow at the

abdomen of Baburao on which his intestine came out. Baburao was

taken to the near by house where handkerchief was tied. Informant

Yash [son of Baburao] and Amol made Baburao to sit on the

motorcycle and were about to proceed to the hospital, however,

accused no.1 Haribhau, accused no.3 Shyam and CCL Mangesh

accosted them in the way. Mangesh and Shyam assaulted him by

means of sharp weapons, as a result of said assault all 4 were lying on

the spot in the pool of blood.        At that time Najukrao tried to

intervene, who was also assaulted. Several people of the vicinity have

witnessed the incident.
6.         P.W.7 Smt. Kiran Thakare, who was Village Police Patil

also witnessed the incident. She telephonically reported the things to

Police Constable Sheikh Sabir [P.W.12] of Hiwarkhed Police Station.

Police Constable Sk.Sabir informed the incident to Police Inspector

P.W.18 Tanwar, who in turn arrived at the spot with police sleuth.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
8
Relevant station diary entry was taken. When police came to the spot,

dead bodies of 4 persons namely Shubham, Dhanraj, Gaurav and

Baburao were lying near ota [platform], at the side of village flag post.

Police Inspector Tanwar [P.W.18], carried panchnama of the scene of

offence. While carrying the panchnama, he has seized incriminating

material including blood mixed earth, pair of chappal, one bamboo

stick. Rough sketch of the place of occurrence was drawn. Crowd was

dispersed and spot was guarded by deploying police personnel. Police

Inspector Tanwar passed a message to cordon the area in order to

catch the culprits. P.W.17 Head Constable Mohanlal after receiving

the message has cordoned the possible way outs. Around 6.30 p.m. he

has stopped an auto rickshaw on Hiwarkhed road. Three male and

one female were seated in the said auto rickshaw. It was noticed that

their clothes were stained with blood. On enquiry, they disclosed that

they have committed murder of 4 persons at Malpura, and therefore,

blood stains on their clothes.   Immediately P.W. 17 Mohanlal took

them in charge and brought them to the Hiwarkhed Police Station,

which was followed by their arrest.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
9
7.         Dead bodies were sent for autopsy. Inquest panchnama

was drawn, blood stained clothes of deceased were seized. On the

following day autopsy was conducted by P.W.14 Dr. Anil on all dead

bodies. After arresting accused their blood stained clothes were

seized. Since accused no.1 Haribhau has sustained bleeding injury, he

was sent for medical examination. While accused no.3 Shyam was in

custody, he made disclosure statement, pursuant to which the

weapons used in the commission of crime came to be seized. The

seized articles were sent for chemical analyzation.          Necessary

statement of witnesses were recorded.         After completion of the

investigation, final report came to be filed in the Court of concerned

Magistrate. Since Mangesh was child in conflict with law, he was

produced before the Juvenile Justice Board.
8.         On committal, the trial Court has framed the charges.

Though the accused denied the guilt, however, the incident is

admitted. To be specific, the accused denied that they assaulted all the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
10
deceased and done to death. However, it is their defence that at the

relevant time, quarrel erupted on account of Shubham outraging

modesty of Dwarkabai. In the said quarrel, CCL Mangesh got furied

and in a fit of anger, assaulted all the deceased. Moreover, it is also

their defence that at the relevant time the deceased Shubham and

others were holding weapons by which they started to attack the

accused. Accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam tried to

snatch the weapons from the deceased, in which they           sustained

injuries, whilst the deceased also sustained grave injuries by their own

weapons as a result of which they died.      According to the defence,

Dwarkabai was merely present on the spot, but, she did not

participated in the occurrence.      To substantiate the defence, the

accused have examined defence witness no.1 Dr. Sujata to establish

the injuries sustained by accused no.1 Haribhau. CCL Mangesh also

stepped into the witness box. Precisely, by denying the guilt and

putting such a defence the accused put the prosecution to the task of

establishing the guilt with requisite standard of proof.



Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
11
9.         In order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the

prosecution endeavored into examining as many as 20 witnesses. The

prosecution evidence mainly consists of 7 eye witnesses, panch

witnesses, medical officers and police officers. As referred above, the

defence has examined only two witnesses.         During recording of

statement under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C., the accused denied

incriminating material and by filing written submission echoed the

defence version.
10.        After analyzing oral and documentary evidence, the trial

Court by fully relying on the evidence of eye witnesses and other

corroborating material, held that the prosecution has duly established

that accused nos. 1 to 3 have assaulted all deceased by means of

dangerous weapons. They have caused multiple injuries of grave

nature on the vital parts of the body resulting into death, and thus all

the accused have committed the offence of murder as defined under
Section 300
of the I.P.C. which is punishable under
Section 302
of the

I.P.C. read with
Section 34
.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
12
11.        The learned trial Court has heard the accused on the point

of sentence. It reveals from the impugned judgment that the accused

preferred to remain silent on the point of sentence. The learned

Counsel appearing for the accused stated that whatever they want to

say on the point of sentence, they will state before the High Court. In

short the accused neither stated anything for claiming leniency, nor

stated mitigating circumstances.    On the other hand, the learned

Addl.P.P. has strongly recommended for imposition capital

punishment on account of brutality, cruelty, multiple deaths and the

manner in which the crime has been committed.
12.        The trial Court has considered the case on set parameters

and was of the opinion that the case squarely falls in the category of

"rarest or rare case" resulting into awarding death penalty. After

pronouncing the capital punishment, the Trial Court has forwarded

the proceeding to this Court for confirmation in terms of
Section

366
[1] of the
Cr.P.C
. Likewise, being aggrieved and dissatisfied by

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
13
the order of conviction and proportionality of sentence, the accused

have also filed an appeal under
Section 374
[2] of the Code.
13.         We have heard the learned Addl.P.P. Shri Doifode, for the

State on the point of confirmation of sentence and Shri Daga, the

learned Counsel for the appellants/accused in support of challenge to

the impugned judgment and order. We have given our thoughtful

consideration to the rival submissions, carefully examined the entire

material and also gone through the various precedents cited by both

sides in support of their respective contentions. We prefer to make

contextual reference of the rival submissions, in the later part of this

judgment.
At the inception, we may note that the defence had not

challenged that all the deceased met with homicidal death.         The

question falls for consideration is - Whether the evidence adduced by

the prosecution is sufficient to fasten the guilt on the accused and if

so, whether the case falls in the arena of 'rarest of rare category', as

explained by the Supreme Court in catena of decisions.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
14
14.        Though the homicidal death of Shubham, Gaurav,

Dhanraj and Baburao was not denied, to satisfy ourselves on said

aspect we have gone through the relevant material. The incident had

occurred on 28.05.2015, whilst P.W.14- Dr. Anil Mal, attached to the

Rural Hospital Telhara has conducted autopsy on all dead bodies on

the following day. For the sake of convenience, we have extracted the

relevant translated portion of medical evidence of Dr.Anil Mal from

the decision of the trial Court (paragraph nos.26 to 36 at page no.633

of the paper book), which reads as below :
"26.      First of all, in his examination-in-chief
           (Exhibit No. 147, Page no. 1 Paragraph No. 2), Dr.
           Anil has stated, "I found the following injuries on
           Gaurav's body."
1)   Cut and crush injury around neck, extending
                from angle of mandible to angle of mandible of
                size 8 cm x 3 cm x neck deep. Cutting carotid,
                trachea, oesophagus and all the vascular
                structures.
2)   Incised wound of size 4 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
                above right eye.
3)   Incised wound of size 4 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
                over right frontoparital region of skull.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
15
4)   Stab injury of size 4 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep
                over right hypochondric region of abdomen
                protruding coils.
5)   Incised wound of size 5 cm x 2 cm x cavity
                deep over centre of back.
27.        Dr. Anil (P. W. No. 14) in his examination-in-
           chief (Exhibit No. 147, Page No. 2, Paragraph No. 4)
           mentioned two injuries that were found in Gaurav's
           internal examination.
1)   Laceration with clots at frontoparital region of skull.
2)   Thorasic cavity filled with around 800 ml to 1000 ml
                of blood and trachea was cut.
28.        Dr. Anil has stated that all the injuries on
           Gaurav's body, both external and internal, are his ante-
           mortem injuries. All these injuries are described in detail in
           the post-mortem report and Gaurav's post-mortem report
           at Exhibit No 148 has been proved by Dr. Anil on all
           legal, technical parameters.
29.        Similarly, in his examination-in-chief (Exhibit
           No. 147, Page No. 2 Paragraph No. 8), Dr. Anil (P. W.
           No. 14) has stated, "Then I performed post-mortem
           examination on the body of Shubham as well and at that
           time, I found the following injuries on Shubham's body."
1)   Cut and crush injury around neck from angle of
                mandible to angle of mandible cutting carotid,
                trachea, oesophagus and all the vascular structures.
2)   Stab injury of size 3 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep over
                right side of chest.
3)   cut injury over right upper arm and forearm, cutting
                bones.
4)   Incised wound of size 5 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep over

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
16
left side of chest.
5)   Incised wound 5 cm x 2 cm x bone deep below right
                shoulder.
30.         Similarly, Dr. Anil has also described in his
           examination-in-chief in Paragraph No. 10, the three
           internal injuries found in the dead body of Shubham. They
           are as follows.
1)   There was fracture of multiple ribs.
2)   Trachea was cut.
3)   Multiple lacerations over both the lungs.
31.        Dr. Anil has stated in his examination-in-chief
           that all the internal and external injuries on Shubham's
           body are ante-mortem. Dr. Anil has described all those
           injuries in detail and proved Shubham's post-mortem
           report marked as Exhibit No. 149 on all legal parameters.
32. In Paragraph No. 14 of his examination-in-chief, Dr
           Anil has stated, "Then, on the same day (i.e., on the date
           29.06.2015) I performed post-mortem examination of
           Dhanraj Sukhdeo Charhate too. I found six external
           injuries on the person of Dhanraj" and he has also stated
           the following six external injuries found on Dhanraj's
           body.
1)   Incise wound of size 8 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
                extending from ramus of right side of mandible to
                angle of mandible left side.
2)   Cut and crush injury around neck extending from
                angle of mandible to angle of mandible cutting
                carotid, trachea, oesophagus and all the vascular
                structures.
3)   Incise wound of size 6 cm x 2 cm x right lung deep.
4)   Incise wound of size 5 cm x 2 cm x apex of left lung

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
17
near left shoulder.
           5)    Incise wound of size 3 cm x 1 cm x cavity deep at
                 centre of chest.
           6)    Two stab injuries of size 3 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep
over left side of abdomen, protruding coils.
33.        In Paragraph No. 16 of his examination-in-
           chief, Dr. Anil has stated, "During post-mortem
           examination of Dhanraj, I found following five internal
           injuries " and he described all the five internal injuries on
           the body of Dhanraj, in detail, as follows.
1)    Thorasic cavity filled with around 1.5 to 2 liters of
                 blood.
2)    Trachea cut.
3)    Multiple lacerations on both the lungs.
4)    pericardium was ruptured.
\5)   Lacerations cavity deep over heart.
34.       Dr. Anil states that all the above-mentioned
           internal and external injuries on Dhanraj's body are ante-
           mortem. All those injuries have been explained in great
           detail by Dr. Anil in his examination-in-chief and post-
           mortem report at Exhibit No. 150, of Dhanraj with the
           description of all those injuries, external and internal, has
           been proved by Dr. Anil on all legal technical parameters.
35.       Similarly, in his examination-in-chief ( Exhibit
           No. 147, Page No 4, Paragraph No. 20), Dr. Anil has
           stated, "On the same day, I also performed the post-
           mortem of deceased Baburao Sukhdeo Charhate. I found
           the following injuries on his body " and he explained the
           following external injuries found on Baburao's dead body.
1)    Cut and crush injury from mandible of left ramus,

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
18
cutting chin of size 6 inch x 3 cm x 2 cm.
2)   Crush and cut injury over neck from angle of
                mandible to angle of mandible, cutting carotid,
                trachea, oesophagus and all the vascular structures.
3)   Incise wound of size 4 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep over
                left side of chest, piercing lungs.
4)   Stab injury of size 3 cm x 2 cm x cavity deep over left
                side of abdomen, coils protruded out from injury site.
5)   Incise wound of size 3 cm x 2 cm x 2 cm over centre
                of back.
36.       In his examination-in-chief ( Paragraph No.
22) Dr. Anil has stated, "While performing post-mortem
           examination of Baburao Sukhdeo Charhate. I found the
           following internal injuries in his body " and he explained
           the following internal injuries found on Baburao's dead
           body.
1)   Thorasic cavity filled with around 1 to 1.5 liters of
                blood.
2)   Lacerations were present over left lung.
3)   Pericardium was ruptured."
15.        On examination, the medical officer P.W.14 Dr.Anil has

expressed the cause of death as neck injury as regards to all the 4

deceased. Besides that it is quite evident from the medical evidence

that there were multiple incise wounds all over the body of the

deceased, which were caused by sharp and heavy object. Apparently


Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
19
all external injuries coupled with corresponding internal injuries were

fatal. All deceased died due to internal hemorrhage caused due to

deep cut wounds on neck, head, abdomen, lungs etc.               In the

circumstances without hiccup it can be held that all of them met with

homicidal death. Moreover, the defence has not challenged the nature

of death and therefore, we may safely return the finding that the

deceased Shubham, Gaurav, Dhanraj and Baburao met with homicidal

death.
16.        In view of that, the enquiry proceeds to decide the crucial

issue which pertains to the authorship of the fatal injuries which took

four lives. The prosecution was heavily banking upon the direct

evidence of eye witnesses to establish the guilt of the accused. In this

regard, the prosecution has examined total 7 eye witnesses i.e. P.W.1

Yash Charhate [Exh. 61], P.W.4 Amol Charhate [ Exh. 95], P.W.5

Vishal Gawarguru [Exh. 98], P.W.7 Sau.Kiran Thakre [Exh.120] and

P.W.11 Rajendra Dandge [Exh.135]. Though the prosecution has

relied on other circumstantial evidence, however, as the prosecution

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
20
case is based on the evidence of eye witnesses, initially we prefer to

deal with the direct evidence which is of vital importance.
17.        At the inception we remind ourselves that the defence has

not denied the presence of accused at the time of occurrence.

Inasmuch as, the incident was also not denied, but, the defence has

some other version to tell.    Keeping in mind the said position, we

have assessed the direct evidence. P.W.1 Yash Charhate [informant],

was the son of deceased Baburao. He has stated about the earlier

quarrel in between the parties dated 24.06.2015. It is his evidence

that on 28.06.2015 around 3 p.m. accused no.2 Dwarkabai was

sowing cotton in the field. Informant Yash was also present in the

field. Deceased Dhanraj desisted Dwarkabai from doing agricultural

activities on which Dwarkabai rushed at his person.           Deceased

Shubham [son of Dhanraj], intervened, on which Dwarkabai got

annoyed by saying that as to why Shubham has touched her.

Dwarkabai by giving abuses returned to the village Malpura.



Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
21
18.        P.W.1 Yash deposed that Dwarkabai in his presence made

phone call to someone. Around 5 p.m. Dwarkabai's husband accused

no.1 Haribhau and two sons accused no.3 Shyam and CCL Mangesh

arrived with deadly weapons. Particularly accused no.3 Shyam was

holding knife, CCL Mangesh was holding sickle, whilst accused no.1

Haribhau was holding an axe. At the relevant time deceased Shubham

was seated on ota [platform] near village flag post. It is his evidence

that initially accused no.3 Shyam assaulted Shubham by means of

knife, whilst CCL Mangesh assaulted him by means of sickle. As their

was shout, Dhanraj and Gaurav rushed to the spot, who were also

dealt with the same treatment. He deposed that accused no.3 Shyam

assaulted them by means of knife, whilst Mangesh assaulted by means

of sickle and Haribhau by axe.
19.        P.W.1 Yash further deposed that his father Baburao came

for rescue, however, accused no.3 Shyam also stabbed at the stomach

of Baburao by means of knife. In order to save Baburao, witness

P.W.1 Yash along with P.W.4 Amol Charhate, took injured Baburao

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
22
to their house, tied a scarf at his stomach, made Baburao to sit on a

motorcycle and were about to proceed for medical treatment.

However, the accused accosted them on which CCL Mangesh again

assaulted Baburao at his neck by means of sickle. Precisely it is the

evidence of informant Yash that after initial quarrel in the field,

Dwarkabai returned to the village Malpura, and telephonically called

her husband and two sons. All three arrived within short time with

deadly weapons and indiscriminately assaulted all four deceased which

took their lives.
20.         Evidence of P.W.4 Amol Charhate is on the same line. He

too deposed about the exact incident occurred around 5 p.m. at ota

[platform] near flag post in the village Malpura. It is his evidence that

he saw that while Shubham was seated on the ota [platform], accused

no.3 Shyam and CCL Mangesh assaulted him by means of weapons.

He saw that Baburao was lying in injured condition, hence, with the

assistance of Yash they took Baburao to the house. While they were

carrying Baburao on motorcycle for treatment, accused no.3 Shyam

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
23
accosted and assaulted Baburao on neck by means of sickle. His

evidence is restricted to the exact occurrence wherein he named that

accused no.3 Shyam and CCL Mangesh assaulted deceased Shubham

and Baburao. It emerges from his evidence that he has not witnessed

the entire occurrence, but, when he came out of the house, he saw that

Shubham was assaulted by Shyam and Mangesh, and saw that Shyam

again assaulted Baburao by means of sickle.
21.        Before considering the evidence of rest of the eye

witnesses, we would like to note that both these eye witnesses have not

stated about role of accused no.2 Dwarkabai. It emerges that P.W.1

Yash was throughout present during the entire occurrence, however,

he has not ascribed role to Dwarkabai. P.W.4 Amol arrived on the

spot while the incident was going on. Though he has limited occasion

to see the occurrence pertaining to the assault on Shubham and

Baburao, however, the fact remained that both these eye witnesses

have not ascribed any role to Dwarkabai. True, P.W.4 Amol has also

not assigned any role to accused no.1 Haribhau, however, the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
24
evidence is to be appreciated as a whole.
22.        Contextually we may refer to the defence submission that

these two witnesses have not assigned role to Dwarkabai, and thus, it

is quite doubtful about her participation, though it was belatedly

stated by other witnesses. Prima facie, the said submission holds

water, and is required to be tested on the basis of entire material as a

whole.
The prosecution has examined P.W.5 Vishal Gawarguru,

who has stated about the role of all accused. It is his evidence that at

the relevant time Shyam was holding knife, Haribhau was armed with

an axe, while Dwarkabai and Mangesh were holding sickles. Besides

the role of Shyam, Mangesh and Haribhau, he has specified the role of

Dwarkabai. It is his evidence that Dwarkabai and Mangesh assaulted

Shubham at his throat by means of sickle. Both of them assaulted

Gaurav by weapon, so also Dwarkabai and Mangesh assaulted

Haribhau at his neck by means of sickle. Pertinent to note that

though P.W.1 Yash and P.W.4 Amol are silent about the role of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
25
Dwarkabai, however, P.W.5 Vishal in his evidence has stated that

Dwarkabai and Mangesh assaulted Shubham and Dhanraj at neck by

sickle and also to Gaurav.    He has not distinguished the role of

Dwarkabai and Mangesh separately, but, in one breath stated that

both of them did so. Be that as it may, we have turned to the evidence

of another eye witness P.W.6 - Ratnabai Charhate, who has equally

stated about the role of Dwarkabai assaulting all the deceased along

with CCL Mangesh by means of sickle. Her evidence is quite similar

on the line of the version of P.W.5 Vishal. The prosecution has

examined P.W.7 Smt.Kiran Thakre, Police Patil in the capacity of eye

witness, however, we prefer to come to her evidence after short while,

as her evidence stands on somewhat different footing.
23.        The next eye witness is P.W.11 Rajendra Dandge. It is his

evidence that all accused were armed with deadly weapons. He has

specified the weapons held by each of the accused. In particular he

deposed that Shyam stabbed at the abdomen of Shubham by means of

knife, Haribhau assaulted Shubham by means of an axe and remaining

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
26
assaulted him with sickle. It is his evidence that Dhanraj and Gaurav

arrived at the spot, on which Shyam stabbed at the stomach of

Dhanraj and others also assaulted him. Gaurav was also stabbed by

Shyam, whilst Mangesh and Dwarkabai assaulted him by means of

knife. He deposed that on arrival of Baburao, he was also assaulted by

Shyam. While Baburao was about to shift, all accused accosted and

assaulted him. The role assigned to accused no.3 Shyam is quite

consistent that he has assaulted all deceased by means of knife. He has

also stated that Haribhau was holding an axe by which he assaulted

three deceased. As regards to Dwarkabai, he assigned a joint role to

her with CCL Mangesh of assaulting by means of sickle. The last eye

witness is P.W.13 Santosh Charhate, who is a nearby resident. His

evidence is in general form that he saw all four accused assaulting

Shubham, Gaurav, Dhanraj and Baburao by means of weapon. He

has not spelt out the specific role of each of them.
24.        So far as P.W.7 Kiran Thakre is concerned, she is village

Police Patil. It is her evidence that she has not witnessed the incident

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
27
as a whole. She deposed that after hearing alarm, she came out of the

house and saw that Shubham and Dhanraj were lying in the pool of

blood near platform/ota of Panchsheel flag post. Dhanraj was leaning

on the person of Shubham. At that time, Shyam inflicted knife blows

on the abdomen of Dhanraj. She deposed that she was called by her

husband, hence she returned to her house and telephonically

contacted the police. Thus, she did not witnessed the entire incident,

but, has only seen accused no.3 Shyam stabbing at the abdomen of

Dhanraj. Her evidence is not of much assistance, except for the role of

accused no.3 Shyam.
25.        The learned Counsel for the appellants/accused has

straneously argued that though as per the prosecution case the genesis

flows from Dwarkabai, however, she did not partake in actual assault.

He would submit that the first information report is totally silent

about the role of Dwarkabai. Likewise, the first informant P.W.1 Yash

has not stated the role of Dwarkabai, which was the initial version. He

would submit that after two days Dwarkabai has been falsely

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
28
implicated by assigning additional role of joining others in the assault

by use of sickle. In order to appreciate said submission he has invited

our attention to the detailed statement of the eye witnesses who have

stated about the role of Dwarkabai.
26.        Per contra, the learned Addl.P.P. would submit that

though initial two witnesses have not stated the role of Dwarkabai,

however, remaining five witnesses have specifically stated that

Dwarkabai assaulted all deceased by means of sickle, therefore, her

presence with the overtact is duly proved. We are not behind the

number of witnesses who spoke from which side. The credibility of

the evidence matters than the quantity. Merely because five witnesses

have deposed about the role of Dwarkabai, it does not mean that the

said evidence has to be accepted as a gospel truth. If on close scrutiny

the Court comes to a conclusion that the evidence of five eye witnesses

who stated about role of Dwarkabai is not free from doubt, then

certainly benefit goes to Dwarkabai.     One cannot be convicted on

assumption or surmises, but, law requires that the guilt has to be

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
29
proved beyond reasonable doubt. Certainly a doubt which clicks to a

prudent mind and not a fanciful one. In the light of said position, we

have revisited the evidence of all seven eye witnesses.
27.        The learned defence Counsel would submit that variance

in the evidence of eye witnesses would affect the prosecution case. In

this regard he has relied on the decisions in case of Subhash .vrs. State

of Uttar Pradesh - 2022 All MR (Cri) 1545 (SC). There can be no

dispute, however, it is a factual aspect whether the inconsistencies or

variance is material, so as to create a reasonable doubt. Needless to say

that minor inconsistencies are bound to occur. In case at hand, the

evidence of prosecution witnesses on the core issue is cogent,

consistent and reliable and, therefore, above decision would not assist

the defence in any manner.
28.        Admittedly, the incident took place on 28.06.2015 around

5 p.m. on platform near flag post at village Malpura. The incident was

witnessed by several villagers.    P.W.1 Yash is son of one of the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
30
deceased namely Baburao. Soon after the occurrence, P.W.7 Village

Police Patil Kiran Thakre, telephonically summoned the police.

Around 7.00 p.m. Police arrived on the spot and drew panchnama of

the scene of offence in between 7.25 to 10.25 p.m. Dead bodies were

shifted to the Rural Hospital for autopsy. Thereafter, P.W.1 Yash

went to Hiwarkhed Police Station which was at the distance of 15

kms., and lodged report on the very day around 11.20 p.m. It assumes

significance since the quick lodgment of the first information is

generally presumed to be true version as there are less chances for

adulteration. In said context the first information report [Exh.62]

lodged within few hours from the occurrence carries importance.
29.        P.W.1 Yash stated about the entire occurrence, however,

he did not ascribed role to Dwarkabai. To be particular, the first

information report is a detailed narration. He was very specific about

the arms held by each of the accused. He has stated in detail about

earlier dispute in the field, followed by Dwarkabai talking on mobile

with someone, probably with her husband and children and then

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
31
actual incident occurred at 5 p.m. He has particularly stated that

accused no.3 Shyam was holding knife, CCL Mangesh was holding

sickle, whilst Haribhau was holding an axe. Then he detailed as to

how these three armed men assaulted four deceased. At the cost of

repetition, we may say that neither he stated that Dwarkabai was

holding weapon, nor her participation in the actual assault.        His

evidence only speaks about the initial dispute of Dwarkabai with the

deceased in the field, and Dwarkabai telephonically summoning her

kins at village Malpura for help.
30.        Had it been the fact that Dwarkabai had actively

participated in the assault, that too by use of deadly weapon, that fact

would not have gone unnoticed by P.W.1 Yash. We have considered

the said aspect from every possible angle. There may be circumstances

in which Yash had no opportunity to witness the entire occurrence or

he was in frightened state of mind. However, we are not prepared to

give such concession to P.W.1 Yash because his police report is not a

cryptic version, but, a detailed narration about the entire occurrence

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
32
till the end. He has stated all minute details, including the weapons

held by each assailant, particular act of each of them, but, it does not

figure Dwarkabai in such detailed narration.
31.        It is to be remembered that P.W.1 Yash is son of one of the

deceased Baburao, and thus, it is highly improbable that he would

exclude one of the culprit who has murdered his father - Baburao,

uncle- Dhanraj and his two sons. It emerges that the genesis of the

occurrence is Dwarkabai, who in fit of anger called her kins, but, on

that basis it cannot be assumed that she has also partaked in the

occurrence, that too in absence of reliable evidence. The absence of

role of Dwarkabai on actual occurrence in the first information report

which was lodged within 3 to 4 hours, gives a body blow to the

prosecution case to the extent of role of Dwarkabai.
32.        The incident occurred around 5 p.m. in the village.

Apparently the villagers must have been terrified by witnessing such a

gruesome multiple murders. Yash, P.W.1 who lost his father, went to

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
33
Hiwarkhed police station which was at a distance of 15 kms., which

must have consumed some time and then lodged report in detail. The

first quick version which is free from concoction excludes Dwarkabai

from the actual occurrence, which according to us is a matter of great

significance. Moreover, during entire evidence P.W.1 Yash did not

state that Dwarkabai also assaulted with weapon to either of the

victim.
33.        We have considered the evidence of next eye witness

P.W.4 Amol Charhate, whose father Najukrao also sustained minor

injuries in the occurrence. He is resident of village Malpura and

related to both sides. He has deposed about the entire occurrence

however, did not assigned the role to Dwarkabai. He has deposed

about the assault at the hands of Shyam and CCL Mangesh. Since he

arrived little bit late i.e. after commencement of the occurrence, he has

witnessed Mangesh and Shyam assaulting Shubham by means of

weapon. He saw that Baburao was lying in injured condition to whom

he himself and Yash were about to shift by motorcycle, however, they

Rgd.
Judgment                                                      con4.24
34
were accosted and again Shyam dealt sickle blow to Baburao.      His
evidence is totally silent about the role of Dwarkabai. Neither he

stated about the weapon held by Dwarkabai, nor overtact on her part.

According to us his evidence carries importance since his statement

was recorded by the police immediately on the following day i.e.

29.06.2015. As noted above, the first information report was lodged

in late hours of 28.06.2015 around 11.20 p.m. and then on the next

morning statement of P.W.4 Amol was recorded by the police. As his

immediate statement which was transmitted into evidence does not

figure the role of Dwarkabai, it accentuates the doubt which flows

from the evidence of P.W.1 Yash.
34.        Coming to the next batch of witnesses who speaks about

the role of Dwarkabai, we prefer to deal with the evidence of P.W.6

Ratnabai, since her statement was also immediately recorded on

29.06.2015 i.e. on the following day.      Though P.W.6 Ratnabai

deposed about the role of Dwarkabai of assaulting some of the victims

by means of sickle, however, her evidence on said point is full of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
35
omissions. The defence has duly proved vital omissions through the

evidence of the investigating officer.       The improved version of

Ratnabai on the point of role of Dwarkabai is of no avail. Apparently

her entire evidence to the extent of role of Dwarkabai is totally

improved version, hence, it loses its credibility.
35.         P.W.5 Vishal and P.W.11 Rajendra had stated above the

role of Dwarkabai. It is the evidence of P.W.5 Vishal that Dwarkabai

and Mangesh assaulted Shubham by means of sickle on throat. Both of

them assaulted Gaurav and Dhanraj by sickle on neck. Pertinent to

note that this witness has assigned a joint role to Dwarkabai and CCL

Mangesh of assaulting at the same part of the body of each of the

deceased, which is not free from suspicion. Moreover, the statement

of Vishal P.W.5, was recorded after two days i.e. on 30.06.2015,

which leaves room for concoction.
P.W.11 Rajendra do stated the role of Dwarkabai,

however, like Vishal he has also stated that Dwarkabai and CCL

Mangesh assaulted Shubham by means of sickle, assaulted Gaurav by

Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
36
means of knife. Then a joint role was assigned that all accused

assaulted Dhanraj and Baburao. He has equally assigned similar role

to Haribhau and Mangesh. This time he has changed the weapon

from sickle to knife to the extent of Dwarkabai while assaulting

Gaurav. Inasmuch as, the statement of Rajendra was recorded after

three days i.e. on 01.07.2015, which is of great significance.
36.        It has come in the evidence of P.W.5 Vishal that on the

date of occurrence in his presence police have prepared panchnama of

the scene of offence.     He has stated that he did not personally

approached to the police to say that he has witnessed the incident. He

admits that when he attended funeral, police were present. He stated

that after two days police patil called him for recording statement.

Likewise evidence of P.W.11 Rajendra           discloses that after the

incident he was throughout in the village till 01.07.2015. He admits

that police visited the village on 28th and 29th, but, still his statement

was not recorded.       No plausible explanation is given by the

investigating officer about delayed recording of statement of these

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
37
witnesses in terms of
Section 161
of the Code. In this regard the

learned Counsel for the defence has rightly relied on the decision of

Supreme Court in case of Shahid Khan .vrs. State of Rajasthan -

[2016] 4 SCC 96, wherein the prosecution case has been discarded on

account of delayed recording of statement in absence of reasonable

explanation.
37.        As noted above, though both witnesses P.W.5 Vishal and

P.W.11 Rajendra were very much present in the village, available for

recording statement, police frequented into the village on and often,

still their statements have not been recorded. In such peculiar facts

the delayed recording of their statement raises serious doubt about

truthfulness of their belated version. Since their evidence as regards

the role of Dwarkabai does not find corroboration from the

foundational fact i.e. the first information report, coupled with

evidence of informant P.W.1 Yash and P.W.4 Amol, we are quite

hesitant to accept their version to the extent of role assigned to

Dwarkabai in the occurrence.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
38
38.        Coming to the evidence of P.W.7 Smt. Kiran Thakre,

police patil, who has admittedly neither witnessed the entire

occurrence, nor has stated about the role of Dwarkabai. Moreover, her

statement has also been recorded after three days despite she being

police patil, which is not free from suspicion.       Then the last eye

witness is P.W.13 Santosh Charhate, who has stated in generalized

manner that all accused inflicted blows on 4 victims. He is not

specific about the role of either of them. Moreover, his statement has

also been recorded after three days despite he is a villager and available

throughout.
39.        On careful scrutiny of the evidence of all seven eye

witnesses, it prominently surfaces that the initial version which

vouched about the credibility is the narration in the first information

report lodged by Yash, followed by his evidence on oath. At the cost

of repetition, we may say that his evidence is silent about the role of

Dwarkabai which we have discussed above. Likewise, the evidence of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
39
P.W.4 Amol is silent about the role of Dwarkabai though his

statement was recorded immediately on the following day. Pertinent

to note that P.W.6 Ratnabai, whose statement was also immediately

recorded by the police on 29.06.2015, her evidence is a pure

improved version to the extent of Dwarkabai. It is apparent that for

first two days from the occurrence Dwarkabai was not in picture about

the actual assault, but, after two days when the police recorded

statement of other eye witnesses, she appeared with a sickle and role of

assault. Thus, for above reasons, our judicial mind does not permit us

to rely on such nebulous evidence to the extent of Dwarkabai as there

is every possibility of belatedly roping her in the actual occurrence.

Therefore, we are not inclined to accept the prosecution case to the

extent of Dwarkabai on slippery path. It is cardinal principle of

criminal jurisprudence that when the situation emerges two views, the

view favouring to the accused would take precedence. Thus, for above

reasons we hold that the prosecution has failed to establish that

accused no.2 Dwarkabai has assaulted either of the deceased and

thereby committed an offence of murder as defined under
Section 300
Rgd.
Judgment                                                             con4.24
40
of the
Indian Penal Code
.
40.         The learned Addl.P.P. would submit that all the accused

have participated in the deadly assault and thus each one is responsible

by applying the principle of joint liability.       In other words, the

prosecution endeavored to state that even if it is assumed that accused

no.2 Dwarkabai has not actually participated in the assault, still by

invoking the principle of joint liability, she is liable for the end result.

The principle enshrined under
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code is

very commonly invoked provision in criminal cases. With a plethora

of judicial decisions rendered on the subject, the contours and its

impact seem still nigh delineated.           We have considered the

applicability of
Section 34
to the extent of accused no.2 Dwarkabai, as

on the basis of independent analysis we have already concluded that

Dwarkabai did not participated into the act of actual assault.
41.         The accused who is to be fastened with the liability on the

strength of
Section 34
should have done some act which has nexus

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
41
with the offence. The said act need not be very substantial, it is

enough that the act is only for guarding or assisting or facilitating the

crime. Act need not necessarily be overt. Even if it is only a covert

act, it is enough, provided it was done in furtherance of common

intention.    The leading feature of this Section is an element of

participation and existence of common intention animating the

offenders. It is also necessary to remember that mere presence of the

offender at the place of murder without any participation to facilitate

the offence is not enough.
42.          It emerges that since Shubham misbehaved with

Dwarkabai, she got annoyed and called help from her two sons and

husband, who in turn arrived on the spot armed with weapons. There

is nothing on record as to what message was conveyed by Dwarkabai

to her kins. The evidence only points out that due to prior incident of

misbehaviour, she summoned her sons and husband. It has come on

record that no sooner the trio came to the spot with weapons,

immediately they started assaulting Shubham who was seated alone on

Rgd.
Judgment                                                            con4.24
42
the platform, and       assaulted others who came to his rescue.
Considering the entire occurrence as a whole, there is nothing to

indicate that there was a prior meeting of mind or sharing of common

intention in between Dwarkabai, her husband and two sons.
43.        The learned Addl.P.P. has relied on the decision in case of

Shiv Mangal Ahirwar .vrs. State of M.P. - AIR 2023 SC 1919, to

contend to fasten the guilt on accused no.2 Dwarkabai, as she

allegedly shared the common object. The said decision would not

assist to the prosecution, as there is marked distinction between

common intention and common object. On the same line, further

reliance is on the decision in case of Masalti .vrs. State of U.P. - [1964]

8 SCR 133. In said case, by invoking the principles of joint liability

some of the accused have been held guilty.       As discussed above, on

facts we have rejected the submission that Dwarkabai has shared

common intention, thus, being distinct fact, the said ruling has no

application.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
43
44.          Undeniably till 5 p.m. of the date of occurrence, both sons

and husband were at different places following their ordinary pursuit.

They never dreamt that something would happen to Dwarkabai and

on that account they would kill the victims. It is not the case that

when the trio came to the spot, they had a discussion with Dwarkabai,

so as to atleast give some clue to hold that they have planned to

eliminate everyone. It is difficult to come to a conclusion that merely

because Dwarkabai was present at or near the scene, without doing

anything and without even carrying any weapon can also be convicted

with the aid of
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code for the offence

committed by other accused. The essential requirement of Section

i.e. prior meeting of mind and sharing of common intention is totally

missing, therefore, we are not prepared to accept the submissions of

the learned Addl.P.P. to rope Dwarkabai by invoking the principle of

joint liability.
45.          Reverting to the role of rest of the accused, it is the

prosecution case that no sooner Dwarkabai telephonically summoned

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
44
to her sons, both Shyam and CCL Mangesh and their father Haribhau

armed with weapons arrived at village Malpura. As regards to CCL

Mangesh, he being child in conflict with law, we are not concerned

with him. It is informed that his case is still pending before the

Juvenile Justice Board, hence we refrain ourselves from making

comments in his regard. All the eye witnesses have stated specific role

of accused no.3 Shyam and accused no.1 Haribhau.           They have

consistently stated that accused no.3 Shyam was holding a knife, who

has opened the attack by stabbing at the stomach of Shubham. There

is specific evidence that accused no.3 Shyam not only assaulted

Shubham, but, particularly assaulted rest of the deceased. Not only

that, while Baburao was being shifted to hospital, he was again made

to stop and was dealt with knife blow at his neck. The evidence of eye

witnesses is consistent about the role of accused no.1 Haribhau also in

assaulting all of them by means of an axe. The first information report

also spells out the specific weapon held by both, coupled with their

positive act of assaulting all the deceased.



Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
45
46.        At this juncture, it necessitates us to deal with the defence

version, though irrupted belatedly. CCL Mangesh has stepped into

the witness box as a defence witness. The accused tried to put up

defence theory, through his mouth.        It is his evidence that on

28.06.2015, his mother Dwarkabai telephonically called him as she

was misbehaved by Shubham. At the relevant time CCL Mangesh was

at Akot, who immediately rushed to village Malpura. He stated that

his father Haribhau was at another field at Malpura, who also arrived

at the spot. It is his evidence that when he came to Malpura, he saw

that Shubham, Dhanraj and Gaurav were holding weapons. All three

rushed at the person of his father Haribhau. In order to save his

father, CCL Mangesh tried to snatch knife held by Shubham, also

tried to snatch axe held by Dhanraj and tried to snatch sickle held by

Gaurav and in said bid, all of them sustained injuries, in which they

died. In other words, it is the defence version that three deceased

Shubham, Gaurav and Dhanraj were about to assault Haribhau,

hence, CCL Mangesh tried to save his father, snatched weapons. He

became furious and in such maily, all three sustained injuries and died.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
46
We may note that though this was the defence version put

forward before the trial Court, however, learned defence Counsel did

not stick to said version. In other words, he did not argue about the

probability of the defence version as tried to be projected before the

trial Court. It appears that Mangesh being CCL, it was a calculated

defence, belatedly raised since law does not provide harsh punishment

to child in conflict with law under the provisions of
Juvenile Justice

Act
. Be that as it may, the said fragile defence is totally improbable

and unacceptable. The evidence of eye witnesses which we have

detailed above, is very specific and consistent about the role of

accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam, which is consistent

and worth to be believed. Moreover, no such suggestion was given to

either of the witnesses, but, it appears that a fine idea of raising such

defence erupted at the fag end of the case. Thus, the defence version

is not acceptable which is against the direct consistent and trustworthy

evidence of various eye witnesses, whose presence was quite natural.
47.        The learned defence Counsel made another submission

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
47
that the case to the extent of accused no.1 Haribhau stands on

different footing. It is his submission that since in the same incident,

Haribhau sustained injuries, it is a sign to show that in sudden fight,

Haribhau reacted, bringing his case under Exception 4 of
Section 300
of the I.P.C. It is submitted that the injuries sustained by the accused

have been suppressed by the prosecution, and thus, it creates doubt

about the very foundation of the prosecution case. For this purpose,

the learned defence counsel relied on the decisions in case of -

Kumar .vrs. State represented by Inspector of Police - [2018] 7 SCC

536, Dashrath Singh .vrs. State of U.P. - AIR 2004 SC 4488 (SC)

and Gurvinder Singh .vrs. State of Punjab and another - [2018] 16

SCC 525, wherein it is observed that failure of prosecution to explain

injuries on the person of the accused weakens the prosecution case.
48.        In above referred decisions it has been observed that

generally failure of prosecution to offer any explanation regarding

injuries suffered by the accused evolves two possibilities that the

evidence of prosecution witnesses may be untrue or the defence plea

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
48
may be probable.     True, it is the duty of the prosecution to furnish
proper explanation about the injuries sustained by the accused. The

investigating officer owes a responsibility to investigate in a fair

manner to elicit truth.
49.        Mere non-explanation of the injuries by the prosecution

may not affect the prosecution case in all cases. The principle would

not apply in cases where injuries are minor or where the evidence is so

clear or cogent, so independent and disinterested, so probable and

creditworthy that it far outweigh the effect of omission on the part of

the prosecution to explain the injuries.
50.        On facts we have been taken through the evidence of

defence witness no.1 Dr. Sujata Chavhan, who has examined

Haribhau on the following day.             She has noted incise wound

measuring 2 cm. over the right arm, incise wound on the middle

finger and injury at left shoulder to accused Haribhau, which is not in

much dispute.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
49
51.        It has come in the evidence that during initial assault,

fourth deceased Baburao belatedly arrived along with a stick. It is

argued that Baburao dealt stick blow to Haribhau, who in turn tried

to snatch knife from the deceased which resulted into causing him

injuries. On that count it has been argued that in sudden fight, as

Haribhau was assaulted he reacted at the spur of moment, which

brings the case under Exception 4 to
Section 300
of the Indian Penal

Code. We have also examined the case from said angle. It is not the

case of erupting sudden quarrel between two groups. In order to

constitute fight, it is necessary that something should be exchanged, at

least verbally.   Dwarkabai telephonically called her two sons and

husband Haribhau, who came with weapons. Heat of passion requires

that there must be no time to cool down. The incident as narrated

discloses that armless Shubham was initially assaulted and done to

death. When father of Shubham namely Dhanraj and brother Gaurav

arrived, they were also assaulted. It was quite natural that Baburao in

a bid to save his kins may have inflicted stick blows to Haribhau, but,

that does not mean that it is a case of sudden fight. Attack was brutal,

Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
50
repeated blows were dealt on vital parts of the body, that too without

any overt act from the victim party.
52.        It is well established that accused no.1 Haribhau by means

of an axe dealt several blows on vital parts of the body of almost all the

deceased, exposing his clear intention and thus, his case would not fall

under Exception 4 to Section 300 of the Code, as claimed by the

defence. In order to attract Exception 4 to Section 300, there must be

a sudden fight that too, accused acted without taking undue

advantage. In the result, the evidence of eye witnesses unerringly

points out that accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam [we

have not dealt with the case of CCL Mangesh], arrived on the spot

with deadly weapon and indiscriminately assaulted all four deceased

on their vital parts of the body, which proved to be fatal. It is not the

case of sudden fight as accused came with arms, used indiscriminately

without any resistance or quarrel.
53.        The defence counsel pointed from the evidence that fourth

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
51
deceased Baburao arrived at the place with stick, by which he dealt

blow to Haribhau and thus, in retaliation Haribhau reacted. Though a

specific plea of private defence has not been raised before us, however,

it was endeavored to convince that since Haribhau was attacked by

means of stick, he reacted in causing injuries. It is evident from the

impugned judgment that in trial Court the theory of self-defence was

raised, however, no specific submission was made before us in that

regard.    We have also examined said probability from the emerging

material. Undisputedly, the accused need not step into the witness

box to establish the case of private defence, which he could point out

from the cross examination or from attaining circumstances. If we

have a re-look to the entire evidence, it emerges that initially Shyam,

Haribhau along with CCL Mangesh have assaulted Shubham by

means of dangerous weapons. Since Dhanraj and Gaurav intervened,

they have also been assaulted and thereafter Baburao arrived on the

spot with a stick. Thus, it is not a case that at the initiation of the

occurrence, fourth deceased Baburao used stick on which accused no.1

Haribhau reacted. But, the facts are clear enough to convey that

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
52
already as per the proved facts, Haribhau has assaulted Shubham,

Dhanraj and Gaurav by means of sickle and then Baburao arrived with

a stick. Therefore, the facts does not indicate that in exercise of

private defence, Haribhau caused injuries, which extended to causing

death.
54.        The learned Addl.P.P. was right in his submission that in

order to claim exception on account of private defence, the accused

ought to have suggested so to the prosecution witnesses. In this

regard, the learned Addl.P.P. has relied on the decision of Supreme

Court in case of Pulicherla Nagaraju .vrs. State of A.P. [2006] 11 SCC

444, wherein the theory of self defence was rejected for the reason that

such a plea was never put forth in statement under Section 313, nor

brought out in the cross examination of any of the prosecution

witnesses. The said observation clearly applies, as no such specific

defence was raised.
55.        The learned Addl.P.P. has rightly pointed out that in

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
53
absence of specific defence of sudden fight or exercise of private

defence, the said theory cannot be accepted. For this purpose reliance

is placed on the decision in case of Ganga Singh .vrs. State of M.P. -

[2013] 7 SCC 278.         In the said decision in absence of cross

examination and specific defence, the stand taken by the accused has

been rejected. On the same line reliance is placed on the decision in

case of Hanumantappa Bhimappa Dalavai and othes .vrs. State of

Karnataka - [2009] 11 SCC 408, which has acode the principle about

the right of private defence.
56.        The learned Addl.P.P. has further relied on the decision in

case of V. Subramani and others .vrs. State of T.N. [2005] 10 SCC

358, to contend that in absence of reasonable apprehension, the

theory of exercise of right of private defence cannot be adopted. The

said submission holds merit, as herein also the accused are unable to

point out the necessity of exercising of right of private defence.
Section 96
of the Indian Penal Code provides that anything is not an

offence which is done in exercise of private defence.          While

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
54
considering said defence, the Court must consider all the surrounding

circumstances. It is not necessary for the accused to plead in so many

words that he acted in self defence, however, the onus lies on the

accused to point out reasonable and probable apprehension to exercise

such a right, merely the accused sustained some injuries, it does not

necessitates that the theory of self defence be accepted. The injuries

sustained by Haribhau are minor and superficial. In order to find

whether the right of private defence is available, the entire incident

has to be examined, which we have detailed above. In the result, it is

not possible to accept either of the defence version about applicability

of Exception 4 to Section 300 or exercise of right of private defence

by accused no.1 Haribhau.
57.        Apart the prosecution has relied on one other circumstance

to fasten the guilt of the accused. It is the prosecution case that in

pursuance to the disclosure made by accused no.3 Shyam, weapons

used in the commission of crime have been seized. The prosecution

led evidence of P.W.3 Ashok who is panch witness to the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
55
memorandum [Exh.92] and consequential seizure [Exh.93] of four

weapons namely two iron sickles, axe and a knife. All these articles

were sealed and sent for chemical analyzation.           On chemical

analyzation, it was found that the seized articles were having blood

stains, which were detected to be of some of the deceased. The

defence has strongly criticized the evidence of seizure by claiming to

be a farce.   The learned defence counsel would submit that the

evidence of P.W. 9 Prashant auto-driver falsifies the entire evidence of

disclosure and seizure.
58.        It is the prosecution case that P.W.9 Prashant, is an auto

rickshaw driver. It is his evidence that on 28.06.2015, around 4 to

4.30 p.m. CCL Mangesh engaged his auto rickshaw so as to proceed to

village Malpura, as he has been telephonically called by his mother

Dwarkabai. Accordingly he took Mangesh by auto to Malpura, who

was holding a nylon bag at the relevant time. Auto left Mangesh 2

kms away at the of the outskirts of village Malapura. When the auto

on return journey reached hardly 2-3 kms, away, auto driver again

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
56
received a call from Mangesh to fetch them from Malpura as they

wanted to return to the original destination Akot. P.W.9 Prashant

deposed that within short time all 4 accused came near the stream-let.

All of them    were holding arms.      He particularly deposed that

Mangesh was holding sickle, whilst Shyam was holding knife. All of

them boarded the auto and proceeded towards Akot. The defence has

pointed out that while the accused along with CCL Mangesh were

proceeding by auto towards Akot, they were accosted by police and

took them in charge. It is argued that in above circumstances, it is

difficult to believe the disclosure and recovery on 01.07.2015, as

already weapons were with the accused whose arrest was immediately

effected.
59.         More importantly, we have been taken through the

admission of P.W.9 Prashant that while the auto came near the railway

crossing gate, police made them to stop. Particularly he admitted that

he did not stopped the auto any where in the way till the police

accosted. It is apparent from the evidence of this witness that after

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
57
occurrence when the accused boarded the auto they were holding

weapons which they carried till they have been taken in charge by

police i.e. P.W.17 Head Constable Mohanlal. In view of said evidence

it is difficult to believe the evidence of alleged disclosure by Shyam on

01.07.2015 and consequential recovery.          It is the prosecution

evidence itself that soon after the occurrence the accused ran by auto

with weapons and within short time they have been taken in charge.

In the circumstances, it is not possible for the accused to get down

from the vehicle, conceal the weapons in to bushes and proceed

further.   Though the trial Court assumed these things, however, in

view of clear admission of P.W.9 Prashant, that he did not stopped the

auto anywhere, it is not possible to accept said assumption. In the

circumstances, it is difficult to accept the prosecution case to the

extent of memorandum and seizure of weapons at the instance of

Shyam on account of improbability.
60.        The prosecution has also relied on the seizure of blood

stained clothes of accused and finding of blood of deceased on the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
58
clothes. It reveals that the clothes of accused no.1 Shyam have been

seized on the very next day at police station Hiwarkhed, which were

containing jeans pant, full sleeves shirt shoes of action company.

Likewise clothes of Dwarkabai containing saree and blouse have been

seized.    Clothes of accused no.1 Haribhau have been seized on

30.06.2015. The chemical analyzers report indicates that on the

clothes of Shyam blood of "A" group was found. On the clothes of

Dwarkabai and Haribhau blood of "AB" group was found.            The

chemical analyzers report shows that the blood of deceased Baburao

and Shubham was of "AB" group, whilst blood of Gaurav was of "A"

group. Though the blood group of accused no.2 Dwarkabai was of

"AB" group and accused no.3 Shyam was of "A" group, however, they

did not sustain injury. Accused no.1 Haribhau sustained injuries, but,

his blood group was "O". Thus it is evident that clothes of accused

were having blood stains of the blood groups of some of the deceased,

which is one of the additional circumstance in favour of the

prosecution. Moreover, since it is the defence itself that there was a

fight in between them, it was as good as an admitted factor that the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
59
clothes of accused were stained with the blood of the deceased. This is

one more additional link supporting the prosecution case.
61.        The prosecution is also banking upon the evidence of extra

judicial confession made by the accused to P.W.9 Prashant Telgote, an

auto rickshaw driver. We have already referred the role of P.W.9

Prashant above. When the auto driver was called back to fetch the

accused, he saw that the clothes of the accused were stained with

blood, and they were holding weapons. Seeing so he has questioned

the accused on which CCL Mangesh and Shyam replied that they have

returned by committing four murders, and boarded the auto. It is a

piece of extra judicial confession made by the accused. It is settled

position of law that extra judicial confession if true and voluntary, it

may be relied by the Court to convict the accused for commission of

the alleged crime. Though conventionally evidence of extra judicial

confession was treated to be weak, however, it cannot be ignored when

shown confession was made before a person who has no reason to state

falsely and to whom it is made in the circumstances are tent to support

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
60
the statement.    The extra judicial confessions are made to man of
confidence.   However, there was a reason for P.W.9 Prashant to

inquire with the accused as they were armed with weapons and their

clothes were full of blood. In response to the query, the accused

replied accordingly, which is quite natural. Moreover, soon after the

occurrence, immediately confession was made. As delineated above,

there was reason for the accused to confess to P.W.9 Prashant about

commission of crime, since the later has questioned as to how there

was blood on their clothes and then had weapons. Thus, everything

was natural, which cannot be doubted and therefore, this piece of

evidence also needs to be used as a corroborative material against the

accused.
62.        The learned defence counsel has canvassed various points

with the sole moto to convince that the prosecution evidence is not

worthy of credit, as well as there are procedural lapses of which benefit

shall be accorded to the accused. One of the submission is about non

compliance in strict-sense, of the provisions of Section 313 of the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
61
Code. It is submitted that the trial Court failed to seek explanation of

the accused on some incriminating material, which has been relied by

the trial Court while returning the finding of guilt. It is argued that

the circumstances which are not put to the accused in his examination

under Section 313, cannot be used against him and have to be

excluded from consideration. To substantiate said contention reliance

is placed on the decision of Supreme Court in cases of - Raj Kumar

Singh .vrs. State of Rajasthan - 2013 All MR (Cri) 2240 (SC) and

Sujit Biswas .vrs. State of Assam - [2013] 12 SCC 406. There can be

hardly a dispute about the said proposition of law. The intent behind

seeking explanation of the accused on incriminating material flows

from the principles of natural justice. It requires that the accused may

be given an opportunity to furnish his explanation on the

incriminating material which would be used against them. Certainly it

is the duty of the Court to examine the accused and to seek his

explanation as on incriminating material that has surfaced against him.
63.        On said count it is submitted that the trial Court did not

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
62
sought explanation of the accused on the point of chemical analyzer's

report. In particular it is submitted that it has not been specifically

asked to the accused regarding the blood group found on the seized

clothes and weapons, which almost matched with the blood group of

some of the deceased. In this regard, our attention has been invited to

question no.666 similarly put to all the accused. The said question

no.666 reads as below :
"[666]     What have you got to say about the Chemical Analysis
           Report from Exh Nos.15 to 23 ?"
It is also submitted that the trial Court has asked exactly same total

700 questions to each of the accused. True though statement of each

of the accused under Section 313 has been separately recorded, but

the same questions were put to all of them. Questions may be the

same, but, the legal requirement is to see whether the explanation of

the accused has been called on every incriminating bit of

circumstance. It may happen that some questions may be irrelevant

for some of the accused, but, the result is that all the questions


Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
63
containing entire incriminating material has to be put to everyone.

There is no scope to say that only because common questions were

framed, it caused prejudice, unless specifically shown.
64.        The learned defence Counsel is only able to show a single

circumstance regarding non seeking of specific explanation about the

result of chemical analyzer's report. Besides that no submission has

been canvassed to point out as to which incriminating material was

not put to the accused. After microscopic analysis, the learned defence

counsel was only able to point towards question no.666 pertaining to

chemical analyzers report. It is not the case that the trial Court did not

sought explanation of accused on the chemical analyzers report. Said

circumstance was put to accused, but, in a generalized manner. The

fact remains that the explanation has been sought though not specific

and thus, the accused cannot muster any strength from the mode

adopted by the trial Court while seeking explanation.
65.        The defence has attracted our attention to the overwritten

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
64
portion in the first information report [Exh.62]. The informant Yash

in his police report stated that after telephonic talk, Haribhau, Shyam

and Mangesh arrived on the spot. At that time 'Shubham' was armed

with knife, Mangesh was armed with sickle and Haribhau was armed

with axe. True in the police report, the first assailants name holding

knife was initially mentioned as 'Shubham', and then by scoring it has

been replaced by the word 'Shyam'.          Taking us through said

overwriting, it has been argued that at the relevant time deceased

'Shubham' was holding knife, but, later it has been converted into

'Shyam' by overwriting. We are not prepared to accord any advantage

to the defence by such mistake committed by the police while writing

the report. We have reason to say so, because in the same breath the

informant Yash stated names of other assailants with their weapons

like Haribhau and Mangesh. If entire sentence is read in continuity, it

conveys that the informant intended to state name of Shyam, then

Mangesh and then Haribhau, and therefore, silly mistake committed

by the police writer cannot be capitalized for any purpose. Moreover,

the mistake was corrected then and there only at the time of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
65
registration of the crime. Thus, submission on said count need no

consideration.
66.        The learned Addl.P.P. would submit that there was

sufficient motive for the accused to commit the crime. It is submitted

that on account of property dispute, the crime was committed.

Accused no.2 Dwarkabai wanted more share in the ancestral property

which the victims denied, hence, the motive for the occurrence. It is

not denied that there was a property dispute in between the parties,

however, that cannot be construed as a motive for commission of

crime. It emerges from the evidence that, 29 acres of ancestral land

was owned by father of Dwarkabai and her two brothers namely

Haribhau and Baburao. Dwarkabai was cultivating 2 acres of land and

was also insisting for more share. Pertinent to note that as per the

evidence Dwarkabai had filed a civil suit for partition, which was

pending since long, therefore, the said land dispute cannot be

construed as a motive as a cause of property dispute was ever lasting.

It appears from the evidence that since Shubham has misbehaved with

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
66
Dwarkabai, it has triggered the quarrel, which ultimately resulted into

taking four lives. Thus one can not say that there was strong motive

for commission of crime, but, at the place of occurrence there was a

quarrel on account of mis behaviour, which took ugly turn. Besides

that we may hasten to add that when the prosecution case rests on

direct evidence, the motive loses its significance. We have already

detailed above, that there was cogent, reliable and trustworthy direct

evidence on the point of occurrence and thus, the motive for

commission of crime would take back seat.
67.        Taking the entire incident as a whole, it is evident that

accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam by means of deadly

weapon caused multiple injuries at the vital parts of the deceased. The

injuries were specifically aimed at neck, chest, abdomen which clearly

demonstrates their intention to eliminate the victims. The act of

accused causing multiple injuries of grave nature by sharp edge

weapon itself demonstrates their definite intention, attracting the

offence of murder. Since a faint plea of self defence and claim of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
67
Exception 4 to Section 300 is rejected, undoubtedly the

overwhelming material indicates that accused no.1 Haribhau and

accused no.3 Shyam are guilty for the offence of murder punishable

under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code.
68.         The next debatable question is about the proportionality

of the sentence. The Trial Court heard both sides on the point of

sentence.   After   considering    the   mitigating   and   aggravating

circumstances, the Trial Court was of the opinion that the case falls in

the category of 'rarest of rare case', and thus, awarded capital

punishment. Certainly, it is a matter of concern, which requires

meticulous examination of all relevant           factors to see the

proportionality of the sentence.
69.         The learned Counsel appearing for the defence has

vehemently argued that the Trial Court has not properly appreciated

the mitigating circumstances in favour of the accused. It is submitted

that the accused are not criminals or professional killers. There was no
Rgd.
Judgment                                                            con4.24
68
strong motive, but, at the spur of moment, the incident occurred. It

was not a pre-planned attack, nor the act demonstrates extreme

brutality. In short, the case does not fall into the exceptional category.
Per contra, learned Addl.P.P. on behalf of the State has

supported the capital punishment awarded by the Trial Court. It is

submitted that the Trial Court in detail considered the mitigating

circumstances and also rejected them. Considering that the accused

have committed brutal murder of four defenseless persons, the Trial

Court has properly awarded the punishment. After considering the

balance-sheet of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances, the

Trial Court has imposed the death sentence, which is appropriate one.

In substance, he would submit that the present case can be said to be a

'rarest of rare' case, warranting a death sentence.
70.         To substantiate death penalty, learned Addl.P.P.           has

relied on the various decisions of the Supreme Court in following

cases:
Rgd.
Judgment                                                      con4.24
69
[1]
Ram Singh vs. Sonia
and ors. - [2007] 3 SC 1

[2]        Surja Ram .vrs. State of Rajasthan - AIR 1997 SC 18.

[3]        Govindaswami .vrs. State of T.N. - [1998] 4 SCC 531.

[4]        Suresh and another .vrs. State of U.P. - AIR 2001 SC
           1344.

[5]        Atbir .vrs. Govt. of N.C.T of Delhi - AIR 2010 SC 3477.

[6]        Ishwarilal Yadav and another .vrs. State of Chhattisgarh -
           [2019] 10 SCC 423.

[7]        Ravji @ Ram Chandra .vrs. State of Rajasthan - [1996] 2
           SCC 175.
[8]
Machhi Singh and others vs. State of Punjab
- (1983) 3
           SCC 470.

[9]        Bachan Singh .vrs. State of Punjab - (1980) 2 SCC 684.

[10]       State of Maharashtra .vrs. Vivek Gulabrao Palatkar -
Criminal Confirmation Case No.2/2023 decided on
           27.03.2024 (Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench).
We have gone through the above decisions and noted the principles

laid therein. We may hasten to add that always precedents would serve

as a guiding factor, but, the Courts have to decide the nature and


Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
70
quantum of punishment on peculiar facts of each case.
71.        We appreciate the herculean exercise taken by the learned

Addl.P.P. to find out some what similar cases wherein death penalty

was confirmed on account of cruelty and multiple deaths. In most of

the cases, the deceased were women and minor vulnerable children.

On the basis of given facts and circumstances, death penalty was

confirmed, which cannot be blindly applied to the distinct facts.

However, in order to understand the judicial trend, we have carefully

examined all above decisions.
72.         Since long, in series of decisions, this question has been

dealt with whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, death

penalty is warranted ? Almost, in every decision we find reference to

the celebrated decisions in the field, namely
Bachan Singh vs. State of

Punjab
[supra] and Macchi Singh vs. State of Punjab [supra], wherein

the issue has been extensively dealt and several guidelines are laid

down.
Recently the Supreme Court in case of Manoj Pratap Singh vs.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                            con4.24
71
State of Rajasthan - (2022) 9 SCC 81, after considering the above

celebrated judgments, made certain observation which would provide

guiding factor. The relevant observations made in paragraphs 76, 77

and 80 read as below :
"76.       The Court also stated that 'special reasons' in the
       context of
Section 354(3)
CrPC would obviously mean
       'exceptional reasons', meaning thereby, that the extreme
       penalty should be imposed only in extreme cases in the
       following terms: - (
Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab
(1980)
       2 SCC 684)

             "161. ....The expression "special reasons" in the
             context of this provision, obviously means
             "exceptional reasons" founded on the
             exceptionally grave circumstances of the
             particular case relating to the crime as well as the
             criminal. Thus, the legislative policy now writ
             large and clear on the face of Section 354(3) is
             that on conviction for murder and other capital
             offences punishable in the alternative with death
             under the Penal Code, the extreme penalty
             should be imposed only in extreme cases."
77.         After taking note of various circumstances
       projected before it, which could be of mitigating factors, and
       while observing that the scope and concept of mitigating
       factors in the area of death penalty must receive a liberal and
       expansive construction, the Court proceeded to uphold the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
72
constitutional validity of
Section 354(3)
CrPC, with the
       observations that the legislature had explicitly prioritiesed
       life imprisonment as the normal punishment and death
       penalty as being of exception, and with enunciation of rarest
       of rare doctrine in the following words: - (Bachan Singh
       vs.State of Punjab (1980) 2 SCC 684)

             "209.....It is, therefore, imperative to voice the
             concern that courts, aided by the broad
             illustrative guide-lines indicated by us, will
             discharge the onerous function with evermore
             scrupulous care and humane concern, directed
             along the highroad of legislative policy outlined
             in Section 354(3), viz., that for persons
             convicted of murder, life imprisonment is the
             rule and death sentence an exception. A real and
             abiding concern for the dignity of human life
             postulates resistance to taking a life through
             law's instrumentality. That ought not to be done
             save in the rarest of rare cases when the
             alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed."

       .....
80.      The Court also explained the relevant propositions
       of
Bachan Singh
(supra) and the pertinent queries for
       applying those propositions in the following terms: -
(
Macchi Singh v. State of Punjab
(1983) 3 SCC 470).
"38.
In this background the guidelines indicated
             in
Bachan Singh
case will have to be culled out
             and applied to the facts of each individual case
             where the question of imposing of death
             sentence arises. The following propositions

Rgd.
Judgment                                                    con4.24
73
emerge from
Bachan Singh
case:
(i) The extreme penalty of death need
                 not be inflicted except in gravest cases
                 of extreme culpability.
(ii) Before opting for the death penalty
                 the circumstances of the 'offender' also
                 require to be taken into consideration
                 along with the circumstances of the
                 'crime'.
(iii) Life imprisonment is the rule and
                 death sentence is an exception. In other
                 words death sentence must be imposed
                 only when life imprisonment appears
                 to be an altogether inadequate
                 punishment having regard to the
                 relevant circumstances of the crime,
                 and provided, and only provided, the
                 option to impose sentence of
                 imprisonment for life cannot be
                 conscientiously exercised having regard
                 to the nature and circumstances of the
                 crime       and    all  the     relevant
                 circumstances.
(iv) A balance sheet of aggravating and
                 mitigating circumstances has to be
                 drawn up and in doing so the
                 mitigating circumstances have to be
                 accorded full weightage and a just
                 balance has to be struck between the
                 aggravating and the mitigating
                 circumstances before the option is

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
74
exercised.
39. In order to apply these guidelines inter alia
           the following questions may be asked and
           answered:
(a) Is there something uncommon
                  about the crime which renders sentence
                  of imprisonment for life inadequate
                  and calls for a death sentence?
(b) Are the circumstances of the crime
                  such that there is no alternative but to
                  impose death sentence even after
                  according maximum weightage to the
                  mitigating circumstances which speak
                  in favour of the offender?
40.       If upon taking an overall global view of
           all the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid
           proposition and taking into account the answers
           to the questions posed hereinabove, the
           circumstances of the case are such that death
           sentence is warranted, the court would proceed
           to do so."
73.
In the earlier decision in case of
Shankar Kisanrao Khade

vs. State of Maharashtra
- (2013) 5 SCC 546, the Supreme Court

surveyed a large number of cases on either side, i.e. where the death

sentence was upheld/awarded or where it was commuted; and pointed

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
75
out the requirement of applying 'crime test', 'criminal test' and 'rarest

of rare test'. The Supreme Court recounted with reference to previous

decisions, the aggravating circumstances (crime test), and the

mitigating circumstances (criminal test), in paragraph 49 of the

decision, which reads as under :
"49. In Bachan Singh and Machhi Singh cases, this
            Court laid down various principles for awarding
            sentence: (Rajendra Pralhadrao case, SCC pp. 47-48,
            para 33-

                  'Aggravating circumstances -- (Crime test)

                  (1) The offences relating to the commission of
                  heinous crimes like murder, rape, armed
                  dacoity, kidnapping, etc. by the accused with a
                  prior record of conviction for capital felony or
                  offences committed by the person having a
                  substantial history of serious assaults and
                  criminal convictions.
(2) The offence was committed while the
                  offender was engaged in the commission of
                  another serious offence.
(3) The offence was committed with the
                  intention to create a fear psychosis in the public
                  at large and was committed in a public place by
                  a weapon or device which clearly could be
                  hazardous to the life of more than one person.
Rgd.
Judgment                                                  con4.24
76
(4) The offence of murder was committed for
           ransom or like offences to receive money or
           monetary benefits.
(5) Hired killings.
(6) The offence was committed outrageously
           for want only while involving inhumane
           treatment and torture to the victim.
(7) The offence was committed by a person
           while in lawful custody.
(8) The murder or the offence was committed
           to prevent a person lawfully carrying out his
           duty like arrest or custody in a place of lawful
           confinement of himself or another. For
           instance, murder is of a person who had acted
           in lawful discharge of his duty under
Section 43
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(9) When the crime is enormous in proportion
           like making an attempt of murder of the entire
           family or members of a particular community.

           (10) When the victim is innocent, helpless or a
           person relies upon the trust of relationship and
           social norms, like a child, helpless woman, a
           daughter or a niece staying with a father/uncle
           and is inflicted with the crime by such a trusted
           person.
(11) When murder is committed for a motive
           which evidences total depravity and meanness.

           (12) When there is a cold-blooded murder

Rgd.
Judgment                                                con4.24
77
without provocation.
(13) The crime is committed so brutally that it
           pricks or shocks not only the judicial
           conscience but even the conscience of the
           society.
Mitigating circumstances -- (Criminal test)

           (1) The manner and circumstances in and
           under which the offence was committed, for
           example, extreme mental or emotional
           disturbance or extreme provocation in
           contradistinction to all these situations in
           normal course.
(2) The age of the accused is a relevant
           consideration but not a determinative factor by
           itself.
(3) The chances of the accused of not indulging
           in commission of the crime again and the
           probability of the accused being reformed and
           rehabilitated.
(4) The condition of the accused shows that he
           was mentally defective and the defect impaired
           his capacity to appreciate the circumstances of
           his criminal conduct.
(5) The circumstances which, in normal course
           of life, would render such a behaviour possible
           and could have the effect of giving rise to
           mental imbalance in that given situation like
           persistent harassment or, in fact, leading to
           such a peak of human behaviour that, in the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
78
facts and circumstances of the case, the accused
                 believed that he was morally justified in
                 committing the offence.
(6) Where the court upon proper appreciation
                 of evidence is of the view that the crime was
                 not committed in a preordained manner and
                 that the death resulted in the course of
                 commission of another crime and that there
                 was a possibility of it being construed as
                 consequences to the commission of the primary
                 crime.
(7) Where it is absolutely unsafe to rely upon
                 the testimony of a sole eyewitness though the
                 prosecution has brought home the guilt of the
                 accused."
74.         We may also recall the observations made by the Supreme

Court in case of
Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik vs. State of Maharashtra
- (2019) 12 SCC 460 were in paragraph nos.45 and 47, which read as

follows :
"45.      The law
laid down by
various decisions of
            this Court clearly and unequivocally mandates that
            the probability (not possibility or improbability or
            impossibility) that a convict can be reformed and
            rehabilitated in society must be seriously and
            earnestly considered by the courts before awarding
            the death sentence. This is one of the mandates of
            the "special reasons" requirement of Section 354(3)
Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
79
CrPC
and ought not to be taken lightly since it
           involves snuffing out the life of a person. To
           effectuate this mandate, it is the obligation on the
           prosecution to prove to the court, through evidence,
           that the probability is that the convict cannot be
           reformed or rehabilitated. This can be achieved by
           bringing on record, inter alia, material about his
           conduct in jail, his conduct outside jail if he has
           been on bail for some time, medical evidence about
           his mental make-up, contact with his family and so
           on. Similarly, the              convict can produce
           evidence on these issues as well.
(46)             ...
47. Consideration of the reformation, rehabilitation
           and reintegration of the convict into society cannot
           be overemphasized.
Until Bachan Singh
(supra), the
           emphasis given by the courts was primarily on the
           nature of the crime, its brutality and severity.
           Bachan Singh placed the sentencing process into
           perspective and introduced the necessity of
           considering the reformation or rehabilitation of the
           convict. Despite the view expressed by the
           Constitution Bench, there have been several
           instances... where there is a tendency to give
           primacy to the crime and consider the criminal in a
           somewhat secondary manner.
As observed in
Sangeet Vs. State of Haryana
(2013) 2 SCC 452. "In
           the sentencing process, both the crime and the
           criminal are equally important." Therefore, we
           should not forget that the criminal, however ruthless
           he might be, is nevertheless a human being and is
           entitled to a life of dignity notwithstanding his

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
80
crime. Therefore, it is for the prosecution and the
            courts to determine whether such a person,
            notwithstanding his crime, can be reformed and
            rehabilitated. To obtain and analyze this
            information is certainly not an easy task but must
            nevertheless be undertaken. The process of
            rehabilitation is also not a simple one since it
            involves social reintegration of the convict into
            society. Of course, notwithstanding any information
            made available and its analysis by experts coupled
            with the evidence on record, there could be
            instances where the social reintegration of the
            convict may not be possible. If that should happen,
            the option of a long duration of imprisonment is
            permissible."
75.        Recently, Three Judge Bench decision of the Supreme

Court in case of Manoj and ors. Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh - (2023)

2 SCC 353,     took review of series of decisions in the field and

observed as under :
"223. The decades that followed, have witnessed a
            line of judgments in which this court has
            continually taken judicial notice of the
            incongruence in application of the 'rarest of rare'
            test enunciated in Bachan Singh, and therefore,
            tried to restrict imposition of the death penalty, in
            an attempt to strengthen a principled application of
            the same.
224. This aspect was dealt with extensively in

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
81
Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar vs. State of
           Maharashtra
(2009) 6 SCC 498 where the court
           articulated the test to be a two-step process to
           determine whether a case deserves the death
           sentence - firstly, that the case belongs to the 'rarest
           of rare' category, and secondly, that the option of
           life imprisonment would simply not suffice. For the
           first step, the aggravating and mitigating
           circumstances would have to be identified and
           considered equally. For the second test, the court
           had to consider whether the alternative of life
           imprisonment was unquestionably foreclosed as the
           sentencing aim of reformation was unachievable,
           for which the State must provide material.
225.              ...
226.              ...
227. Recently, while considering a review petition,
           this court in
Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State
           of Maharashtra
(2019) 12 SCC 460 held that
           Bachan Singh had intended the test to be
           'probability' and not improbability, possibility or
           impossibility of reformation and rehabilitation as a
           mandate of
Section 354(4)
CrPC. The court
           analyzed numerous earlier precedents, noting that
           evidence by the state on this has been sparse and
           limited, but was essential for the courts to measure
           the probability of reform, rehabilitation and
           reintegration. The court located this requirement in
           the right of the accused, who regardless of being
           ruthless, was entitled to a life of dignity,
           notwithstanding his crime. While this process is not
           easy, it was noted that the neither is the process of
           rehabilitation since it involves reintegration into

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
82
society. When this is found to be not possible in
           certain cases, a longer duration of imprisonment
           was instead permissible.
227.             ...
228.             ...
229.             ...
230.             ...
231.             ...
232. This court in
Rajesh Kumar v. State
(2011)
           13 SCC 706 again reiterated that brutality in itself,
           was not enough to impose death sentence - the
           accused was convicted for murder of two children
           who offered no provocation or resistance to the
           brutal and inhuman fashion in which the accused
           committed the crime, however, it was held that due
           consideration to the mitigating circumstances of the
           criminal still had to be given. Evidence had to be
           placed on record by the State, demonstrating that
           he was beyond reform or rehabilitation, the absence
           of which was a mitigating circumstance in itself.
           The High Court had merely noted that he was a
           first-time offender and had a family to take care of
- which this court noted was a very narrow and
           myopic view on the mitigating circumstances.
233.        Therefore, 'individualised, principled
           sentencing' - based on both the crime and criminal,
           with consideration of whether reform or
           rehabilitation is achievable (held to be 'probable' in
           Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik), and consequently
           whether the option of life imprisonment is
           unquestionably foreclosed - should be the only

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
83
factor of 'commonality' that must be discernible
           from decisions relating to capital offences. With the
           creation of a new sentencing threshold in Swamy
           Shraddananda (2), and later affirmed by a
           constitution bench in
Union of India v. V Sriharan
(2016) 7 SCC 1, of life imprisonment without
           statutory remission (i.e.,
Article 72
and
161
of the
           Constitution are still applicable), yet another option
           exists, before imposition of death sentence.
However, serious concern has been raised against
           this concept, as it was upheld by a narrow majority,
           and is left to be considered at an appropriate time.
234.               ...
235.               ...
236.               ...
237.               ...
238.               ...
239.               ...
240.               ...
241. In Santosh Bariyar, making observations on
           nature of information to be collected at the pre-
           sentencing stage, this court further observed that -
"56. At this stage, Bachan Singh [(1980) 2
                  SCC 684 informs the content of the
                  sentencing hearing. The court must play a
                  proactive role to record all relevant
                  information at this stage. Some of the
                  information relating to crime can be culled out
                  from the phase prior to sentencing hearing.
                  This information would include aspects

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
84
relating to the nature, motive and impact of
                 crime, culpability of convict, etc. Quality of
                 evidence adduced is also a relevant factor. For
                 instance, extent of reliance on circumstantial
                 evidence or child witness plays an important
                 role in the sentencing analysis. But what is
                 sorely lacking, in most capital sentencing cases,
                 is information relating to characteristics and
                 socio-economic background of the offender.
                 This issue was also raised in the 48 th Report of
                 the Law Commission."
76.        Per contra, the learned defence Counsel relied on the

following decisions of Supreme Court in cases of -

[1]        Manoj and others .vrs. State of Madhya Pradesh - [2023] 2
           SCC 353.
[2]        Madan .vrs. State of Uttar Pradesh - 2023 SCC Online SC
           1473.
[3]        Suo Motu Writ Petition (Cri) No.1/2022 - 2022 Live Law
           (SC) 777.
[4]        Rabbu @ Sarvesh .vrs. The State of Madhya Pradesh -
Criminal Appeal No.449-450 of 2019 decided on
           12.09.2024.
[5]        Bhagchandra .vrs. State of Madhya Pradesh - AIR 2022 SC
           410,

to contend that this case does not falls in the exceptional category



Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
85
namely 'rarest of rare case' and thus, the trial Court utterly failed in

awarding capital punishment.
77.        The learned trial Judge has assigned reasons in paragraph

nos.333 to 354 for awarding extreme penalty.           On account of

aggravated circumstances, the trial Court took into account the

indiscriminate attack on four persons and multiple injuries on vital

parts. The aggravated circumstances culled out by the trial Court in

paragraph nos.337/1 to 337/18 precisely are as below :
[1]        Lack of repentance.
[2]        Inhuman cruelty.
[3]        Accused armed with lethal weapons, whilst victims were
           unarmed.
[4]        Total absence of provocation.
[5]        Absence of life threat to the accused.
[6]        Victims did not got chance to defend.
[7]        No compulsion to commit crime.
[8]        Crime occurred without pressure or coercion.
[9]        Determined intention of accused and aggressiveness.
[10]       Victims entire family was destroyed.


Rgd.
 Judgment                                                            con4.24
86
[11]         Life threat was also to Yash and Amol who survived.
[12]         Disregard of accused to their close relations with victims.
[13]         Accused Baburao was a teacher, whilst deceased Dhanraj
was Head Constable, but, there was no apprehension to the
             accused of said position.
[14]         Accused were of cruel mindset. Tender age of 17 and 19
             years of two deceased.
[15]         Accused Haribhau was a teacher who tarnished the image
             of noble teaching profession.
[16]         After initial attack on Baburao, he was chased and killed.
[17]         Crookedness of accused in taking defence of thumping
             blame on CCL Mangesh by taking disadvantage of legal
             position.
[18]         Accused have no sanctity of relations.
78.          On the other hand, the trial Court has considered the

mitigating circumstances in paragraph nos.333/1 to 333/3, which are

as under :
[1]          Age of accused is considered, but, expressed that it is not a
             mitigating circumstance.
[2]          Gender of accused no.2 Dwarkabai was considered, but, it
             was not found to be a mitigating factor [we have already
             accorded benefit of doubt to Dwarkabai]
[3]          Absence of criminal antecedents, but, held that the accused

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
87
were of criminal tendency.
79.         The Trial Court in true sense has not categorized the

mitigating circumstances, which surfaced from the facts of the case.
In

the decision of
Manoj Pratap Singh vs. State of Rajasthan
(supra), the

Supreme Court laid emphasis that the burden of eliciting mitigating

circumstances, lies on the Court, which has to consider them liberally

and expansively. On the other hand, the responsibility of providing

material to show that the accused is beyond the scope of reformation

or rehabilitation, thereby unquestionably falls on the State. In true

sense the trial Court did not endeavored in that regard.
80.         The learned Addl.P.P. has made elaborate submissions to

impress us that the case falls in 'rarest of rare category'. In order to

arrive at such a conclusion, he has attracted our attention to few

circumstances which are - the accused arrived on the spot with

dangerous weapons; all the deceased were unarmed; accused acted in

pre-planned and calculated manner; assault was mainly on vital parts



Rgd.
Judgment                                                       con4.24
88
i.e. neck, chest, abdomen of the deceased; false defence has been

raised; motive was a property dispute, and the accused were remorse

less and the entire family has been done to death. We would like to

test this submission on the touchstone of the factual score.
81.         It is the prosecution case itself that on the date of

occurrence around 3 p.m. Dwarkabai was sowing cotton crop in the

ancestral field. Deceased objected to such agricultural activities on

which there was ruckus. In the said altercation, deceased Shubham

misbehaved with Dwarkabai, which enraged her. Dwarkabai returned

from the field to the village Malpura by hurling abuses, and in anger

telephonically called her two sons and husband at village Malpura. In

turn the accused arrived with weapons, and saw that the deceased

Shubham was seated alone on the platform near flag post.
Immediately accused no.3 Shyam stabbed Shubham with knife at his

stomach. Hearing shouts, Haribhau and Gaurav came to the rescue of

Shubham, however, accused assaulted and axed them too. It was

followed by Baburao arriving on the spot, but, he was dealt with the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
89
same treatment. The entire chain of events is to be appreciated as a

whole to understand whether it was a pre-planned attack.
82.         The above facts are clear enough to convey that before 3

p.m. everything was peaceful and normal.           Even it is not the

prosecution case that the accused have predetermined to kill all four

deceased, and to execute the plan, they came and done victims to

death. It can be gathered from the prosecution case itself that the

accused i.e. Shyam and Haribhau were leading their normal day to

day affairs till receiving phone message. It can be easily perceived that

Dwarkabai informed that she has been manhandled by Shubham, that

is why they have been called. Perhaps may be to teach a lesson to

Shubham. In response, Shyam and Haribhau got annoyed and came

to the spot with weapons at their own. Undoubtedly Shyam came by

auto from their residential place i.e. Akot, whilst Haribhau who was

working in another field at village Malpura also came to the spot. It is

evident that both of them had no prior communication, but, as

Dwarkabai summoned, they came at their own to the help of

Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
90
Dwarkabai. The evidence discloses that there was no interaction, but,

no sooner they saw Shubham seated on ota [platform], both of them

assaulted him by means of deadly weapons.           These facts do not

indicate that it was a pre-planned attack.
Moreover, it requires to be noted that the initial assault

was restricted to Shubham only.              Since Gaurav and Dhanraj

intervened to save Shubham, they became the prey.            Likewise,

Baburao also arrived on the spot with stick, hence, he was affected by

the angried action of the accused. These circumstances indicate that

accused did not planned to eliminate four persons, but, as the rest

victims at their own came to the spot, it was at their detriment. The

chain of events no where signals that the accused were predetermined

to eliminate entire family of the victim, therefore, we are not in

agreement with the submission advanced by the learned Addl.P.P. that

it was a pre-planned murder of four victims. It is not the prosecution

case that all the accused with predetermined intention to kill came to

the spot in search of victims and by finding, done them to death.



Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
91
83.         No doubt, the accused were armed with deadly weapons,

whilst victims were defenseless. The attack was severe as the accused

indiscriminately assaulted at the vital parts of the body of all the four

deceased amounting to the offence of murder.          However, we are

considering the case from the point whether it can be fitted in

exceptional category.
84.         Though the trial Court has culled out various

circumstances, as referred in the above paragraphs, it needs

consideration whether in real sense those can be termed as aggravating

circumstances. The trial Court has culled out total 18 circumstances,

however, most of them are repetition of one and the other. We fail to

understand as to how the circumstances as delineated in paragraph

nos.337/7 and 337/8, that there was no compulsion to commit

murder or the accused were not under pressure or coercion to commit

crime, can be termed as incriminating circumstance. Likewise, the

circumstances culled out by the trial Court in paragraph no.337/13

and 337/15 that the accused Haribhau was a teacher which is a noble


Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
92
profession, however, how it can be termed as incriminating

circumstance.    The trial Court in paragraph no.337/17 has also

observed that the accused took a false defence of shifting the

responsibility on CCL Mangesh in a crooked manner.             In our

considered view taking a particular defence cannot be termed as an

aggravated circumstance. It is a statutory right of every accused to

take defence, apart he may succeed or not, but, that cannot be treated

as an aggravated circumstance. True, falsity of defence can be termed

as an additional circumstance while recording finding of guilt, but, it

cannot be termed as an aggravated circumstance while deciding the

case on the set parameters of exceptional category.
85.         More interestingly the reasoning assigned by the trial

Court for awarding capital punishment [paragraph nos.341 to 354] are

quite strange. The trial Court has quoted a verse from Mahabharata,

which we feel to be an unwarranted exercise. More interestingly in

paragraph no.344 of the decision, the trial Court has reproduced some

crime data regarding State of Maharashtra of last 10 years. It has been

Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
93
stated that during last 10 years, 23,222 offence of murder have

occurred in the State. Incidents of 4 murder in a single occurrence in

last 10 years are 19 in number. On the basis of said statistical data, it

has been expressed that such incident of committing 4 murders in a

single incident are rare and therefore, falls in the category of rarest of

rare case.   According to us, the said approach of the trial Court is

erroneous, as on the basis of some statistical data, without returning to

the facts of this case, the category cannot be decided. In criminal trial

each case has its own feature and distinctions. The Court has to

evaluate the case strictly on the facts of the case and not to be swayed

by the statistics and numbers of similar cases.    The said approach is

wholly erroneous, which shall be kept out of consideration.
86.          The trial Court in paragraph no. 347 has expressed that

instances of active involvement of women in committing offence of

murder is normally low. Instances of women committing murder of

her two brothers and nephew is zero, and thus, it is a case of rarest of

rare.   Again we repeat that this reasoning to compress the case in

Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
94
exceptional category is wholly unjustified. As we have stated above,

each case has its own feature and distinction, therefore, each and every

case cannot be put in exceptional category by pointing out some

unique feature. If such analogy is applied, then each case by its unique

feature can be said to be falling in rarest of rare category. For example,

by such analogy, murder by mother with two sons and husband

perhaps may be unique, but, that cannot be an aspect for

consideration.
87.         The trial Court has further expressed in paragraph no.349

that the incident of murder of four close relatives occurred in bright

day light, infront of various villagers. The community was terrified by

such attack, and thus, it is a rarest of rare case. We quite see that this

can be a little bit of circumstance for consideration, but, not of much

significance.
88.             The trial Court has expressed in paragraph no.351, that

none of the accused have expressed slightest remorse for the crime


Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
95
committed.      Accused no.3 Shyam never stated that during his long
incarceration of 9 years he has utilized the time for some fruitful

purpose. Again this line of thinking is misdirected which has no

connection.     We fail to understand as what was the criteria or

parameters for the trial Court to express that accused did not have

repentance.
89.           The trial Court in paragraph no.352 stated that the

possibility of rehabilitation seems to be impossible. They have killed

their close relatives in total disregard to the virtues, humanity and for

the sake of selfishness. The said analogy like a literature has no place

in the eyes of law. Moreover, it was a personal opinion of the trial

Judge, that there was no possibility of rehabilitation of the accused.

Unless there is some material, we cannot arrive at such a conclusion,

particularly to act against the accused for putting them into gallows.
90.           The trial Court has taken into account the conduct of the

accused of non-cooperation. When the trial Court has asked the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
96
accused as to what they went to say on the point of sentence they

declined to express anything. The learned defence Counsel before the

trial Court has stated that whatever they want to say on the point of

sentence, they would say before the High Court.     On such response,

trial Court expressed that accused have undermined the trial Court.

According to us, the trial Court went on emotional line, which ought

to have been avoided. Taking note of such conduct, the trial Court

has concluded that the accused did not cooperate the Court, and

therefore, there is no possibility of reformation. Denial of accused to

express on the point of sentence cannot be taken as an adverse, but, it

has only little relevance.
91.         Surprisingly the trial Court has expressed in paragraph

no.354 that the Constitutional validity of death penalty has been

upheld by the Supreme Court and thus, if in such a case death penalty

is not awarded, then the blame will be pinned to the trial Court for not

making the best use of upholding of Constitutional validity of death

penalty. Less said is better about such type of reasoning to frame the

Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
97
accused for capital punishment.
92.         In case of Manoj .vrs.
State of Madhya Pradesh
[supra], the

Supreme Court has held that the Court should consider Psychological

Evaluation report, Probationary Officers report and Prison report

including the material in respect of conduct of the accused and work

done during their jail term. The trial Court did nothing in said regard.

Neither the trial Court called for the report from the expert,

Probationary officer or atleast the conduct report from the concerned

jail for evaluation. The said exercise was done by this Court while

admitting the matter itself by giving appropriate directions to the

Authorities to submit the report.
93.         The Jail Superintendent, Nagpur has submitted report

dated 11.07.2024 regarding the conduct of the accused. It is reported

that the conduct of accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam

was good and satisfactory. Accused no.1 Haribhau being old aged and

infirm, he was kept in medical ward. Accused no.3 Shyam voluntarily

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
98
undertook the cleaning work in jail dispensary and canteen.
94.         We are in receipt of the report of the Assistant Professor of

Psychology dated 31.07.2024. It is reported that on examination,

accused no.1 Haribhau was found to be psychologically and

physically fit. The same is the opinion as regards accused no.3 Shyam.

The District Probationary Officer in his report dated 05.08.2024,

opined in detail about accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3

Shyam.     It is stated that the conduct     accused no.3 Shyam was

satisfactory. He was not of criminal tendency. In past he was helping

his father in milk business and used to partake in religious village

functions. Accused Shyam has studied upto Bachelor in Science and

was preparing for service in Police Department.         It was his first

offence. His behaviour in the vicinity was good and relations were

cordial.   As regards to accused no.1 Haribhau, it is stated that due to

old age, he was suffering from neurological problem, diabetes, blood

pressure and was frequently required medical treatment in jail. He has

also studied upto B.Sc. and his over all conduct was good.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
99
95.         The reports received from the Authorities reflect that both

accused have a record of over all good conduct in the prison and

display inclination to reform.    It is evident that while in prison,

accused no.1 Haribhau was majorly suffering from ailments, whilst

accused no.3 Shyam has taken steps towards bettering his life by doing

services.   Unequivocally it demonstrates that there is infact a

probability of reformation. There is no material to conclude that they

are beyond reformation. The State has not adduced any material that

the accused are menace or danger to the society. Rather it emerges

that they were leading a normal human life, their conduct prior to the

date of incident was good as well as, during their long incarceration, it

remained good. It was a first offence of both the accused. Meaning

thereby they were not history sheeter. Certainly, the said aspect can be

construed as a strong mitigating circumstance in their favour.
96.         Time and again in various decisions the Supreme Court

has expressed that multiple deaths is not the sole criteria to bring the


Rgd.
Judgment                                                        con4.24
100
case into exceptional category. At the cost of repetition, we may say

that the incident was occurred on a momentary quarrel. Before short

time from the occurrence, nothing was planned or arranged, but, when

accused learnt that Dwarkabai was manhandled, they got annoyed and

rushed for her safety. They assaulted Shubham and only because the

rest three came to the rescue of Shubham, in succession they have also

been done to death.
97.         We have tested the aforesaid mitigating and aggravated

circumstances on the touchstone of guidelines laid in the cases of
Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab
(supra) and Macchi Singh vs. State of

Punjab (supra). Besides multiple murders, we could see no other

uncommon feature to carve out the exception. It is not a case of brutal

killing of defenseless or vulnerable section of the society, namely

women or minor children.      Moreover, there was no motive for the

accused to kill all the four deceased. Everything erupted at a spur of

moment on account of trifling issue of mis-behaviour with the accused

no.2 Dwarkabai at the hands of deceased Shubham.             Unfolded

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
101
evidence discloses that when the accused nos. 1 and 3 received a

telephone call from accused no.2, they lost temper, and in retaliation,

assaulted the deceased by the weapons which they brought and killed

all four. The circumstances do not indicate that life imprisonment is

altogether inadequate punishment compelling the Court to arrive at a

conclusion that alternative mode would result into failure of justice.

In above circumstances, in our opinion, the present case does not fall

within the category of 'rarest of rare' case warranting the death

penalty. Though, we acknowledge the gravity of the offence, we are

unable to satisfy ourselves that the case would fall into the exceptional

category. The offence has undoubtedly been committed, which can

be said to be brutal, but, does not warrant a death sentence. There is

no material to answer with certainty that there are no chances of

reformation. Thus, we are of the considered opinion that it is a fit case

for commutation of sentence.
98.         Imposition of punishment is a delicate task of every

criminal trial. The variety of circumstances needs to be considered


Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
102
while imposing punishment.       We have elaborately discussed above
that the case does not fall in the category of 'rarest of rare category',

thus, capital punishment is unwarranted. The alternate punishment

provided under the statute for committing murder is life

imprisonment. However, in certain cases Constitutional Courts may

feel that mere life imprisonment is an inadequate sentence. In that

perspective, we have independently examined the case of accused no.1

Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam with its peculiarities.
99.         It emerges from the evidence that accused no.3 Shyam

has commenced the attack which he continued till the last victim. His

role was crucial in assaulting all four deceased by means of dangerous

weapon. At the time of commission of offence, Shyam was 25 years of

age and acted in cruel manner. We are sure that mere imprisonment

for life is inadequate punishment in accordance with the atrocities

committed by the accused no.3 Shyam. Certainly, punishment of life

imprisonment may prove too grossly inadequate as to the gravity of

the offense for which the accused no.3 Shyam has been sentenced. In


Rgd.
Judgment                                                           con4.24
103
reported case of
Swamy Shraddananda vs. State of Karnataka
(2008)

13 SCC 767, the Supreme Court took a note of above situation and

ruled that there can be a third category of sentence without remission.
Recently, in case of
Ravinder Singh vs. State of Govt. of NCT of Delhi
(2023) AIR (SC) 2220, the same issue was dealt by the Supreme

Court and ruled that the High Courts are empowered to impose a

modified punishment without remission through out, or for specified

period. Therefore, this Court can always exercise the power to impose

a modified or fixed-term of sentence by directing that a life sentence

shall be of a fixed period of more than 14 years. Undoubtedly accused

no.3 Shyam deserves for this third kind of punishment to meet the

ends of justice.
100.         The case of accused no.1 Haribhau lies on some what

different footing, as he did not initiated the attack, but, joined his son

Shyam.      Secondly Haribhau was aged 55 years at the time of

occurrence and now he is 65 years of age. The report submitted by

the Jail Authorities, Probation Officer and Psychological Expert


Rgd.
Judgment                                                             con4.24
104
indicates that Haribhau is suffering from different ailments and was

treated in jail hospital. Considering said distinguishing feature, we

deem it appropriate to award him the alternate mode suggested by the

statute for the offence of murder, i.e. to under go imprisonment for

life.
101.        On careful consideration, we are of the considered opinion

that the present case does not fall in the category of 'rarest of rare' case

warranting the death penalty. For the aforesaid reasons, accused no.1

Haribhau is liable for alternate punishment of life imprisonment, as

provided under law. However, considering that the accused no.3

Shyam has brutally attacked four innocents for no reason, allowing

him to be released after 14 years of term is tantamount to trivializing

the very purpose of sentencing policy. The ends of justice would be

sufficiently served if the life imprisonment of the accused no.3 Shyam

is for a minimum of 30 years of actual incarceration. We, accordingly,

convert his death penalty into imprisonment of life, without remission

for the period of 30 years of actual imprisonment.

Rgd.
Judgment                                                          con4.24
105
102.         The trial Court has convicted all the accused for the

offence punishable under
Section 506 (II)
of the Indian Penal Code.

There is no material to constitute said offence against accused no.2

Dwarkabai.
103.         In conclusion we hold that the conviction rendered by the

trial Court to the extent of accused no.2 Dwarkabai is unsustainable in

law under all charges. However, we maintain the finding of the trial

Court to the extent of holding accused no.1 Haribhau and accused

no.3 Shyam guilty of the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the

Indian Penal Code. We also hold that the trial Court seriously erred in

understanding the principle of 'rarest of rare' case as delineated by the

Supreme Court in catena of decisions, ultimately misdirecting itself,

by awarding the extreme penalty. Therefore, we commute the death

sentence of both the accused i.e. accused no.1 Haribhau and accused

no.3 Shyam. We convert the sentence of accused no.1 Haribhau into

life imprisonment, whilst convert the sentence of accused no.3 Shyam

to undergo life imprisonment without remission for a period of 30
Rgd.
Judgment                                                         con4.24
106
years of actual imprisonment.
104.        The trial Court has imposed fine of Rs.50,000/- on both

                            i.e. accused no.1 Haribhau and accused no.3 Shyam for which we see

                            no justification.   We reduce the fine amount to the extent of

                            Rs,10,000/- each with default clause as per the trial Court, for the

                            offence punishable under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code.
105.        Accused no.2 Dwarkabai is acquitted of all charges. She

                            be released forthwith, if not required in any other offence. The fine

                            amount, if any, paid by her, be refunded.
106.        We maintain rest part of the impugned order as it stands.
107.        We decide the Confirmation Reference accordingly and

                            partly allow the criminal appeal in the above terms.
108.        Muddemal property be dealt with in accordance with the

                            Rules.
JUDGE                          JUDGE
                            Rgd.

Signed by: R.G. Dhuriya (RGD)
Designation: PS To Honourable Judge
Date: 13/11/2024 19:51:18
