Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 481]
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/152836116/

[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
The Officer-In-Charge, Customer Care, ... vs Sri Samaresh Paul, S/O Late Sarat Ch. ... on 28 April, 2014
STATE
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION, 

 

 TRIPURA 

 

  

 

  

 

 Appeal No.F.A-38/2013 

 

   

 

The
Officer-in-charge, 

 

Customer Care,
Aircel, 

 

Near Agiachala
Sangha, 

 

H.G.Basak
Road, 

 

Agartala, West
Tripura. 

 


. . .
. Appellant. 

 

Vs 

 

Sri Samaresh
Paul, 

 

S/O Late Sarat
Ch. Paul, 

 

Ramnagar Road
No-3, P.O-Ramnagar, 

 

Agartala, West
Tripura. 

 

 . .
. . Respondent. 

 

  

 

   

 

 PRESENT : 

 

  

 


HONBLE MR.JUSTICE S.BAIDYA, 

 

 PRESIDENT, 

 

 STATE COMMISSION 

 

  

 

 MR.H.CHAKRABORTY,IAS (Retd), 

 

 MEMBER, 

 

 STATE COMMISSION. 

 

  

 

  

 

 For the appellant : Mr.P.Chakraborty,Adv. 

 

 For the Respondent : Mr.S.K.Bhattacharjee,Adv. 

 


 

 

 Date of Hearing : 20.03.2014. 

 

 Date of delivery of judgment
: 28.04.2014.  

 

   

 

   

 

   

 

   

 

 J U D G M E N T
S.Baidya,J, 

 

 This appeal filed on 03.08.2013
under section 15 of the C.P.Act, 1986 by the appellant, Officer-In-Charge,
Customer Care Aircel is directed against the judgment dated 06.07.2013 passed
by the Ld. District Forum, West Tripura, Agartala in the complaint case being
C.C. 84/2012 whereby the Ld. District Forum allowed the complaint petition directing
the O.P, the appellant herein, to refund a sum of Rs.475/- with a sum of
Rs.2000/- towards compensation and a cost of Rs.1000/- to the complainant
within a period of one month from the date of judgment, failing which it shall
carry interest @ 9% p.a. after expiry of one month till the payment is made.
2. The case of the appellant
as narrated in the memo of appeal, in brief, is that the complainant-respondent
filed a complaint petition before the Ld. District Forum, West Tripura,
Agartala against the O.P.-appellant claiming refund of Rs.475/- along with
compensation and cost of litigation. It has also been stated that the
allegation of the complainant is that he has a Aircel prepaid mobile connection
bearing Mobile No-8575153909 and there was deduction, without his consent from
his mobile account in the name of services namely, Aircel Friends Zone
and missed call alerts.
3. It has also been stated
that the O.P.-appellant appeared before the Ld. District Forum through one Supratim
Deb of its Customer Care Department and the Ld. District Forum was pleased to
grant time to the parties to explore possibility for an amicable settlement out
of court and the appellant without admitting the jurisdiction of Consumer Forum
and maintainability of Telecom dispute before the Consumer Forum gave its
consent for an amicable settlement, but ultimately could not be settled.
4. It has also been alleged
that on 29.04.2013 the O.P.-appellant had filed an objection application on
maintainability point in C.C.84/2012 and submitted that the District Forum does
not have jurisdiction to entertain the complaint against the telephone/telecommunication
service provider being barred by
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
and hence prayed
for dismissal of the complaint at the threshold.
5. It has also been stated
that at the time of filing the objection application the O.P.-appellant annexed
all the relevant judgment passed by the Honble Supreme Court of India, Honble
National Commission, Honble Gauhati High Court and other relevant judgment, but
the Ld. District Forum instead of considering the maintainability of the case
on jurisdiction point passed the impugned judgment disregarding the decision of
the Honble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.7687 of 2004 in
General Manager,
Telecom Vs M. Krishnan & another
whereby the Honble Supreme Court was
pleased to hold that the remedy under the
Consumer Protection Act
in respect of
telephone dispute is barred.
6. That being aggrieved by
and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment dated 06.07.2013 passed by the Ld.
District Forum in C.C. 84/2012 the O.P.-appellant has preferred the instant
appeal challenging the judgment passed by the Ld. District Forum on the ground
that the Ld. District Forum though had gone through the preliminary objection
on jurisdiction point, but did not consider the same and passed the judgment in
capricious and whimsical manner and as such judgment under appeal is not
sustainable in law, that the Consumer Forum had no jurisdiction to adjudicate
upon the claim for compensation and dispute on telephone/telecommunication
service provider, but the Ld. District Forum without considering the judgment
of the Honble Apex Court passed in Civil appeal No-7687/2004 [2009(8)SCC 481]
awarded the compensation by the impugned
judgment which is liable to be set aside being not sustainable in law and hence
the appellant has filed the present appeal.
Points for consideration.
7. The points for
consideration are (1) whether the Ld. District Consumer Forum has any jurisdiction
to entertain the dispute between the consumers and the telecommunication
service provider in view of the
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885,
and (2) whether the Ld. District Forum was legal and proper in passing the
impugned judgment and (3) whether the impugned judgment can be sustained in the
eye of law.
Decision with Reasons.
8. Admittedly, an Aircel Sim
connection has been given to the complainant-respondent by the O.P.-appellant
after observing all formalities. It is also admitted fact that the present
appellant being the O.P. through its officer appeared before the Ld. District
Forum and both the complainant as well as the O.P. submitted that they were
trying to settle the matter outside the Forum. It is also admitted fact that
the time for an amicable settlement were granted twice and thereafter the
O.P.-appellant submitted a draft compromise petition, but the same was not
accepted as the condition included therein were not acceptable to the
complainant-respondent. It is also admitted fact that thereafter a written
objection was filed on behalf of the O.P., but the order was passed regarding
acceptance of the written objection subject to the condition that the O.P.
shall pay cost Rs.100/- to the complainant on the next date. It is also
admitted fact that on the next date no step was taken from the side of the
O.P.-appellant and order was passed further that as the said written objection
submitted on behalf of the O.P. was neither verified nor contained the signature
of the O.P., it was not treated as written objection and the said complaint
case was proceeded for exparte hearing and ultimately, the impugned judgment
has been passed.
9. At the very inception of
the hearing the learned advocate for the appellant-O.P. submitted that the Ld.
District Forum has no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint petition filed by
the complainant in view of
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, and as such
entertainment of such complaint is without jurisdiction. Reliance has been
placed in the judgment reported in (2009)8 SCC 481.
10. The learned advocate for
the appellant also submitted that
section 8
of the Arbitration Act will not be
applicable in the said proceeding because in the eye of law there is no written
objection and/or written statement filed by the appellant-O.P. and as such
reference may be made before the Arbitrator under the
Arbitration and Conciliation
Act
.
11. He also submitted
referring to a decision passed in W.P.(C) No. 429/2011 of the Honble High
Court of Gauhati that the jurisdiction of the District Forum and the State
Commission to entertain any complaint regarding deficiency in service of
telephone would, if arises out of functioning of telephone, lie in an
arbitration proceeding.
12. The learned advocate for
the appellant also submitted that the judgment of the Honble Supreme Court is
the law of the land and the present telecommunication disputes under the
C.P.Act shall be liable to be dismissed on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
13. The learned advocate for
the appellant also submitted referring to the section 144 of the Constitution
of India that all authorities, Civil and Judicial, in the territory of India
shall act in aid of the Supreme Court. He then submitted that the Ld. District
Forum, Honble State Commission and the Honble National Commission although
all are tribunals, but are the Judicial Authority and as such the judgment
passed by the Honble Apex Court of our country is binding on the Consumer Fora
and as the impugned judgment has been passed disregarding the decision of the
Honble Apex Court in Civil Appeal No.7687/2004 between
General Manager,
Telecom Vs M.Krishnan & another
, the impugned judgment is without
jurisdiction and is liable to be set aside.
14. On the other hand, the
learned advocate for the respondent-complainant submitted that the case cited
by the appellant being Civil Appeal No.7687 of 2004 is not applicable in the
present appeal because in the cited case, General Manager, Telecom (Govt. of
India) was a party and whereas in the present appeal, the officer-in-charge,
Customer Care Aircel, a public limited companys local officer, is a party.
15. He also submitted
referring to a decision of the Honble Apex Court reported in AIR 2008 Supreme
Court 690 that every case is to be decided on merit of its own facts and
circumstances and as such decision of one case shall not be blindly accepted
for taking decision of another case.
16. The learned advocate for
the respondent referring to
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
submitted that if any dispute concerning any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus
arises between the telegraph authority and the person for whose benefit the
line, appliance or apparatus is, or has been provided, the dispute shall be
determined by arbitration and shall, for the purpose of such determination, be
referred to an arbitrator appointed by the Central Govt. either specifically
for the determination of that disputes or generally for the determination of
dispute under that section. He also submitted that as per
section 3(6)
of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 Telegraph Authority means the Director
General of Posts and Telegraphs and includes any officer empowered by him to
perform all or any of the functions of the Telegraph Authority under the said
Act. He also submitted that the appellant-O.P., in the instant appeal, is not a
Telegraph Authority and as such the provision of
section 7-B
of the India
Telegraph Act, 1885 is not applicable in the instant appeal.
17. The learned advocate for
the respondent also submitted that BSNL, Aircel, Bharati Airtel etc. are all licensees
under
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. These service providers have
not been conferred any status of Telegraph Authority by the Central Govt. by
way of publishing any notification in this regard. He also submitted that after
all, these licensees cannot be termed under any stretch of imagination as
Director General of Posts and Telegraphs, a high official of the Govt. of India
or an officer duly empowered by him to perform the act of the Director General,
Posts and Telegraphs and as such the provision of
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph
Act is not applicable in the instant appeal and it also cannot oust the
jurisdiction of the Consumer Forum to entertain the dispute between the
consumers and the licensees under
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph Act as
service provider concerning telephone/ telecommunication service.
18. The learned advocate for
the respondent also submitted referring to
section 3
of the C.P.Act, 1986 and
the decision reported in AIR 1997 Supreme Court 533 that
section 3
of the
C.P.Act envisages that the provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of the provision of any other law for the time being in
force. He also submitted referring to the above mentioned cited decision that
District Forum, State Commission and National Commission are Judicial Authorities
for the purpose of
section 34
of the Arbitration and conciliation Act and
Consumer Fora by virtue of
section 3
of the C.P.Act can proceed with matter in
accordance with the provision of that Act rather than relegating parties to
arbitration proceedings pursuant to contract between parties. He also submitted
that in the first instance, the appellant could not show that there is
existence of an agreement between the appellant and the respondent containing
any arbitration clause and as such the Consumer Fora in view of the principle
of law enunciated in the above mentioned cited case have ample jurisdiction to
proceed with the matter in accordance with the provisions of the C.P.Act.
19. The learned advocate for
the respondent then submitted that assuming the matter in dispute is/was a
subject-matter of arbitration, even then also the District Forum have had
judicial authority to deal with the case pending it, because the subject of the
arbitration shall be governed/guided by the
Arbitration Act, 1986
. He also
submitted that under
section 8(1)
of the Arbitration Conciliation Act, 1986 a
judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter which is the
subject of an arbitration agreement, if a party so applies not later than when
submitting his first statement on the subsistence of the disputes refer the
parties to arbitration. He also submits that under
section 8(2)
of the
said Act the application referred to in sub-
section 1
shall not be
entertained unless it is accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or a
duly certified copy thereof. He also submitted that under
section 8(3)
of
the said Act notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub-
section
1
and that issue is pending before the judicial authority, and arbitration may
be commenced or continued and arbitral award made. He also submitted that
the respondent-complainant filed the complaint petition before the Ld. District
Forum and the O.P.-present appellant did not file any application under
section
8(1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act for referring the matter to the
arbitration assuming that there was the existence of an agreement containing
arbitration clause. He also submitted that non-filing of such an application
under
section 8(1)
of the Act has made it clear that the present appellant has waived
his right to make the matter in dispute referred to the arbitrator.
20. The learned advocate for
the respondent further submitted that the object and purpose of enacting the
C.P.Act, 1986 is to provide for simple, inexpensive and speedy remedy to the
consumers who have grievance against the defective goods and deficient services
etc and the said benevolent piece of legislation has been enacted to protect a
large body of consumers from exploitation.
21. He also submitted that
according to
section 3
of the C.P.Act, 1986, the provisions of the said Act
shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other
law for the time being in force and as such it can be said that the relief
under the C.P.Act, 1986 provides for additional remedy and from that stand
point it can be accepted that the jurisdiction of the District Forum is not
barred, in spite of the existence of the provision of
section 7-B
of the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 assuming that
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act would
also have been applicable in the matter in dispute, but the fact is otherwise
as the appellant is not a Central Govt. not being the Telegraph Authority as
provided under
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act and therefore, the
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act has no manner of application in the
instant appeal and therefore, the District Forum, West Tripura, Agartala has
had ample jurisdiction to entertain the complaint petition filed against the
appellant, a mere licensee under
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
He also submitted that as the appellant is a mere licensee and not the General
Manager, Telecom (Govt. of India), the principle of law enunciated in the Civil
Appeal No.7687 of 2004 in between
General Manager, Telecom Vs M.Krishnan &
another
referred to by the learned advocate for the appellant debarring the
jurisdiction of the District Forum to entertain the complaint petition of the
present respondent under the C.P.Act, 1986 has got no application in the
instant appeal being the facts and circumstances not being similar in nature.
22. He also submitted that all
other cases referred to by the learned advocate for the appellant decided on
the basis of the decision of the Honble Supreme Court passed in Civil Appeal
No.7687 of 2004 between
General Manager, Telecom Vs M.Krishnan & another
are not applicable in the instant appeal.
23. The learned advocate for
the respondent then submitted that in the first instance, the provision of
Section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is not applicable in the present
appeal and as such the filing of the complaint petition in the District Forum
by the respondent is not a bar under any of the provisions of the
Indian
Telegraph Act
. Secondly, the appellant has not made out any case by which it
can be said that there was an arbitration agreement between the respondent and
the appellant and the matter in dispute should be referred to the arbitration
under the provision of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1896
. Thirdly, he also
submitted that in view of the principle of law enunciated by the Honble Supreme
Court reported in (1994)1 SCC 243 between
Lucknow Development Authority Vs
M.K.Gupta
as quoted in the decision arrived at by the Honble Supreme Court in
Civil Appeal 10706 of 2011 arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.17213 of 2010 in between
Nivedita Sharma Vs Cellular Operators Association of India, Bharati
Televentures Ltd. & others, the provisions of the C.P.Act should be
construed widely to give effect to the object and purpose of the Act and the
section 3
thereof envisages that the provisions of the Act are in addition to
and are not in derogation of any other law in force. He, therefore, submitted
that the C.P.Act, 1986 provides for the additional remedy, barring any other
remedy available under the Arbitration Act, Indian Contract Act and under
section 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure.
24. Lastly, the learned
advocate for the respondent submitted that in any way the complaint petition
filed by the present respondent as complainant is not barred and it is
maintainable legally under the provision of C.P.Act, 1986 and therefore, the
judgment passed by the LD. District Forum which is under challenge in this
appeal, being legal, valid and justifiable should be affirmed and the appeal
shall be dismissed.
25. We have gone through the
complaint petition, evidences, the impugned judgment, the memo of appeal, case
laws referred for both sides and the written notes submitted by the learned advocate
of both sides after hearing of the appeal. It transpires from the record of the
Ld. District Forum in C.C. 84/2012 that one Mr.Supratim Deb appeared on behalf of
the O.P. and submitted that the parties would try to settle the matter outside
the Forum and for that time was prayed for which was granted for twice and
thereafter the O.P. submitted a draft compromise petition which not being
contained the acceptable condition to the complainant, was not materialized. It
further appears on that very date i.e. on 29.04.2013 one written objection has
been filed on behalf of the O.P. and accordingly, the order was passed to the
effect that the acceptance of the said written objection was subjected to
payment of cost Rs.100/- to the complainant by the next date. It further
appears that the O.P. was directed to supply the copy of the said written
objection to the complainant within seven days and the Ld. District Forum fixed
the case for evidence of the parties on 04.06.2013, but on 04.06.2013 none
appeared for the O.P. and the order has been passed by the Ld. District Forum
to the effect that as the said written objection not being verified and signed
by the O.P., it cannot be treated as written objection and accordingly, on
12.06.2013 has been fixed for hearing the complaint case exparte and thereafter
the said complaint case was heard exparte and the impugned judgment was passed.
26. It transpires from the
record of the Ld. District Forum that the learned advocate for the appellant
has referred to the decision of the Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission,
Chennai passed by a common order on 30.10.2009 in respect of a number of cases
pending before it wherefrom it is found that all the cases (appeals) were
disposed of by the said Honble State Commission relying on the decision of the
Honble Apex Court made in the Civil Appeal No.7687 of 2004 reported in (2009)
8 SCC 481 and held that the complainants cases are not maintainable in view of
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act. It has also been held by the Honble
National Commission in Revision Petition No.1703 of 2010 as referred to by the
learned advocate for the appellant that the Consumer Fora below dismissed the
complaint filed by the petitioner relying upon the judgment of this Honble
Supreme Court in
General Manager, Telecom Vs M.Krishnan & another
reported
in (2009) 8 SCC 481 wherein it has been held that any dispute between the
subscriber and Telegraph Authority can be resolved by taking recourse to arbitration
proceeding only. It has also been held that the judgment of the Honble Supreme
Court is binding on all the subordinate courts and as such there is no scope
for interference and as such dismissed the revision petition.
27. It is also found that the
District Consumer Forum, Karimgonj on 01.07.2011 in consumer case No.09/2010 as
referred to by the learned advocate for the appellant dismissed the complaint
filed against proprietor of Aircel, Chennai on the ground that the Consumer
Fora has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the complaint in view of
section
7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
28. It also appears as
referred to by the learned advocate for the appellant that the Honble National
Commission in a revision petition No.701/2011 also dismissed the revision
petition in view of the provision of
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 as enunciated by the Honble Supreme Court in the decision reported in
(2009) 8 SCC 481.
29. It has also been held in
the decision reported in AIR 2012 Gauhati 156 as referred to by the learned
advocate for the appellant that the jurisdiction of District Forum and State
Commission to entertain complaint regarding deficiency in service in respect of
telecom would, if arises out of functioning of telephone, lie in a arbitration
proceeding.
30. It transpires that the
decision referred to by the learned advocate for the appellant mentioned above
is based on the decision of the Honble Apex Court passed in between
General
Manager, Telecom Vs M.Krishnan & another
reported in (2009) 8 SCC 481, It
further appears that
the said decision
of the Honble Apex Court in the above
cited decision is based on the provision of law embodied under
section 7-B
of
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. So, it is necessary to quote
section 7-B
of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 which runs as follows :- 7-B arbitration of
disputes-(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, if any dispute
concerning any telegraph lines, appliance or apparatus arises between Telegraph
Authority and the persons for whose benefit the line, appliance or apparatus
is, or has been, provided, the dispute shall be determined by arbitration and
shall, for the purpose of such determination, be referred to an arbitrator
appointed by the Central Govt. either specially for the determination of that
dispute or generally for the determination of disputes under this section.
(2) the award
of the arbitrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive between
the parties to the dispute and shall not be questioned in any court.
31. Again, the word Telegraph
Authority as provided under
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
means the Director General of Posts and Telegraphs, and includes any officer
empowered by him to perform all or any of the function of the Telegraph
Authority under the said Act.
32. The
section 7-B
provides
for arbitration proceeding in case of dispute between the subscriber and the
Telegraph Authority i.e. the Director General of Posts and Telegraphs, and
includes any officer empowered by him to perform all or any of the functions of
the Telegraph Authority under the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
. The decision of
the Honble Supreme Court given in Civil Appeal No.7687 of 2004 reported in
(2009) 8 SCC 481 taking into consideration the provision of
section 7-B
of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 was in respect of a dispute between the
General
Manager, Telecom (appellant) Vs M. Krishnan & another
(respondent).
33. Now, the question comes as
to whether the present appellant, the officer-in-charge, Customer Care, Aircel
can be termed as Telegraph Authority within the meaning of
section
3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. Undisputedly, Aircel, Airtel,
Vodaphone, BSNL, Reliance are all licensees under
section 4
of the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885. It means that the dispute was in between department of
telecommunication as a service provider prior to the hiving off of telecom
services into a separate company namely BSNL. It appears to us that as the
department of telecommunication was the telegraph authority under the
Indian Telegraph Act
, the reference was made by the Honble Supreme Court to
the provision of
section 7-B
of the said Act, but nothing has been shown or
established if the powers of the Telegraph Authority have been vested
to the private Telecom service providers and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL).
It also appears to us that recourse to
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 in the dispute of the present case as submitted by the learned advocate
for the appellant between the consumers and private service providers would not
be available. It also appears to us that the Honble Supreme Courts judgment
as referred by the learned advocate for the respondent is sui generies in its
application and has to be read with reference to the particular facts and
circumstances of the case before the Honble Apex Court between the Telegraph
Authority and the subscriber.
34. It has been held in the
decision of the Honble High Court at Delhi on 06.02.2012 in W.P.(C) 8285-10
& C.M. No.21319 of 2010 between the petitioner J.K.Mittal Vs and the
respondents Union of India & Others, where the respondent No-2 was Bharati
Airtel Ltd., in para-12 of the judgment that the impugned order dated
22.09.2010 passed by the State Commission cannot be sustained as it
erroneously holds that the consumer complaint of the petitioner was barred by
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act. It is clear that the respondent No-2
is not a Telegraph Authority. The bar under
section 7-B
, if at all,
could have applied, had the dispute arisen between the petitioner and a
Telegraph Authority, which is the respondent No-2 is not. Merely because the
respondent No-2 is a licensee under
section 4
of the India Telegraph Act, it
does not confer on it the status of a Telegraph Authority and if the indentment
of Director General of Posts and Telegraphs were to confer the status of the
Telegraph Authority upon the licensees under
section 4
, the Director General of
Posts & Telegraphs, which comes under the Central Government could have
issued the requisite notification under
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph
Act, which has not been done. The parliament was conscious of the fact that
there could exist a licensees by virtue of
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph
Act. However, it has not chosen to fasten the statutory arbitration on the
licensee or its consumer under
section 7-B
. Else, while mentioning the
Telegraph Authority, the legislature could easily have included the licensee
as one of the parties to an arbitration dispute under
section 7-B
of the Indian
Telegraph Act.
35. From para-8 of
the said
judgment
it appears that the learned advocate for the petitioner submits that
the Parliament, while enacting the
Finance Act, 1994
,-whereby service tax was
introduced, defined the expression Telegraph Authority as meaning the
Telegraph Authority under clause (6) of
section 3
of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885, and including a person who has been granted a license under the first
proviso to sub- section (1) of
section 4
of that Act.
36. It was also argued as
mentioned in para-9 of the judgment that if a licensee who is granted a license
under
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph Act where ipso facto covered by the
expression Telegraph Authority, there was no need to introduce a new
definition for the term Telegraph Authority in clause (III) of
section
65
of the Finance Act, 1994.
37. It has been held in that
decision as mentioned in para 13 I also found force in the submission of
the petitioner founded upon the amendment to the
Income Tax Act
whereby the
service tax provision were introduced. It clearly shows that even the
Parliament did not consider the definition of Telegraph Authority contained
in section 3(6) of the Telegraph Authority to include a licensee per se.
38. It has also been held by
the Honble High Court in
the above decision
referring to the decision as held
by the Honble Supreme Court in
Secretary, Thirumurugan Cooperative Agricultural
Credit Society Vs M.Lalitha
(dead) through LRS & others, (2004) 1 SCC 305
placing reliance on the decision reported in (1996)6 SCC 385 between Fair Air Engineers Pvt.Ltd. Vs N.K.Modi The
Supreme Court has given a broad interpretation to
section 3
of the Consumer
Protection Act, in the light of the clear expression used by the Parliament,
which states that the
Consumer Protection Act
shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of the provision of any other law for the time being in force.
Mere existence of an arbitration agreement, assuming there is one between the
petitioner and the respondent No-2, would not bar the maintainability of a
consumer claim.
39. From the above findings it
is firmly established that the appellant herein is not a Telegraph
Authority as provided under
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885. It is also evident that the appellant herein is a licensee under
section
4
of the Indian Telegraph Act as private service provider of telecom. The case
reported in (2009) 8 SCC 481 is between
General Manager, Telecom Vs M.Krishnan
& another
and
in that case
it has been held by the Honble Supreme Court
that any dispute between the subscriber and the telegraph authority can be
entertained by taking recourse to arbitration proceeding only. The expression Telegraph
Authority defined under
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act means the
Director General of Posts and Telegraphs and includes any officer empowered by
him to perform all or any of the functions of the telegraph authority under
this Act. It is, therefore, clear as the appellant does not come within
the definition of expression telegraph authority, the statutory
arbitration under
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 cannot be
invoked and as such it can be held that the remedy is not a bar to the
maintainability of a consumer claim under the C.P.Act, 1986.
40. It has been mentioned
earlier that the appellant could not produce any document showing the execution
of an agreement between the appellant and the respondent containing any
arbitration clause in case of any dispute arises between them. The complaint
petition has been filed by the respondent-complainant in the District Forum. Assuming
that there is an arbitration clause in the said agreement between the appellant
and the respondent in case of any dispute arises between them. There is a
provision for referring the matter to the arbitration under
section 8
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It also appears that the appellant who
is the O.P. in the District Forum did not take any step for referring the
matter to arbitration following the procedure laid down under
section 8(1)
and
(2) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
. Even
in that case
also the
Honble Supreme Court in the decision reported in (2004) 1 SCC 305 Secretary,
Thirumurugan Cooperative Agricultural Credit Society Vs M.Lalitha (dead)
through LRS & other relying on the decision reported in (1994) 6 SCC 385 has
been pleased to hold that in view of
section 3
, the C.P.Act provides the
additional remedy. It has also been observed by the Honble Apex Court that
Consumer Fora created under the C.P.Act
are at liberty to proceed with the matters in accordance with the provisions of
the Act rather than relegating the parties to an arbitration proceeding
pursuant to a contract entered into between the parties. It has also been
observed that the C.P.Act intends to relieve the consumers of the cumbersome
arbitration proceedings or Civil action unless the Forums on their own and on
the peculiar facts and circumstances of a particular case, come to the
conclusion that the appropriate Forum for adjudication of the disputes would be
otherwise those given in the C.P.Act. So, in that view of the matter, the
filing of the complaint petition by the respondent-complainant before the
District Forum, West Tripura, Agartala under
section 12
of the C.P.Act was
legal and proper as the said Consumer Forum has had ample jurisdiction to
entertain the said complaint under the C.P.Act.
41. It is clear that the
principle of law enunciated in the decision reported in (2009) 8 SCC 481
between
General Manager, Telecom Vs. M. Krishnan & another
as referred to
by the learned advocate for the appellant is not applicable in the instant
appeal as the appellant herein is not a telegraph authority within the meaning
of
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. As regards other case laws referred
by the learned advocate for the appellant it is also clear that the said
decisions arrived at relying on the decision reported in (2009) 8 SCC 481 are
also not applicable in the instant appeal as those cases were in between the
subscriber and the private Telecom service provider who are mere licensees
under
section 4
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
42. The appellant has made out
no case raising any dispute regarding the claim of the complainant-respondent.
The appellant only has filed the appeal challenging the jurisdiction of the Ld.
District Forum alleging that in view of
section 7-B
of the Indian Telegraph
Act. 1885 the District Forum has got no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint
petition. We have already arrived at the conclusion that the
section 7-B
of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is not applicable in the complaint case and also in
the instant appeal as the appellant herein is not a telegraph authority
within the meaning of
section 3(6)
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. So, it is
palpable that the appellant has no case disputing the claim of the complainant.
In that view of the matter, it can be said as submitted by the learned advocate
for the respondent that the appellant is admitting the claim of the
respondent-complainant. As the claim of the respondent-complainant is not denied
by the appellant-O.P., we find force in the submission of the learned advocate
for the respondent in this regard and as such we find no difficulty to proceed
with the disposal of the instant appeal taking the submission of the learned
advocate for the appellant regarding claim of the complainant-respondent as an
admitted fact.
43. We have gone through the
judgment passed by the Ld. District Forum. Going through the same, we find
nothing to interfere with it. That being the position, we are of the view that
the impugned judgment calls for no interference by this Commission and as such
the impugned judgment being legal and proper is liable to be affirmed and the
appeal is liable to be dismissed. All the three points are, accordingly,
disposed of.
44. In the result, the appeal
fails. The impugned judgment dated 06.07.2013 passed by the Ld. District Forum,
West Tripura, Agartala in case No.C.C.84/2012 is hereby affirmed, but no order
as to cost.
MEMBER
PRESIDENT

 

 State
Commission
State Commission

 


Tripura
Tripura
