Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 63 of 2018
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/154175902/

[Cites
17
, Cited by
18
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Anita Devi vs State Of H.P. & Another on 31 October, 2019
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA




                                                                         .
Cr.MMO No. 608 of 2019





                                    Reserved on : October 25 , 2019

                                    Date of Decision : October 31 , 2019.
Anita Devi                                                       ...Petitioner.

                                    Versus




    State of H.P. & another                                          ...Respondents.


    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 No.

    For the petitioner        :     Mr. Daleep Chand, Advocate, for the petitioner.
For the respondent        :     Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Additional Advocate
                                    General for respondent No.1/State.
Mr. Gambhir Singh Chauhan, Advocate, for




                                    respondent No.2.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
The accused (petitioner herein), after compromising the

    entire matter with the complainant (respondent No. 2 herein), has

    come up before this Court under
Section 482
CrPC, by invoking

    inherent powers, seeking quashing of FIR No. 63 of 2018, dated

    01.09.2018, under
Sections 452
,
323
and
506
Indian Penal Code, in
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
2
the file of Police Station Sangrah, District Sirmour, Himachal

    Pradesh, and all subsequent proceedings.
.
2.          The present F.I.R. stands registered on the basis of

    information given by Bimla Devi, who has been arrayed as





    respondent No. 2 in the present petition and Mr. Gambhir Singh

    Chauhan, Advocate, duly represents her .
FACTS:
3.          The gist of the entire case is as follows:
(a)     The present FIR was registered on the basis of

          information given by complainant Bimla Devi (respondent No.
2).
(b)     As per the complainant (respondent No. 2) on 1.9.2018


          when she alongwith her son was at home then the accused
          (petitioner) committed house trespass by entering into her
          house and hurled filthy abuses at her. As per the complainant




          the accused also gave stick blow on her head as a result of





          which she sustained injuries. Allegedly the accused also
          threatened the complainant to do away with her life. The





          complainant further alleged that on hearing her cries one
          Mamta Devi rescued her from the clutches of the accused. On
          these allegations, the present FIR (Annexure P-1) was
          registered.
(c)     Now the parties             have entered into a written
          compromise which has been placed on record as Annexure
          P-2.
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
3
(d)      Complainant Bimla Devi (respondent No. 2)                    and
          accused Anita Devi (petitioner) had put in appearance in Court




                                                                .
and made statements on oath that they have compromised





          the entire matter. The statements are on record.
REASONING:
4.          The following aspects would be relevant to arrive at a final

    conclusion in this petition:-
(a)   The parties have amicably settled the matter
                  between them in terms of the compromise deed
                  (Annexure P/2).
(b)   The complainant vide her separate statement
                  recorded in Court on oath,       had stated that she has
                  amicably settled the matter with accused without any


                  coercion, duress, pressure or any wrong tactics and
                  wants the FIR to be quashed.
(c)   Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through
                  District Magistrate as a normal procedure. However,





                  there is inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to





                  intervene in such kind of matter. It is not the requirement
                  of law that the cancellation has to be approved only
                  through the District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of
                  High Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be
                  exercised, depending upon the facts and circumstances
                  of each and every case.
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
4
(d)    Even if, this case is put to trial, the parties are
                likely to maintain the stand which they have taken in this




                                                              .
compromise, which is likely to result in the acquittal of





                the accused.
(e)    If the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC





                is not invoked, then it may lead to bitterness in relations.
                Every time the accused will be summoned in the Court,
                she would blame complainant for the money spent on





                case and travel.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
5.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H. Chanchani

    and another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that

    the determination of the question as regards the propriety of the



    order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need

    not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court




    observed thus :-
"5. .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to





                us inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right
                to plead at the time of framing of charges that there is
                no sufficient material for such framing of charges as
                provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure
                Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even
                at an earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the
                Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and
                summons the accused to appear to contend that the
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
5
very issuance of the order of taking cognizance is
                invalid on the ground that no offence can be said to




                                                               .
have been made out on the allegations made in the





                complaint petition. It has been held in a number of
                cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised





                sparingly and in the interest of justice. But allowing the
                criminal proceeding to continue even where the
                allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any





                offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process
                of court, and therefore, there cannot be any dispute that
                in such case power under
section 482
of the Code can

                be exercised."
6.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd. and

    another
, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as


    under:-
"8. .... .... ....There is no hard and fast rule that the




                 objection    as   to   cognizability      of    offence        and
                 maintainability of the complaint should be allowed to be





                 raised only at the time of framing the charge."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS               ON    JURISPRUDENCE                 OF
          QUASHING:
7.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three

    Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"6. ....    ...    ...It is well established that the inherent
                jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash
                proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
6
abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to
        secure   the   ends    of   justice.     Ordinarily,      criminal




                                                       .
proceedings instituted against an accused person must





        be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High
        Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said





        proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible,
        desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule
        which would govern the exercise of this inherent





        jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some categories
        of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should
        be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may

        be cases where it may be possible for the High Court to

        take the view that the institution or continuance of
        criminal proceedings against an accused person may
        amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or that


        the quashing of the impugned proceedings would
        secure the ends of justice. If the criminal proceeding in




        question is in respect of an offence alleged to have
        been committed by an accused person and it manifestly





        appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or
        continuance of the said proceeding, the High Court





        would be justified in quashing the proceedings on that
        ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may, for
        instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may
        also arise where the allegations in the First Information
        Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their
        face value and accepted in their entirety, do not
        constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no
        question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
7
merely of looking at the complaint or the First
        Information Report to decide whether the offence




                                                      .
alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be





        legitimate for the High Court to hold that it would be
        manifestly unjust to allow the process of the criminal





        Court to be issued against the accused person. A third
        category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of
        the High Court can be successfully invoked may also





        arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations
        made against the accused person do constitute an
        offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence

        adduced in support of the case or evidence adduced

        clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing
        with this class of cases, it is important to bear in mind
        the distinction between a case where there is no legal


        evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly
        and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and




        cases where there is legal evidence which on its
        appreciation may or may not support the accusation in





        question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A,
        the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to





        whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That
        is the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it
        would not be open to any party to invoke the High
        Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a
        reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation
        made against the accused would not be sustained.
        Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the
        inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
8
the matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that is
                  the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In




                                                                     .
Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184,





                  Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26
                  Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun





                  LR 54 : (
AIR 1954 Punj 193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v.
                  Gobina Bandhu Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and
                  Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47





                  Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
8.
In     Madhavrao
                     r
Jiwaji       Rao   Scindia       v. Sambhajirao

    Chandrojirao Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges bench of the

    Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under:-
"7. The legal position is well-settled that when a


                  prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be quashed,
                  the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the
                  uncontroverted     allegations       as     made       prima      facie




                  establish the offence. It is also for the court to take into





                  consideration any special features which appear in a
                  particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in





                  the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to
                  continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be
                  utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the
                  opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is
                  bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be
                  served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue,
                  the court may while taking into consideration the special
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
9
facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though
               it may be at a preliminary stage."
.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS                ON         QUASHING               ON
          COMPROMISE:
9.       A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian





    Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on

    quashing on account of compromise/compounding, in the following





    terms:
"53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language

               suggests, saves the inherent power of the High Court

               which it has by virtue of it being a superior court to
               prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise
               to secure the ends of justice. It begins with the words,



               'nothing in this Code' which means that the provision is
               an overriding provision. These words leave no manner




               of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code limits or





               restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise
               of such power is provided in
Section 482
itself i.e., to





               prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise
               to secure the ends of justice. As has been repeatedly
               stated that
Section 482
confers no new powers on High
               Court; it merely safeguards existing inherent powers
               possessed by High Court necessary to prevent abuse of
               the process of any Court or to secure the ends of
               justice. It is equally well settled that the power is not to
               be resorted to if there is specific provision in the Code
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
10
for the redress of the grievance of an aggrieved party. It
        should be exercised very sparingly and it should not be




                                                      .
exercised as against the express bar of law engrafted in





        any other provision of the Code.
...     ...
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the
        ground of settlement between an offender and victim is
        not the same thing as compounding of offence. They are




        different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the
        power of compounding of offences given to a court

        under
Section 320
is materially different from the

        quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court in
        exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of
        offences, power of a criminal court is circumscribed by


        the provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is
        guided solely and squarely thereby while, on the other
        hand, the formation of opinion by the High Court for




        quashing a criminal offence or criminal proceeding or





        criminal complaint is guided by the material on record as
        to whether the ends of justice would justify such





        exercise of power although the ultimate consequence
        may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding
        having regard to the fact that dispute between the
        offender and victim has been settled although offences
        are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion,
        continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
11
in futility and justice in the case demands that the
        dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace




                                                       .
is restored; securing the ends of justice being the





        ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which
        have harmful effect on the public and consist in wrong





        doing that seriously endangers and threatens well-being
        of society and it is not safe to leave the crime- doer only
        because he and the victim have settled the dispute





        amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation,
        yet certain crimes have been made compoundable in
        law, with or without permission of the Court. In respect

        of serious offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or

        other offences of mental depravity under
Indian Penal
        Code
or offences of moral turpitude under special
        statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the


        offences committed by public servants while working in
        that capacity, the settlement between offender and




        victim can have no legal sanction at all. However,
        certain    offences     which        overwhelmingly             and





        predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of
        civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or





        such like transactions or the offences arising out of
        matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the
        family dispute, where the wrong is basically to victim
        and the offender and victim have settled all disputes
        between them amicably, irrespective of the fact that
        such offences have not been made compoundable, the
        High Court may within the framework of its inherent
        power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
12
complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that on the face of such
                settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of offender




                                                                .
being convicted and by not quashing the criminal





                proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of
                justice shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative





                and not exhaustive. Each case will depend on its own
                facts and no hard and fast category can be prescribed."
10.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur





    and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr.,(2017) 9 SCC 641, a Three

    Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad

    principles for quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
"16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents
          on the subject, may be summarised in the following



          propositions :
16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High




          Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to
          secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer new





          powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere
          in the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
          quash a First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on
          the ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the
          offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of
          jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
          compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed
          by the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is
          attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
          complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
13
under Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the
     ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent
     power;
.
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
     ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the
     ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any
     court;
16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
     Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the
     offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves





     ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
     exhaustive elaboration of principles can be formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and
     while dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the

     High Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of

     the offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental
     depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
     appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the
     victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly


     speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon
     society. The decision to continue with the trial in such cases is
     founded on the overriding element of public interest in
     punishing persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be





     criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant
     element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in
     so far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is





     concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
     commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
     transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
     situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the
     dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
     proceeding if in view of the compromise between the
     disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and the
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
14
continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause oppression
          and prejudice; and




                                                               .
16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in





          propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving
          the financial and economic well-being of the state have
          implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute
          between private disputants. The High Court would be justified





          in declining to quash where the offender is involved in an
          activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour.
          The consequences of the act complained of upon the financial
          or economic system will weigh in the balance."
11.        In the present case, the offence under
Section 452
IPC is

    not compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. Although the other

    offences under
Sections 323
and
506
IPC are compoundable, still

    even a single Non-Compoundable offence shall take in its sweep

    even the compoundable offences. Be that as it may, the inherent



    jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC can be invoked to quash the FIR

    and subsequent proceedings.
12.       In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as

    judicial precedents, a few of which have been mentioned





    hereinabove, I am of the considered opinion that continuation of

    these proceedings will only cause unnecessary burden on the trial

    Courts but in all likelihood is going to cause distressing hardship on

    both the victim as well as the accused, without resulting into any

    fruitful purpose whatsoever.   Moreover, our trial Courts are already

    burdened with so many cases and it will be a total wastage of the
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
15
valuable time of the Courts. If these types of proceedings are

    permitted to be continued and the accused are prosecuted, it will




                                                                .
serve no purpose whatsoever. Therefore, I am of the considered

    opinion that this is a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the





    High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is

    invoked to quash the above mentioned FIR and consequent





    proceedings.
13.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State of

    Himachal Pradesh (SC
); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme

    Court holds as under:-
"47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017
                   is concerned, the appellants came to this Court
                   challenging the order of cognizance only because of




                   the reason that matter was already pending as the





                   appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions
                   against the order of the High Court rejecting their





                   petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having
                   regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also
                   been entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR
                   needs to be quashed, order of cognizance would
                   automatically stands vitiated."
CONSEQUENCES:
14.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3

    SCR 639, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
16
"The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when
                  parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and




                                                               .
weave a sense of fellowship or reunion."
15.       Consequently, this petition is allowed and the F.I.R. No. 63





    of 2018, dated 01.09.2018, registered at Police Station Sangrah,

    District Sirmour, H.P., for the commission of offences punishable

    under Sections 452, 323 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code,                      is
16.
r            to
    quashed. Since FIR has been quashed, all the consequential

    proceedings, if any, are also quashed and set aside.
The bail bonds are accordingly discharged.
Petition is allowed. All pending application(s), if any, also

    stand disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                          Judge.
October    31 , 2019 (PK)
::: Downloaded on - 31/10/2019 20:25:55 :::HCHP
