Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 77 of 2017
Citation: SCC 667, Hon'ble
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/157574257/

[Cites
14
, Cited by
48
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Seema Devi & Others vs State Of H.P. & Another on 5 August, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                              Cr.MMO No.77 of 2017
                                              Reserved on: 13th July, 2021
                                              Decided on : 5th August 2021




                                                                         .
Seema Devi & Others                                                   ..Petitioners

                                  Versus





    State of H.P. & Another                                           ...Respondents.
    Coram:





    The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
    Whether approved for reporting?1 NO
    For the petitioner            :        Mr. Jagan Nath, Advocate
    For the respondents           :        Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Addl. A.G., Mr.
                           r               Ram Lal Thakur, Asstt. A.G., for

                                           respondent No.1.
                                           Mr. Anup Rattan,             Advocate       for
                                           respondent No.2.


                          THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE

    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.




    FIR No.        Dated        Police Station                   Sections
    20 of 2012     17.1.2012    Una, District Una, H.P.          498-A, 406, 34 IPC
Seeking quashing of above captioned FIR and further proceedings for





    meeting cruelty and usurping the 'Streedhan' of the complainant, who was
    married in the accused's family, have come up before this Court under Section 482
    Cr.P.C.
2.        On 17.1.2012, the complainant-respondent No.2 made a written complaint
    to Superintendent of Police, Una. She alleged that she was married to Manjeet
    Singh (son of petitioners No.3 and 4) on 14.6.2009. The marriage was arranged
    and fixed within a fortnight. A-1 Gurwara Singh (petitioner No.3), who is the
    father of Manjeet Singh, had told the complainant's family that his son resides in
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
2
Canada. He had visited India for marriage and was unable to stay longer, and for
    that reason, they wanted to decide the marriage at an early date. The complainant
    further alleged that before marriage Manjeet Singh assured her to take along to
    Canada. On this assurance, her parents had agreed to the marriage. After the




                                                                         .
marriage, relations were cordial for a month. At that time, the complainant has
    done her B.Sc. with B.Ed. She was working on a contract basis on a self-financed
    project in Una. Her husband asked her to leave this job by assuring her that he





    would take her along to Canada. In between, her husband got the marriage
    registered in the office of Sub Divisional Magistrate, Una, and procured her
    passport to travel to Canada. After a month of the wedding, her husband started





    complaining about lesser jewelry and dowry.
3.     The complainant told her husband that her parents had given dowry
    according to their capacity, on which he gave beatings to her. At that time, her A-
1 Gurwara Singh, father-in-law, A-2 Champa Devi, mother-in-law, A-3, Seema

    Devi, A-4, Prem Chand, A-5, Bholi Devi, A-6, Dev Raj A-7, Gurmail Kaur A-8,
    Sarjeevan A-9, Baby A-10, Ashok Kumar and A-11 Suman Devi were present. All
    these people taunted her for not bringing dowry as per their capacity. Her mother-
in-law and father-in-law also taunted her that at the wedding, they were not given
    proper treatment. In between, they also gave her beatings. The complainant
    informed her parents about the same. On the next day, i.e., 6.8.2009, her husband




    left for Canada. On reaching Canada, he informed her on the phone that he has
    married in Canada and would never return to India, and she would not be allowed





    to live in peace in her in-laws till she brings appropriate dowry and gold. The
    complainant further alleged that now her husband is outside India and is not





    paying her money. The complainant further stated that due to consummation of
    marriage, she gave birth to a son on 24.2.2010. She further stated that on the birth
    of the child, no member of her in-laws visited her.
4.     Before that, on 25.10.2009, all these persons had thrown her away from
    their house and had kept her passport, marriage certificate, etc., with them.
    Despite repeated requests, they did not return her documents. The complainant
    further stated that she is residing with her parents from 25th October 2009 till
    date. She further stated that when she visited her office, her father-in-law would
    stop her and say that he is retired from the police and knows the law very well. He
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
3
also threatened that if she makes any complaint against them, they will not let her
    and her family live in peace. Her father-in-law also wrote dirty letters to defame
    her. He also complained against her in the Panchayat. She further stated that the
    Women Commission has also called her father-in-law on three occasions, and




                                                                         .
even in such meetings, they had hurled abuses at her and threatened her to take
    back her complaint.
5.       On these allegations, she sought legal action against all the accused





    persons. Based on these allegations, the Police registered the FIR mentioned
    above. After completing the investigation, the officer in charge of the Police
    Station, Una, filed a police report under
Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C., in the Court of





    learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Una.
6.       Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate took cognizance of the offence and
    summoned the accused. As evident from order-sheet dated 24.1.2017, the matter

    was adjourned to 7.3.2017 for consideration on charge in case RBT No.239-II-
13/12.
7.       Challenging the FIR mentioned above, order taking cognizance, issuance
    of summons, All the accused except the husband has come up before this Court


    under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. During the pendency of this petition, petitioner No.10
    Ashok Kumar (A-10) died, and his name was deleted from the array of the
    petitioner.
ANALYSIS AND REASONING.
8.       Mr. Jagan Nath learned counsel for the petitioner has handed over one
    communication, which reveals that up to March 2018, a sum of 19,984.35 U.S.





    Dollars was paid to the child. It further reveals that another sum of 67,000/- U.S.
    Dollars was further paid to the child in 2018. Apart from that, another sum of
    4,000/- U.S. Dollars was also paid on March 20, 2018. A further sum of 4000/-
    U.S. Dollars after March 21, 2018, onwards. This order, dated April 2, 2018, is
    under the signature of the Court at Ontario in case NO.FS-16-0094-00. Learned
    counsel for the complainant-second respondent does not dispute this Court decree
    passed by the Court of Canada.
9.       Around Rs. 72 Lacs have already been paid for the maintenance of the
    child. A sum of USD 60,000/- approximately are also being paid. This payment
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
4
part remains undisputed, and on that, it has nothing to do with the quashing of
    FIR.
10.    In the FIR, the complainant stated that she had agreed to the marriage on
    the assurance by the accused Manjeet Singh that he would take her to Canada. In




                                                                         .
the application itself, she explicitly stated that the marriage had taken place on
    14.6.2009, and the accused had left for Canada on 6.8.2009. Thus, he had stayed
    with the complainant for around 1½ months, and in between, she conceived. A





    perusal of the FIR further reveals that accused Gurwara Singh had impressed upon
    the complainant's family that the boy has to return to Canada and wants early
    marriage. Consequently, the return of the accused Manjeet Singh on 6.8.2009 is





    not something, which was not on the complainant's notice. Even otherwise, a long
    absence from a place of work leads to various consequences more significantly of
    the loss of Job. Given this, the allegations that the accused had left Canada on

    account of lesser dowry are meaningless. The factum that accused No.1 Manjeet

    Singh has already paid a considerable amount of money for the maintenance for
    his son and apart from monthly maintenance, which is also huge even in Indian
    standards, would point out that there cannot be any element of lesser dowry,


    which appears to be an afterthought to involve the provisions of
Section 498-A
and
406
IPC. Furthermore, when the accused was financially well off, and the
    complainant had agreed to marry knowingly that he lives in Canada, and even she




    would also be going with him; to imply that the allegations of dowry leveled after
    2½ years of the wedding are nothing but an afterthought to fill up the ingredients





    to make the case a cognizable offense to register the FIR.
11.    Other than the husband, all the relatives have filed the present petition,





    including the father-in-law and mother-in-law. A perusal of FIR reveals that all of
    them taunted her for not meeting the demand of dowry. But hypothetically, even
    if the complainant's family had given any dowry, the relatives had nothing to gain.
    Thus, the possibility of framing them in a criminal case cannot be ruled out to put
    pressure on the husband, Manjeet Singh. Thus, the mere allegations that in their
    presence, father-in-law and mother-in-law had taunted the complainant would not
    at all make out any case against them. Even as per the complainant, her husband
    was not present, and he had already left for Canada on 6th August 2009. This
    incident a day before Manjeet Singh leaving India for Canada. Once the wife was
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
5
supposed to settle down in Canada, Manjeet did not need to keep dowry articles in
    India. Thus, even if these allegations are accepted to be accurate and correct on
    their face value, it still does not make any case against these relatives.
12.    So far as the allegations against the father-in-law and mother-in-law are




                                                                           .
concerned, these are too general. The intention and conduct of the father-in-law,
    mother-in-law, and husband prima facie make these allegations false and doubtful
    on its face. Per the contents of the application, which led to the registration of





    FIR, the complainant herself stated that immediately after marriage, the accused
    got her passport made and got the marriage registered.             It means that the
    complainant was not having any passport at the time of marriage. In the year





    2009, making of passport was not as easy as in the present time; instead, it was a
    very tedious process. Accused must have spent his entire vacation getting the
    marriage registered and making a passport for his newly wedded wife. The

    conduct of the accused and his parents in fulfilling their promise by getting her

    passport and registering the marriage proves that the marriage was not performed
    to terminate the same in between.
13.    Furthermore, due to this wedding, the complainant becomes pregnant,


    which would also show the intention of Manjeet Singh, her husband, to raise the
    family. Since Manjeet Singh was to move back to Canada, the pregnancy part
    must have the tacit approval of her parents because getting a visa would have




    taken time. Given the overall conduct of the complainant's husband, her father-in-
    law, and mother-in-law, nowhere leads to any inference or points out towards any





    action, which would amount to breaking their promises or deceiving or cheating
    her. Thus, even if the allegations in the FIR are taken as gospel truth, they do not





    make any case to launch a prosecution. Instead, the possibility of the complainant
    leveling allegations to make out a case for cognizable offenses so that FIR is
    registered and subsequently used as a settlement tool cannot be ruled out.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING UNDER SECTION 498-A
IPC
:
14.
In
Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand
, (2010) 7 SCC 667, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court observed that [30] "It is a matter of common experience that most
    of these complaints under
Section 498A
Indian Penal Code are filed in the heat of
    the moment over trivial issues without proper deliberations. We come across a
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
6
large number of such complaints which are not even bonafide and are filed with
    oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the number of genuine cases
    of dowry harassment are also a matter of serious concern. [32] Unfortunately, at
    the time of filing of the complaint the implications and consequences are not




                                                                          .
properly visualised by the complainant that such complaint can lead to
    insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the complainant, accused and his
    close relations. [33]. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and





    punish the guilty and protect the innocent. To find out the truth is a herculean task
    in majority of these complaints. The tendency of implicating husband and all his
    immediate relations is also not uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of





    criminal trial, it is difficult to ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be
    extremely careful and cautious in dealing with these complaints and must take
    pragmatic realities into consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases. The

    allegations of harassment of husband's close relations who had been living in

    different cities and never visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant
    resided would have an entirely different complexion. The allegations of the
    complaint are required to be scrutinized with great care and circumspection.
Experience reveals that long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour,
    acrimony and bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is also a matter
    of common knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband or the




    husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it would ruin the
    chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of suffering is extremely





    long and painful."
15.
In
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P.
, 2012(10) SCC 741, Para 28, Hon'ble





    Supreme Court holds that "We, therefore, deem it just and legally appropriate to
    quash the proceedings initiated against the appellants Geeta Mehrotra and Ramji
    Mehrotra as the FIR does not disclose any material which could be held to be
    constituting any offence against these two appellants. Merely by making a general
    allegation that they were also involved in physical and mental torture of the
    complainant-respondent No. 2 without mentioning even a single incident against
    them as also the fact as to how they could be motivated to demand dowry when
    they are only related as brother and sister of the complainant's husband, we are
    pleased to quash and set aside the criminal proceedings in so far as these
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
7
appellants are concerned and consequently the order passed by the High Court
    shall stand overruled."
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
.
16.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble





    Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the
    propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process





    need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds, "...
    This argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as merely because an
    accused has a right to plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no
    sufficient material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the





    Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even at an
    earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the
    offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that the very issuance of

    the order of taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said

    to have been made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition. It has
    been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised
    sparingly and in the interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to


    continue even where the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any
    offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore,
    there cannot be any dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the Code




    can be exercised.
17.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full





    Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court observed that the High Court need not wait
    for completion of investigation and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
18.   The law is almost settled by various pronouncements of the Hon'ble
    Supreme Court that when the FIR and the investigation do not make out any case
    or the prosecution is inherently and patently illegal, and the matters that fulfill the
    criteria for quashing, the High Court resorting to
S. 482
CrPC can quash such FIR
    and consequent proceedings.
In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC
    866, a three-member Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court holds, "[6]. ...It is well
    established that the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
8
quash proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of
    any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal
    proceedings instituted against an accused person must be tried under the
    provisions of the Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to interfere with




                                                                         .
the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or
    expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of this
    inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some categories of cases where





    the inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for quashing the
    proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possible for the High Court to
    take the view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings against an





    accused person may amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or that the
    quashing of the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the
    criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have been

    committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar

    against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding, the High Court
    would be justified in quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the
    requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may


    also arise where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint,
    even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not
    constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating evidence




    arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First Information
    Report to decide whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it





    would be legitimate for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust
    to allow the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the accused person.
A third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can
    be successfully invoked may also arise. In cases falling under this category the
    allegations made against the accused person do constitute an offence alleged but
    there is either no legal evidence adduced in support of the case or evidence
    adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing with this class
    of cases, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where there
    is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly
    inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence
    which on its appreciation may or may not support the accusation in question. In
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
9
exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High Court would not embark upon
    an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the
    function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to
    invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable




                                                                          .
appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the accused would not
    be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent
    jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of quashing criminal





    proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In
    Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v.
    Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR





    54 : (AIR 1954 Punj 193), NripendraBhusan Roy v. GobinaBandhu Majumdar,
    AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. SivaramaSubramania, ILR 47
    Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
19.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
,

    1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds

    "[7]. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at the initial stage
    is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the
    uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is also for



    the court to take into consideration any special features which appear in a
    particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to




    permit a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be
    utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of





    an ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be
    served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may while taking





    into consideration the special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even
    though it may be at a preliminary stage."
CONCLUSION:
20.   FIR was registered in the year 2012 against almost every family members,
    in all 11 persons, who are facing criminal prosecution. A perusal of the FIR does
    not make out any case and as such this Court would certainly resort to its
    extraordinary jurisdiction under
Section 482
Cr.PC and deem it appropriate to
    quash this FIR. Its continuation may cause grave injustice to the accused persons.
    Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the catena of case law, but since
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
10
on the appraisal of the allegations, this Court is satisfied that FIR deserves to be
    quashed, as such there is no need to refer to those judgments.
21. An analysis of the entire allegations and the investigation does not contain
    legally admissible evidence and thus, does not make out any prima facie case




                                                                         .
against the petitioners.
22. Given the entirety of the case and judicial precedents, I am of the considered
    opinion that the continuation of these proceedings will not suffice any fruitful





    purpose whatsoever.
23.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh
,
    2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[47]. As far as Writ Petition
    (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court





    challenging the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was
    already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the
    order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Charge-
sheet. Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been

    entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of
    cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
24. Given above, this is a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High
    Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash



    the proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is quashed qua the
    petitioners, and all the consequential proceedings qua the petitioners are also




    quashed and set aside. The bail bonds of the petitioners are accordingly
    discharged. All pending application(s), if any, stand closed.
25. In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is allowed in
    the aforementioned terms.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                              Judge.
August 05, 2021 (ps)
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:28 :::HCHP
