Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 27 of 1996
Citation: AIR 1970, 189 (
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1613921/

[Cites
19
, Cited by
3
]
Patna High Court
M/S Milkfood Private Limited vs M/S Gmc Ice Cream (P)Ltd on 25 April, 2008
Author:
Mridula Mishra
Bench:
Mridula Mishra
Against the Judgment and order dated 23.3.2006 passed
            by Principal Sub-Judge, Gaya in T.S. No. 262 of 2004

                              C.R. No.690 of 2006

                       M/S MILKFOOD PRIVATE LIMITED
                                  Versus
                      M/S G.M.C. ICE CREAM (P) LTD.

       For the Petitioner: Mr.Chittaranjan Sinha No.-1 (Sr. Advocate)
                              Mr. Amit Prakash
                            Mr. Soni Srivastava
          For Opposite Parties: Mr. Chandrashekhar (Sr. Advocate)
                            : Mr. A.K. Upadhyay


                                 P R E S E N T
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE SMT. MRIDULA MISHRA




Mridula Mishra.J Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and

          learned counsel for the opposite party.
Civil      Revision   No.   690     of    2006   was    earlier

          decided by order dated 27/9/2007 against which S.L.P.

          (C) No. 21576/07 was filed by the Opposite Party. The

          Supreme Court by order dated 26.11.2007 has set aside

          the order passed in the Civil Revision and remitted the

          matter for fresh decision in accordance with law with a

          request     for    expeditious     hearing      and    disposal     of     the

          matter preferably within three months.
Now Civil Revision is being heard in terms of

          the   order       of   the   Supreme    Court    in    S.L.P.      (C)     No.

          21576/07.
Civil      Revision   No.   690/06       has been      filed    by

          petitioner, M/s Milk Food Private Limited for setting
2
aside the order dated 23rd March, 2006 in Title Suit No.

262/04       whereby      application         under       order     VII    rule   10
C.P.C
. read with
Section 14(2)
of the Arbitration Act,

1940 has been rejected with a finding that Delhi High

Court has no jurisdiction to entertain an application

under
Section 14(2)
of the Arbitration Act, 1940, as
Section 31(4)
excludes it‟s jurisdiction.
M/s      Milk   Food    Limited       (petitioner)           and    M/s

G.M.C.       Ice-cream        (opposite       party)         entered      into     an

agreement in the year, 1992 for the manufacturing of ice

cream on the basis of terms and conditions mentioned in

the agreement. Clause 20 of the agreement provided that

in case of any dispute or any difference arising at any

time     in       between     the     parties        relating        to    matters

mentioned         in    the   agreement       ,     the    dispute        shall   be

referred          to a single arbitrator, in case the parties

can    agree      upon    one,    and    failing       such       agreement,      two

arbitrators; one to be appointed by either party and in

case of disagreement between the two arbitrators to an

umpire       to   be     appointed      by    the     said    two    arbitrators

before them entering upon the reference.
The      opposite     party     filed    a     suit    being    Title

Suit No. 40/1995 in the court of Munsif-I, Gaya for an

injunction. The petitioner (Defendant) on receiving the

notice of the suit, filed an application under
Section

34
of the Arbitration Act, 1940, for stay of the suit in

view    of    the      provisions       for    Arbitration          contained      in
3
Clause 20 of the agreement. This application was allowed

by order dated 03.8.1995 by the Munsif -Ist, Gaya and

the finding of the court was, "Defendants, stand was

that they do not wish to challenge jurisdiction of the

court. The dispute between parties arose after filing of

the suit, prior to that there was no occasion to refer

matters to Arbitration as there was no dispute between

the parties. On the request, application dated 17.7.1995

filed on behalf of Respondents No. 1 to 3 is allowed.

Further     proceeding      of       the    suit     stayed      and    in    the

meantime,      matter      is       referred    to      arbitration."          The

plaintiff (opposite party) preferred Misc. Appeal No.

30/95    against     the    order      passed      by     Munsif-Ist,        Gaya.

Show-cause notice in the injunction matter was issued to

the parties. The defendant (present petitioner) filed

his rejoinder before the District Judge, Gaya. The M/s

Milk Food Limited (petitioner), in the meantime issued

registered letter dated 14.9.95, informing M/s G.M.C.

Ice cream regarding appointment of Hon‟ble Mr. Justice

H.L. Agarwal (retired) as it‟s Arbitrator in terms of

Clause    20   of    the    agreement       between        the   parties       and

called    upon      the    opposite        party     to    concur      in    that

appointment or in case of disagreement to appoint it‟s

nominee arbitrator for the settlement of the                           dispute.

By   order     dated      16.12.1995,        the     Additional        District

Judge, Gaya rejected the petition filed by M/s Milk Food

Limited (petitioner) in Misc. Appeal to hear the appeal
4
and proceed to decide injunction matter.                   Against this

order, M/s Milk Food Limited (petitioner) preferred C.R.

No. 27 of 1996 in which an order of stay was passed and

the proceedings in Misc. Appeal No. 30/95 was stayed.

Civil    Revision      No.   27/96   was    allowed   by   order     dated

14.2.1996. The Additional District Judge was directed to

complete the hearing of Misc. Appeal and also to finally

dispose    of    the   appeal     latest    by   16.3.1996.   By     order

dated 13.3.1996, the Additional District Judge-II, Gaya

dismissed the Misc. Appeal affirming the Munsif‟s order

dated 03.8.1995. Against this order, M/s G.M.C. filed

Civil Revision No. 1020/1996 which was disposed of by

order dated 06.5.1997 as during the pendency of Civil

Revision    application,          both     the   parties    agreed     for

reference of dispute to the arbitrator chosen by them.

M/s     G.M.C.    chose      Hon‟ble     Mr.     Justice   Uday      Sinha

(retired) and M/s Milk Food had already                chosen Hon‟ble

Mr. Justice H.L. Agarwal (retired) as their arbitrators.

With consent of the parties, the dispute was referred to

the appointed arbitrators with a request to dispose of

arbitral proceeding within three months from the date of

the reference. Parties were directed to appear before

the arbitrators within a month from 06.5.1997 and to

file necessary documents within four weeks thereafter.

Before the arbitrators, the question arose whether the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
or
Arbitration

Act, 1940
would have application to the proceedings. The
5
majority arbitrators were of the view that 1996 Act will

have application to the proceedings. Against this order,

a petition
u/S 33
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 was filed

by M/s Milk Food Limited before the Delhi High Court

vide   O.M.P.     No.    94/98.       By   order      dated   13.10.1998,

Single Judge of the Delhi High Court held that arbitral

proceeding      will    be    governed     by   the
Arbitration         and

Conciliation      Act,       1996
.    Letters      Patent     Appeal        was

preferred against the judgment of the Single Judge and

the    five    Judges‟       Bench   decided    the     L.P.A.      as     not

maintainable.
Being aggrieved by the order dated 17.2.2003;

Civil Appeal No. 9672/03 was filed by M/s Milk Food

Limited. The Supreme Court held that since the arbitral

proceeding commenced on 14.9.95, i.e. the date when M/s

Milk Food Limited issued registered letter appointing

arbitrator in terms of Clause 20 of the agreement and

calling upon M/s G.M.S. Ice cream to appoint its nominee

arbitrator       for     settlement        of    dispute,        as        such
Arbitration Act, 1940
would apply. It was also observed

that   the     entire   arbitral      proceeding      need    not     be   re-

opened. The arbitrator may proceed to give their award

which shall be filed in the court having jurisdiction.

The    award     has    been       pronounced    on     14.8.2004.         The

arbitrators have determined the Stamp Paper payable on

award on the basis of Bihar State Stamp Act.                    Stamp has

been paid by M/s G.M.C. and the same has been signed and
6
filed by the arbitrators in the court of Principal Sub-

Judge, Gaya.
After filing of award by arbitrators,                                 Title

Suit No. 262/04 was filed by M/s G.M.C. u/S 14(2) of the
Arbitration Act, 1940
before Principal Sub-judge, Gaya

for making the award rule of the court. M/s Milk Food

Limited   receiving         the       summons     appeared     in     Suit       No.

262/04    and     filed       an        application      raising           limited

objection to the jurisdiction of the court of Principal

Sub-Judge, Gaya. The Principal Sub-Judge, Gaya heard the

parties on the question of jurisdiction to entertain the

suit
u/S 14(2)
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 for making

the award rule of the court and finally, by order dated

23.3.2006 held that the court at Gaya has jurisdiction

to   decide     the    application            filed   u/S     14(2)        of    the
Arbitration     Act,       1940
for    making   award    rule        of     the

court, in view of
Section 31(4)
of the Arbitration Act.
The question for consideration is whether the

court at Delhi or court of the Principal Sub-Judge, Gaya

has jurisdiction to entertain the suit filed
u/S 14
of

the Arbitration Act, 1940 for making award rule of the

court.
The     stand           of        the   petitioner          is         that

jurisdiction of Principal Sub-Judge; Gaya is barred by
Section   31(4)
of   the        Arbitration     Act,    1940.
Section

31(4)
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 reads as under:
7
"(4)"          Notwithstanding             anything      contained

elsewhere in this Act or in any law for the time being

in force, wherein any reference in an application under

this Act has been made in a court competent to entertain

it, that court alone shall have jurisdiction over the

arbitration proceedings and all subsequent applications

arising    out     of    that       reference       and    the    arbitration

proceedings shall be made in that court and in no other

court."
Petitioner‟s         case       is   that      the     matter    was

referred   to    arbitration         as    soon     as    the    notice    dated
14.9.1995 was issued by the petitioner and served on the

opposite     party,       once        the       arbitration        proceeding

initiated on 14.9.95, first "in reference" application

was filed by the petitioner
u/S 33
of the Arbitration

Act, before Delhi High Court being O.M.P. No. 94/1998

with a prayer for clarification that the provisions of
Arbitration      Act,    1940
will    apply    to    the    arbitration

proceedings. Thus in view of
Section 31(4)
, the Delhi

High Court is the court within the meaning of
Section

2(C)
of the Arbitration Act, 1940, being a civil court

having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the

subject matter of the reference,                    if the same had been

the subject matter of a suit. Once an application in

reference is made in a court competent to entertain it,

that   court     alone     shall       have     jurisdiction        over     the

arbitration proceedings and all subsequent applications
8
arising     out       of     that         reference       of     the     arbitration

proceedings shall be made in that court alone and in no

other court.
It         has     also             been     submitted           that      the

jurisdiction of Gaya court is otherwise also ousted by

the     agreement       dated         07.4.1992         between        the    parties.
Clause    20     of    the       agreement            dated    07/4/1992       is    the

arbitration       clause.        It       provides       that    all     arbitration

proceeding shall be held in Delhi. It further provides

that this contract is subject to Delhi jurisdiction by

specifying that arbitration proceeding shall be held at

Delhi. This clause makes the intention of the parties

clear to exclude the jurisdiction of all other courts

other than Delhi High Courts. It has also been submitted

that M/s G.M.C. Ice-cream Private Limited had also filed

O.M.P. No. 217/2000 in Delhi High Court for orders for

summoning        witnesses        from          Patna.        Thus,    in     view     of

provisions of
Section 31(4)
of the Act, only the Delhi

High Court have jurisdiction in the matter.
The case of the opposite party on the other

hand, is that the arbitrators after passing the award

filed it in the court of Principal Sub-Judge, Gaya as

such,    the     court      of    Principal           Sub-judge,       Gaya    is     the

competent court. The stand of the petitioner that the

Delhi     High     Court         is       the    proper        place    for        filing

application       u/S       14(2)         is    misconceived.         The    cause     of

action for filing suit or for reference of the dispute
9
for arbitration arose on account of breach of agreement

as    bank    draft    was     returned       by    the     petitioner    in

violation      of   the     terms      of   agreement.    The     draft   was

returned at Gaya address of the opposite party. As such,

pecuniary and territorial jurisdiction to entertain the

proceeding is of Gaya court. The opposite party when

filed petition
u/S 34
of the Arbitration Act for stay of

Title Suit No. 40/95, did not challenge the jurisdiction

of the court. The objection was regarding filing of suit

instead of referring the dispute to the arbitration. It

has also been submitted that since the petitioner is

heavily relying on the order of Munsif- Ist, Gaya for

the purpose of scope of the arbitral proceeding, at the

same breath, petitioner cannot take the plea that Gaya

court is lacking jurisdiction in any manner. The notice

dated 14.9.95 for reference to arbitrator was sent to

the   opposite      party    at     Gaya.    Gaya   court    is   otherwise

competent to entertain the suit as it is a proceeding of

breach of agreement and not for determination of right

and interest of the parties during the subsistence of

the agreement. So far the terms of agreement regarding

Delhi Jurisdiction are concerned; it in no way excludes

the jurisdiction of the Gaya Court.
Section   2(C)
of   the   Arbitration      Act   defines

court in the light of
Section 31
of the Arbitration Act,

which deals with jurisdiction. The word "Court" means

court having civil jurisdiction over the subject matter
10
of reference. The court must be a competent court within

the meaning of
Section 31
. In the present case, the

dispute regarding breach of agreement arose at Gaya and

for that civil suit was filed as it had territorial as

well as pecuniary jurisdiction. The petitioner also did

not raise any objection so far entertaining the suit on

the     ground    of   jurisdiction     is     concerned.     Simple

objection was regarding maintainability of suit in view

of Clause 20 of the agreement. The petitioner filed his

objection
u/S 34
of the Arbitration Act and on that

basis, the proceeding of the suit was stayed and the

dispute was referred for arbitration.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that a party

to arbitration agreement may chose to file suit in a

court having no jurisdiction, in such suit if defendant

has to make an application
u/S 34
of the Arbitration Act

for stay of the suit, it cannot be a deciding factor for

deciding    jurisdiction    as   the   court   otherwise      had   no

jurisdiction and it cannot be not a "court" within the

meaning of
Section 2(C)
of the Act.
I do not find much force in this submission for

the reason that it is not the case of the petitioner

that the suit was filed by the opposite party before a

court    having   no   jurisdiction.     The    court   had    civil

jurisdiction to entertain the suit in which the petition

u/S 34 was filed for stay of the suit. Counsel for the

petitioner has submitted that in view of the decision of
11
the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1970, 189 (
Union of

India Vs Surjeet Singh Atwal
) and AIR 1953 (S.C.)
313

(
Kumbha       Mawji        Vs    Union      of    India
)       the    issue    of

jurisdiction under
Section 31(4)
of the Act is no more

„res integra‟. It has been held by Supreme Court that

petition      u/S     34    of    the     Act    is    not    a   petition     „in

reference‟ to an arbitration proceeding for constructing

of
Section 31(4)
of the Act which is a non-obstinate

clause.
The counsel for the opposite party in reply to

this has submitted that it is true that the judgment of

Kumbha Mawji has been explained by Supreme Court in the

case of
Union of India Vs Surjeet Singh Atwal
, but in

paragraph No. 5 of this judgment, the Apex Court has

explained      that        „notwithstanding            the    fact    proceeding

under
Sections 8
and
20
are anterior to the reference

yet they lead to reference and cover under mischief of
Section 31(4)
of the Act."
Counsel for the opposite party submits that the

order dated 06.5.97 is an order
u/S 8
of the Arbitration

Act,    for     the        reason        that    the    petitioner         through

registered letter dated 14.9.95 had asked the opposite

party to concur in the appointment of arbitrator and in

case of difference appoint it‟s nominee arbitrator for

settlement of dispute. It was during pendency of the

civil revision application that the parties decided to

refer     their     dispute         to    arbitrator         chosen   by     them.
12
Thereafter, by the orders of the court, the dispute was

referred to the arbitrator with a direction to proceed

and file relevant documents and dispose it of within

three months. The Supreme Court in the decision reported

in 1972(1) S.C.C. 702 (State of Madhya Pradesh Vs M/s

Saith and Skelton (P) Ltd & Ors) as well as in the case

of M/s Gurunanak foundation Vs M/s Ratan Singh & Sons

reported in 1981(4) S.C.C. 634 has answered the question

relating to
Section 31(4)
in relation to
Section 14(2)
of the Act. In that case also arbitrator was appointed

by the court with the consent of the parties to make

award and the time was fixed for preparation of award.

The     Supreme     Court       considering        this    situation       has

recorded its finding in the following manner:
In
Nachiappa Chettiar V. Subramanian Chettiar
,

(1960) 2 SCR 209 = (AIR 1960 SC 307) the question arose

whether the trial court had jurisdiction to refer the

subject    matter    of     a   suit   to   an     arbitrator      when    the

decree passed in the suit was pending appeal before the

High Court. Based upon
Section 21
, it was urged before

this court that the reference made by the trial court,

when    the    appeal   was     pending,    and     the    award   made    in

consequence of such reference, were both invalid as the

trial    court    was   not     competent     to    make    the    order   of

reference. This court rejected the said contention and

after a reference to Ss. 2 (c) and 21 of the Act held

that the expression "Court" occurring in
S. 21
includes
13
also the appellate court, proceedings before which are a

continuance of the suit. It was further held that the

word     "suit"       in
S.        21
includes           also     appellate

proceedings. In our opinion, applying the analogy of
the

above decision
, the expression "Court" occurring in
S.

14 (2)
of the Act will have to be understood in the

context in which it occurs. So understood, it follows

that    this    court      is        the       court
S.     14    (2)
where     the

arbitration award could be validly filed."
Similarly         in        1981    Supreme           court    2075,     an

application was made to Delhi High Court
u/S 20
for a

direction       to    file      the        arbitration         agreement       in    the

court, the proceeding was numbered as a suit. The suit

ended    in     order      of    reference             to    the     arbitrator.      As

subsequent application was made to Delhi High Court
u/S

5
read with
Section 11
of the Act for removal of the

arbitrator       of   this       application                being    dismissed.       The

matter was brought to the Supreme Court in appeal. By

the decision of the Supreme Court in the appeal, the

arbitrator was removed and another person was appointed

as     sole    arbitrator.            The        Supreme        Court       held     that

undisputedly, therefore, the arbitrator was appointed by

the Supreme Court. The appeal was accordingly disposed

of. Thereafter, the Supreme Court gave further direction

about the matter and method of conducting the arbitral

proceeding and fixed the time for completion of arbitral

proceeding.       The      Supreme          Court       by    appointing       another
14
arbitrator would not mean the Supreme Court was not in

seisin of the matter. Consequently, in view of provision

of
Section 31(4)
, the Supreme Court alone would have

jurisdiction      to   entertain     award     and    it   could     not   be

filed before the Delhi High Court.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that
Section

8(i) (a)
of Arbitration Act, 1940, deals with the power

of Court to appoint arbitrator. So far the order dated

06.5.1997 (Annexure-4) is concerned, it is not an order

u/S 8 of the
Arbitration Act, 1940
. The submission of

the counsel for the opposite party is based on the wrong

premises that the order contained in Annexure-4 is an

order
u/S 8
of the Act. In fact, power of the court was

not invoked for appointment of arbitrator rather the

parties selected their arbitrators with consent. First

ingredient as provided
u/S 8
is that the parties must

file an application and (ii) the court should appoint an

arbitrator. In the present case, both the ingredients

are missing.
Section 8
application can be filed when

there     is    difference     between    the        parties     regarding

selection of arbitrator. There was no difference rather

parties chose their arbitrators with consent , as such,

no application was filed, u/S 8.So this order cannot be

treated    as    first   "in      reference"    in     the     arbitration

proceeding.
The     question       for    consideration          is    which

application filed before which court should be treated
15
as first application "in reference" by the parties to

the   arbitration      agreement.      Admittedly,         M/s      Milk   Food

Private Limited by sending a registered letter dated

14.9.95 intimated M/s G.M.C. regarding appointment of

arbitrator     and    sought    consent       of    G.M.C.     or    asked   to

appoint it‟s own arbitrator. G.M.C. declined to consent

on the appointment of Hon‟ble Mr. Justice H.L. Agarwal

(retired) or opined/nominate any other arbitrator. In

civil Revision No. 1020/96 both the parties consented

and the High Court passed an order dated 06.5.97. In

view of decision reported in 1972(1) S.C.C. 702 and AIR

1970S.C.189, this order               can be considered to be an

order passed
u/S 8
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 as the

dispute was referred to the appointed arbitrators. The

request   was    made    to     the    arbitrators        to     dispose     of

arbitration     proceedings         within    three       months.     Notices

were sent to the arbitrators and the parties were also

directed to appear before the arbitrators within one

month   from    the   date     of   order     and    to    file     necessary

documents. So far the O.M.P. No. 94/98 filed by M/s Milk

Food
u/S 33
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 is concerned,

it cannot be treated as first "in reference" application

before a court of competent jurisdiction as prior to

that,   the    parties    had       already    filed      an     application

before the Patna High Court consenting to refer their

dispute to arbitrator and also chose their arbitrators.

The Supreme court in Civil Appeal No. 9672/03 and the
16
case of M/s Milk Food Private Limited has held that

arbitral proceeding               commenced in the instant case on

14.9.95 and considering that only it was decided that
Arbitration Act, 1940
would apply. Since in view of the

Supreme        Court,       arbitration             proceeding      commenced       on

14.9.95        and    thereafter,             the     parties      consented       for

appointment of arbitrator and the direction was issued

for commencing the proceeding. In any view, the order

dated   06.5.97         can   be    treated          as    first    "in   reference

application" and relevant for deciding the jurisdiction

u/S 31(4) of the Act.
Section 31
of the Act provides the forum in

which     an    award       may     be     filed.         Sub-
section      4
vests

exclusive        jurisdiction            in     the       court     to    which    an

application          has    been    made      in     any    reference      and    that

court   is      only       competent       to       entertain      all    subsequent

applications arising out of the reference case and that

is    the      only        court    having           jurisdiction         over    the

arbitration proceeding. In the present case, the award

was rightly filed
u/S 14(2)
in the court of Principal

Sub-judge, Gaya as this court has jurisdiction u/S
u/S

31(4)
as in reference application has been filed before

the   Patna      High       Court       and    the    original      court      having

territorial jurisdiction is of Gaya Court. The award has

rightly been filed in the court of Principal Sub-judge,

Gaya,     and         this     court          alone       has   jurisdiction        to
17
entertain the suit
u/S 14(2)
read with
Section 31(i)
and
31(4)
of the Arbitration Act.
I do not find any merit in the application.

  This Civil Revision application is dismissed.
(Mridula Mishra,J.)

Patna High Court
The     Day of April, 2008
N.A.F.R./AKV
