Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 565
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/164051712/

[Cites
23
, Cited by
25
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Vipin Goel vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 29 June, 2015
Bench:
A. M. Khanwilkar
,
K.K.Trivedi
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
                              1

  HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : JABALPUR

                  M.Cr.C. No.8811 of 2015
       (with I.A.No.11502/2015 & I.A.No.11552/2015)

Vipin Goel                                  .....Applicant
                           Versus
State of M.P. and others                   ....Respondents


=============================================
Coram:

Hon'ble Shri Justice A. M. Khanwilkar, Chief Justice
Hon'ble Shri Justice K.K.Trivedi, J.

Whether approved for reporting : Yes.
=============================================
      Shri Anil Khare, Senior Advocate with Shri Priyankush
Jain, Advocate, Shri H.S.Chhabra, Advocate and Ms. Namrata
Kesharwani, Advocate for the applicant.

     Shri P.K.Kaurav, Additional Advocate General with Shri
Prakash Gupta, learned Panel Lawyer for the respondent/State.

=============================================

Reserved On      :   26.06.2015
Date of Decision :   29.06.2015


                        ORDER
{29th June, 2015}


Per: A.M. Khanwilkar, Chief Justice:
This is first bail application by this applicant in Crime
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
2
No.14/2013 registered with S.T.F. Police Station, Bhopal for

offences commonly known as VYAPAM examination scam

cases, punishable under
Sections 409
,
420
,
120-B
of I.P.C. and
Section 3 (Gha)
,
1
,
2
/
5
of M.P. Manyata Prapt Pariksha

Adhiniyam, 1937.
2.   The role ascribed to the applicant by the prosecution is that

he acted as middleman to facilitate candidate (Dr. Prakhar

Singhal). That candidate had appeared in the examination

conducted by VYAPAM for Pre.P.G. Medical Course and

allegedly indulged in unfair means during the said examination,

in conspiracy with the racketeers involved in the crime. The

applicant was called upon by the Investigating Officer vide

notice dated 26.11.2014, to remain present in connection with

enquiry concerning Crime No.14/2013. According to the

applicant, in response to the said notice, applicant appeared

before the Investigating Officer and extended full cooperation in

the enquiry and disclosed all facts within his knowledge. The

applicant was questioned extensively by the Investigating

Officer. It is further stated that since the Investigating Officer

was convinced with the explanation and the disclosures made by
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
3
the applicant, no precipitative action was taken against him.

However, when the applicant apprehended that he may be

arrested in connection with the said crime, applied for

anticipatory bail before the Court of 9th Additional Sessions

Judge, Bhopal. That anticipatory bail was rejected on

11.02.2015.
3.   The applicant then rushed to the High Court against that

decision by way of bail application under
Section 438
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure being M.Cr.C.No.3440/2015. That

application was rejected by a speaking order dated 24.03.2015.

The Court accepted the argument of the prosecution that the

applicant was not cooperating in the enquiry and that the

Investigating Officer was convinced that the custodial

interrogation of the applicant had become necessary. The Court

observed thus :-
"It is, fairly, accepted by the counsel for the State
         that as of today from the information gathered by the
         Investigating Officer, it appears that both these
         applicants were concerned only with Prakhar - one
         candidate. However, unless the investigation of
         Crime No.14/2013 is completed in all respects, it
         may not be possible to take any firm view in that
         regard. It is also not in dispute that pursuant to the
         liberty given to applicants to appear before the
         Investigating Officer, they had appeared in the
         Office of the Investigating Officer on 12 & 14th
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
4
March, 2015, for 13 hours 59 minutes in aggregate
         in M.Cr.C.No.3441/2015 and 13 hours 44 minutes in
         aggregate in the case of applicant in M.Cr.C.
         No.3440/2015. However, according to the
         Investigating Officer, the interrogation with the
         applicants was not fruitful as no further clues have
         been divulged by them during the said period. In
         view of the attitude of the applicants during the said
         interrogation, the Investigating Officer is convinced
         that custodial interrogation of the applicants has
         become necessary. Besides the phone call details
         made      between     the    applicants     and    the
         middleman/racketeer, the Investigating Officer
         would like to interrogate the applicant in
         M.Cr.C.No.3440/2015 with regard to the
         information received from the computer details
         recovered from Nitin Mohindra mentioning about
         payments by separate cheques and cash amount as
         well as on matters as to how the applicants received
         the question papers in advance in connection with
         the said examination and the source from where the
         same were received and in respect of matters which
         unfolded after receipt of the said papers. The correct
         information can be unraveled by the Investigating
         Officer only on the basis of the custodial
         interrogation and confronting the two applicants in
         the said process".
(emphasis supplied)
4.   Against this decision the applicant unsuccessfully carried

the matter in appeal before the Supreme Court by way of S.L.P.

(Cri) No.2480/2015. The said Special Leave Petition was

dismissed by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court affirmed

the findings recorded by this Court that the investigating agency

was convinced that custodial interrogation of the applicant was

essential having regard to the totality of the facts and
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
5
circumstances in which the offence was allegedly committed

and that the applicant had not cooperated with the process of

investigation till then. As a result, the prayer for grant of

anticipatory bail pursued by the applicant was rejected right

upto the highest Court. The Supreme Court vide order dated

30.03.2015, Bench of Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justice

N.V.Ramana, observed thus :-
"It is submitted by Mr. Amarendra Sharan, Learned
         Senior counsel appearing for the petitioners that in
         similar matters other accused have been granted the
         privilege of pre-arrest bail. It is further submitted
         that the petitioners in the present Special leave
         Petitions have been interrogated for about 14 hours
         and therefore, custodial interrogation is not required.
           Upon reading the orders of the High Court, we find
         that according to the Investigating Agency custodial
         interrogation is required having regard to the totality
         of the facts and circumstances in which the offences
         are alleged to have been committed. The High Court
         has also recorded a finding that the petitioners have
         not cooperated with the process of investigation
         uptill now. In such circumstances, we decline to
         grant the privilege of pre-arrest bail to the
         petitioners. The mere fact that the other persons
         involved in the VYAPAM scam have been granted
         the privilege of pre-arrest bail will not be a ground
         for granting pre-arrest bail to the petitioners.
           The facts of each case will have to be considered
         and it is in the light of the said facts that we have
         thought it proper to dismiss both these special leave
         petitions. It is ordered accordingly."
(emphasis supplied)
5.   Since the applicant did not respond to the Investigating
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
6
Officer, action under
Section 82
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure was resorted to against the applicant. The Trial Court

had also issued non-bailable warrants against the applicant. The

applicant, however, questioned the said processes resorted to by

the prosecution, which proceedings were unsuccessfully carried

right upto the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court vide order

dated 19.05.2015 Bench of Justice A.K.Sikri and Justice

Uday Umesh Lalit, rejected the Special Leave Petitions filed by

the applicant bearing S.L.P. (Cri.) Nos.4342 - 4343 and

4351/2015 arising from the order passed by the High Court

dated 24.04.2015 in M.Cr.C.No.3837/2015 and 05.05.2015 in

M.Cr.C. No.6927 /2015 respectively. The said order reads thus :-
"SLP (CRL.) NOS. 4342-4343/2015
                 On the facts of this case, we are not inclined
           to grant anticipatory bail. Since by the impugned
           order, the High Court has refused to set aside the
           order dated 27.02.2015 passed by the Magistrate,
           the proper course of action for the petitioner is to
           approach the Magistrate with appropriate
           application. It is stated that such an application
           shall be filed within two weeks. The petitioner
           shall not be arrested for two weeks. Subject to
           above, the special leave petitions are dismissed.
           However, we make it clear that whenever such an
           application is filed by the petitioner, the same shall
           be considered by the concerned Magistrate on its
           own merits and without being influenced by the
           orders of the High Court in the impugned order.
           On the petitioner's filing the bail application, the
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
7
same shall also be considered expeditiously.
SLP (CRL.) No.4351 of 2015
After some arguments, Mr. P.H.Parekh,
          learned senior counsel, seeks permission to
          withdraw this special leave petition with liberty to
          apply for regular bail.
Liberty, as aforesaid, granted.
The special leave petition is dismissed as
          withdrawn, accordingly."
(emphasis supplied)
6.   Thereafter, the applicant once again approached the Trial

Court by way of regular bail application under
Section 439
of

the Cr.P.C. The said application came to be dismissed by the

Trial court on 29.05.2015. The applicant, however, could

persuade the Trial Court to give protection to the applicant of

not arresting him till he approached the High Court by way of

regular bail application, in the light of observations in the

Supreme Court order dated 19.05.2015.
7.   The applicant then approached this Court on 1st June, 2015

by way of present bail application. The interim protection

granted to the applicant was continued by the Vacation Bench

until the hearing of the application on 04.06.2015 by the

appropriate Bench. On 04.06.2015, the concerned Bench

(Vacation Court) directed placing of the matter before the
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
8
regular Court on 16.06.2015, after the re-opening of the Court;

and continued the interim protection to the applicant.

Accordingly, the matter was placed before the regular Court

(this Bench) after re-opening on 16.06.2015.
8.   After hearing the counsel for the parties, the Court opined

that since the application was for grant of regular bail and as

that can proceed only if the applicant was already in jail or in

custody of the Court, as is well established, the applicant

through counsel agreed to appear before the Court on the next

day. Accordingly, the matter was listed on 17.06.2015 but was

ordered to be taken up for arguments on 18.06.2015. On

18.06.2015, the argument on this application proceeded. The

Court noticed that subsequent to filing of this regular bail

application   on    01.06.2015,     the    applicant    presented

I.A.No.11502/2015 supported by affidavit of the applicant dated

14.06.2015. The applicant also filed further affidavit sworn on

17.06.2015, in support of his prayer for grant of regular bail. In

these affidavits, entirely new plea has been taken. The applicant

made serious allegations against the Investigating Officer - Shri

D.S.Baghel. The Court allowed the applicant to tender those
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
9
affidavits, in the interest of justice; but thought it appropriate to

give a fair opportunity to the prosecution to respond to the said

allegations. The Court, however, noted that the question as to

whether the applicant had knowledge about the facts stated in

the said additional affidavits filed by the applicant, before

19.05.2015; and whether the applicant can be permitted to rely

on those facts in the wake of Supreme Court order rejecting the

appeals preferred by the applicant against the decision of this

Court refusing to grant anticipatory bail and to set aside the

process issued under
Section 82
of Cr.P.C. and non-bailable

warrant against the applicant, will be considered at the

appropriate stage. The Court also noted that after considering

the response of the respondents it may have to be ascertained

whether the assertion made by the applicant in the additional

affidavits is genuine and if so, whether it would reflect on the

bonafides of the Investigating Officer. As the consideration of

these matters were required to be deferred to give opportunity to

the respondents to file response and as the applicant had already

surrendered before the Court, the Court thought it appropriate to

direct that the applicant shall remain in judicial custody at
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
10
Jabalpur. Accordingly, the applicant was taken in judicial

custody and detained at Jabalpur. The hearing of the application

was deferred till 23.06.2015.
9.    On 23.06.2015, when the matter was taken up for hearing,

counsel for the applicant pointed out to the Court that the

applicant has filed one more affidavit in support of the relief

claimed in this application, sworn on 19.06.2015. Since the said

affidavit was not circulated to the Court, hearing of the

application was deferred till 24.06.2015. On 24.06.2015, the

arguments proceeded and finally concluded after filing of the

further affidavits by the applicant and the response filed by the

respondents in the form of affidavit of Ashish Khare, A.I.G.,

S.T.F., Bhopal dated 22.06.2015.
10. During the hearing, emphasis was placed by the counsel

for the applicant as to how the Investigating officer D.S.Baghel

was biased against the applicant. The whole attempt was to

persuade the Court that the applicant has been falsely implicated

in Crime No.14/2013, by D.S.Baghel. Further, custodial

interrogation by D. S Baghel will not be free and fair.
11.   In the context of the said apprehension of the applicant,
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
11
during the course of argument, the counsel appearing for the

respondents had not only harped on the refutal of allegations

made against the Investigating Officer - D.S.Baghel to contend

that the apprehension of the applicant is misplaced and ill-

advised, but went on to voluntarily suggest, without prejudice,

that to assuage the apprehension of the applicant by D. S.

Baghel, custodial interrogation of the applicant can be

conducted under the supervision of the Head of the STF. In the

light of this submission, we called upon the counsel for the

applicant at the end of the hearing, as to whether the applicant

was willing to consider this option given on behalf of the

respondents. The counsel for the applicant prayed for time till

26.06.2015 to take instructions in that behalf. Accordingly, even

though the hearing on this bail application had concluded for all

purposes, the matter was deferred till 26.06.2015 as requested

by the applicant.
12. On 26.06.2015, however, counsel for the applicant on

instructions submitted that the applicant was not satisfied with

the option offered on behalf of the STF. Instead, the applicant

would invite decision of this Court on merits of the application.
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
12
In view of this stand, we directed posting of the matter on

29.06.2015 for pronouncement of the order.
13. To complete the record, it needs to be mentioned that

although the applicant was ordered to be kept in judicial custody

in terms of direction given by this Court vide order dated

18.06.2015, the local newspaper "Patrika" published on

25.06.2015 mentioned with photograph in support - that the

applicant was having a free time in Subhash Chandra Bose

Medical College, Jabalpur. The news item further mentioned as

to how the applicant interacted with several visitors and that the

family members of the applicant were in attendance in the

separate room allocated to the applicant in the said hospital.

Further, no police personnel were seen any where nearby the

said room in which the applicant was seen resting along with his

family members in the hospital. When our attention was drawn

to this news item and counsel for the applicant was asked as to

in what circumstances the applicant was shifted to the hospital

as reported by the newspaper, without prior permission or for

that matter any intimation to this Court, the counsel submitted

that the State must explain the same. In the context of this
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
13
response, the counsel for the applicant was informed that the

said issue will be taken up by the Court dealing with suo moto

Writ Petition No.6385/2014 (PIL) concerning VYAPAM

examination scam cases and the investigation whereof is under

monitoring of this Court before the Bench (to which one of us

A.M.Khanwilkar, Chief Justice is a party). That matter was

scheduled for hearing after the lunch - break. Appropriate

directions   have    been    issued   by    the      said    Bench

(A.M.Khanwilkar, Chief Justice and Alok Aradhe, Judge) to the

Head of STF, Shri Sudhir Sahi to enquire into the said matter

and submit his report in sealed cover before the next date of

hearing on 02.07.2015.
14. Reverting to the grounds agitated in the original

application as filed on 01.06.2015, the sum and substance is that

the applicant is not involved in the commission of the alleged

offence. He has been falsely implicated. In        fact, STF had

unequivocally denied about his involvement on affidavit dated

18.05.2015 filed in disposed of W.P.No.11695/2014 (PIL for

transfer of investigation of VYAPAM related crimes to CBI). It

is stated on affidavit that the applicant and his cousin nephew
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
14
Dr. Prakhar Singhal had no role in the examination of Pre-P.G.

That, the applicant has not been named as accused in the FIR or

the charge-sheet filed by the STF till date. None of the co-

accused in the statement recorded under
Section 27
of the

Evidence Act have disclosed about the involvement of the

applicant in the commission of the alleged crime. The entire

case against the applicant was based on the memorandum

statement of Mr. Nitin Mohindra dated 30.10.2014; but he has

not named the applicant nor his cousin nephew. That, his cousin

nephew Dr. Prakhar Singhal has already been granted bail by the

Supreme Court on 23.02.2015 S.L.P. (Cri.) 1020/2015. The

allegation about any unfair means committed during the

examination by his nephew is illogical and baseless, as he is a

meritorious student having very good academic record. There

was no evidence at all about the involvement of Dr. Prakhar

Singhal in the commission of the alleged crime. The fact that Dr.

Prakhar Singhal was regularly staying in the house of the

applicant, it would not follow that applicant had facilitated Dr.

Prakhar Singhal in commission of the alleged offence. Similarly,

mere acquaintance of the applicant with Nitin Mohindra cannot
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
15
be the basis to assume that the applicant, succeeded in getting

admission for his cousin nephew in Medical course by

conspiring with the racketeers in any manner. The applicant and

other residents of their colony was in contact with Nitin

Mohindra and Bharat Mishra in connection with maintenance

issues in their colony. The allegation against the applicant that

he had telephonic conversation with Nitin Mohindra, a day prior

to the examination of Dr. Prakhar Singhal, was not based on any

call details but sheer speculation - that the applicant "may" have

procured the model answer key from the racketeers. Mere

telephone calls between them, in any case, would not be an

incriminatory circumstance to proceed. The prosecution, inspite

of rejection of anticipatory bail application of the applicant,

unfairly initiated action against the applicant under
Section 82
of Cr.P.C. The applicant had raised concerns in that behalf in the

proceedings questioning the said process. The Supreme Court

though refused to interfere has made it clear that the regular bail

application be decided on merits, but the Trial Court shockingly

rejected the prayer for grant of regular bail. The STF having

denied the involvement of applicant on affidavit filed on
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
16
18.09.2014 in disposed of Writ Petition No.11695/2014, cannot

now proceed against the applicant. Further, the Trial Court

committed palpable error in observing that if any person is

accused of cognizable offence and is arrested in that behalf the

police can interrogate him for 24 hours and in the present case,

the police did not have that opportunity of custodial

interrogation. According to the applicant, custodial interrogation

must be resorted to only in exceptional cases when the person

accused is so influential that he cannot be interrogated by the

investigating agency without his custody. The applicant,

however, is a small time businessman with fair reputation. The

prosecution without any rhyme or reason wants to arrest the

applicant only to cause his social death and infringe his right to

liberty enshrined in
Article 21
and
22
of the Constitution. The

applicant had appeared before the Investigating Officer

whenever called upon to do so in the past, but no question

relating to the offence was asked to the applicant. The applicant

was merely asked about general information like PAN card,

Passport details, Bank A/c details, income-tax return and his

family. According to the applicant, the prosecution is insisting
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
17
for custodial interrogation to explain details regarding a

computer entry - which query was never put to the applicant,

though he was interrogated on five times in the past by STF.
15. As aforesaid, after filing of this bail application

01.06.2015, the applicant filed application supported by

affidavit dated 14.06.2015 (I.A.No.11502/2015) for taking

additional facts and submissions on record. In this application,

for the first time, the applicant has adverted to some litigation

and dispute between one S.N.Goel Contractor for Chirayu

Charitable Foundation of which Dr. Ajay Goenka was Secretary

and Arvind Goenka was President. Reference is made to some

transaction between the said parties regarding construction work

to the tune of Rs.38,85,00,000/- (Rupees Thirty Eight Crores

Eighty Five Lacs) and out of which Rs.12,85,00,000/- (Rupees

Twelve Crores Eighty Five Lacs) was still unpaid by Chirayu

Charitable Foundation. It is stated that on account of non-

payment of that amount, a dispute has arisen between the

present applicant and Dr.Ajay Goenka. Notably, in this

application, the applicant has admitted that he is one of the

Director of M/s Raksha Buildcon which is a company
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
18
incorporated under the
Companies Act
. Further, the father of the

applicant S.N.Goel is also involved with the construction

business and that the outstanding amount was due to them.
16. Reference is then made to the criminal case registered

pursuant to the order passed by the Judicial Magistrate First

Class, Bhopal, in Crime No.12/2013 dated 10.02.2012, filed by

the applicant in his capacity as Director of M/s Raksha Buildcon

Pvt. Ltd. against Dr. Ajay Goenka in particular. The relevant

assertion in the subject application, for considering this bail

application, is that, the Investigating Officer in Crime

No.14/2013 - D.S.Baghel, D.S.P., STF, is also the Investigating

Officer in the offences registered at the instance of the applicant

against Dr.Ajay Goenka. He was shielding Dr. Ajay Goenka

from the said criminal case because of his close proximity with

him.
17. In paragraph 15, it is stated that Investigating Officer,

D.S.Baghel is in regular contact with Dr. Ajay Goenka who has

been named as accused in Crime No.12/2013. At the instance of

Dr. Ajay Goenka, the Investigating Officer has maliciously

implicated the applicant in the subject Crime No.14/2013
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
19
registered with STF concerning VYAPAM examination scam

cases. The proximity and close relations between Dr. Ajay

Goenka and Investigating Officer, D.S.Baghel can be noticed

from the call records between the two by calling the same from

the service provider. The applicant has requested the Court to

summon the relevant records of Crime No.12/2013 registered by

the applicant against Dr. Ajay Goenka and others.
18. In paragraph 16 of this application, it is alleged by the

applicant that a clear pattern is likely to emerge from the call

records about the interaction between Dr. Ajay Goenka and

Investigating Officer D.S.Baghel event wise, in connection with

the criminal proceedings. According to the applicant, it is also in

public domain that the investigating officer was shielding

Goenka in Crime No.12/2013, in view of the news report.
19. Besides filing the aforesaid application, the applicant has

filed additional affidavit dated 17.06.2015 in support of the

prayer for grant of bail. In this affidavit, for the first time, he

has stated that he has become privy to certain additional facts in

particular about the number of telephone calls exchanged

between Dr. Ajay Goenka and Investigating Officer D.S.Baghel,
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
20
as much as 600 times and in particular the frequent calls on

certain important events unfolding in criminal proceedings. The

details of the number of calls so made on such events has been

mentioned in tabular form.
20. However, as these affidavits were allowed to be tendered

across the Bar on 18.06.2015, in the interest of justice; and after

examining the same, as we found merits in the objection taken

by the respondents, the applicant was called upon to give more

specific information as to when the additional facts came to the

knowledge of the applicant. As a result, the applicant has filed

further affidavit sworn on 19.06.2015 giving details about the

circumstances in which these additional facts came to his

knowledge and purportedly about the source. This affidavit of

the applicant states that suspicion arose about the proximity

between the Investigating Officer, D.S.Baghel and Dr. Ajay

Goenka after he obtained certified copy of the STF objection

dated 29.05.2015, filed before the Trial Court on 03.06.2015. He

found that in the objection reference has been made to FIR

registered and pending against the deponent. That fact was

within the exclusive knowledge of Dr. Ajay Goenka but has
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
21
been referred to by the Investigating Officer in the objection

dated 29.05.2015. That gave rise to the suspicion of the

applicant about the proximity of the Investigating Officer,

D.S.Baghel and Dr. Ajay Goenka. The affidavit further mentions

that the applicant has been informed that D.S.Baghel and Dr.

Ajay Goenka were in regular contact during the course of

Investigation by STF and on 13th June, 2015, the applicant came

to know that D.S.Baghel and Dr.Ajay Goenka has telephonically

contacted each other for over 600 times from December 2014 to

May 2015 and most of the calls coincided with the events

concerning the applicant - such as arrest of his nephew Dr.

Prakhar Singhal, rejection of anticipatory bail application,

rejection of application for regular bail etc. Thus, for the first

time disclosure was made by the applicant that he acquired this

additional information about the call records on 13.06.2015, but

the source from which the same has been obtained has not been

disclosed.
21. The respondents have filed affidavit sworn by Ashish

Khare, A.I.G., S.T.F. dated 22.06.2015. It is accompanied by a

report prepared under the signature of said Ashish Khare on the
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
22
same day. This report refers to the outcome of the enquiry

conducted by him to ascertain the correctness of the allegations

now made by the applicant about the proximity of the

Investigating Officer with Dr. Ajay Goenka and that being the

reason for implicating the applicant in Crime No.14/2013

concerning Vyapam Examination scam cases allegedly out of

vengeance and at the behest of Dr. Ajay Goenka. The affidavit is

also accompanied by the communication sent by the

Investigating Officer to the affiant dated 21.06.2015, being his

explanation. Similarly, communication under the signature of

Dr.Ajay Goenka dated 21.06.2015, addressed to the affiant

(Ashish Khare) is also enclosed along with the said affidavit.
22. At the outset, the respondents have denied the allegations

made by the applicant. It is further stated that earlier application

(anticipatory bail application) filed by the applicant has been

rejected right upto the Supreme Court as there was evidence

already available with the Investigating Agency to indicate the

complicity of the applicant including the call details between the

applicant and other co-accused and other material. It is then

stated that there is no correlation between the evidence available
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
23
against the applicant in connection with subject Crime

No.14/2013, which is independent of the factum of relationship

of the Investigating Officer with Dr.Ajay Goenka. Further, the

applicant has not disclosed the source from where the

information referred to in the further affidavits filed by him has

been gathered. The date on which he received such information

has also not been disclosed. As a matter of fact, the affiant has

verified with Idea Cellular Company as to whether the applicant

had collected the call details of the said two persons from the

company. However, the officials of the company, informally,

informed in the negative. The affiant, however, has already

made a request for providing necessary information officially,

which is awaited.
23. Notwithstanding this affidavit filed by the respondents, the

applicant has not filed any rejoinder to controvert the stand

taken by the respondents or to offer further explanation but

chose to proceed with the arguments on the bail application.
24. During the arguments, counsel for the applicant has relied

on the averments made in the applications and affidavits filed by

the applicant to contend that the applicant had no knowledge
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
24
about the events till recently. The applicant started doubting

about the proximity between the Investigating Officer,

D.S.Baghel and Dr.Ajay Goenka after 3rd June, 2015 as the

Investigating Officer had disclosed certain facts in the objection

filed by him to oppose the bail application filed by the applicant

before the Trial Court, which fact was within the exclusive

knowledge of Dr.Ajay Goenka. The whole attempt of the

counsel for the applicant was to persuade the Court to hold that

there is reasonable apprehension in the mind of the applicant

that the Investigating Officer D.S.Baghel will not act fairly.

Emphasis was placed on the stand taken by the STF on affidavit

on 18.09.2014 filed to oppose the disposed of Writ Petition

11695/2014 (PIL), which according to the applicant, gives clean

chit to the applicant. It was submitted that it is cardinal principle

that the investigation must be done by the Investigating Agency

in a free and fair manner; and if there was even slightest of

apprehension and the circumstances spelt out by the applicant

were sufficient to arouse such apprehension, it must necessarily

follow that the applicant has been falsely implicated in Crime

No.14/2013 out of vengeance and to further the cause of
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
25
Dr.Ajay Goenka.
25. Counsel for the applicant has also referred to the report

prepared by Ashish Khare, appended to his affidavit dated

22.06.2015, to contend that there is clear admission of the

Investigating Officer D.S.Baghel as well as Dr. Ajay Goenka

about their acquaintance and proximity and that D.S.Baghel and

his family members were taking medical treatment from

Dr.Ajay Goenka on regular basis. Their association has been for

quite sometime. Besides raising issues about the conduct of the

Investigating Officer D.S.Baghel, it was contended that no

fruitful purpose would be served by custodial interrogation

which is the only ground for insisting to arrest the applicant and

keep him in jail. The applicant cannot be forced to say what the

Investigating Officer decides to record. The applicant has

already revealed all information during the enquiry in the past

and was interrogated for considerably long time. No new

material can be obtained from the applicant. Further, since the

applicant is engaged in a small time business, if he is released

on bail, there is no possibility whatsoever that applicant will

influence the prosecution evidence or further investigation of
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
26
the crime.
In support, counsel for the applicant has relied on the

decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of
Shri Gurbaksh

Singh Sibbia and others Vs. State of Punjab1
-
paragraph 19,

Padmakar Tukaram Bhavnagar & anr Vs. The State of

Maharashtra2
and
Babubhai Vs. State of Gujarat
and

others3 para 32.
26. Having            perused   the   averments   in    the   respective

applications, further affidavits filed by the applicant, the

response filed by the respondents and considering the rival

submissions, we have no manner of doubt that it is not open to

the applicant to contend that there is absolutely no material

whatsoever to proceed against the applicant in Crime

No.14/2013, much less to resist the request of the Investigating

Agency to allow custodial interrogation of the applicant. For,

that aspect has already been dealt with in the earlier round of

applications, for grant of anticipatory bail as also petition to

question the validity of the process issued against the applicant

under
Section 82
of the Cr.P.C. and for cancellation of non-

bailable warrant. This Court had rejected the said contention of
1
(1980) 2 SCC 565
2
(2012) 13 SCC 720
3
2010 (12) SCC 254
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
27
the applicant and which finding has been affirmed by the

Supreme Court.
27. Presumably, realizing this position, the applicant has

advisedly taken a plea that the applicant is being persecuted by

the Investigating Officer, D.S. Baghel at the behest of Dr. Ajay

Goenka, who is in close proximity with the Investigating Officer

and is accused in Crime No.12/2013 registered at the instance of

the applicant. Notably, in the regular bail application filed by the

applicant on 1.6.2015 this specific plea has not been taken by

the applicant. The averments in the bail application, however,

inter alia, rest on the assertion that there is no tangible material

to proceed against the applicant and which fact has been stated

on affidavit filed on behalf of STF to oppose the disposed of

W.P. No.11695/2014 (PIL praying for transfer of investigation of

all VYAPAM related Scam Cases to CBI).
28. Taking that plea first, no doubt, in the reply filed by the

respondents in the said writ petition, it is mentioned that

allegations regarding Vipin Goel and his sister's son admitted in

Pre-P.G. is denied. However, that statement is being read out of

context by the applicant. The averments in Paragraph No.56 of
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
28
the reply affidavit, is in response to the averments in Paragraph

No.3.30 of the said writ petition. The whole paragraph will have

to be considered in its totality. In Paragraph No.3.30 in the writ

petition it is stated as follows:-
"3.30 - it is further submitted that, the STF instead of
        working independently and impartially is working in
        an arbitrary manner as the STF has adopted pick and
        choose method which ultimately would serious affect
        the fate of the entire scam. The petitioner herewith
        brings to the notice of this Hon'ble Court certain
        instances which are part of final report/challan filed by
        the STF before the competent criminal court
        demonstrating that, the STF has adopted pick and
        choose method due to pressure casted on it by political
        leaders, high ranked Administrative and Police
        Officials.
a) In FIR No.14/2013 which has been lodged in
        relation Pre-PG Examination, Mr. Raghvendra Singh
        Tomar has been made accused No.6. But till date Mr.
        Raghvendra Singh has not been arrested. It is alleged
        in theFIR that Mr. Raghvendra Singh along with Mr.
        Bharat Mishra who is brother of a Senior IPS Officer
        Miss Sonali Mishra took students to his factory at
        Mandideep and provided them Model key answers
        which were given to them by Nitim Mahindra. It is
        further alleged that an amount of Rs.30, Lacs was paid
        to Mr.Raghvendra Singh. However, to the utter
        astonishment the STF in order to save him has made
        him a witness under the influence of his brother in law
        Santosh Singh Gaur who is S.P. (E.O.W) in Gwalior.
It is not out of place to mention here that, the STF
        miserably failed to probe into the fact of the
        investments made by Nitin Mahindra of the money
        derived from the VYAPAM scam. Raghvendra Singh
        Tomar who is in the business of construction has made
        huge investment of the money belonging to Nitin
        Mahindra through his company M/s Faith Builders.
        Nitin Mahindra has made investment of the money
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
29
derived from VYAPAM scam in ash to Bharat Mishra,
Raksha Builders and others. Despite being the above
mentioned fact was in the notice, the STF did not
probe into the investment made by Nitin Mahindra for
the reason that there was likelihood of many other
influential political leaders and high ranked officers to
be surfaced. The STF is adopting pick and choose
method which is palpably clear from the fact that
Bharat Mishra was arrested but no concrete chain of
connecting events to the crime was ever made out. It is
important to mention here that Bharat Mishra who is
brother of a Senior IPS Officer Sonali Mishra is a close
friend of Nitin Mahindra. Raghvendra Singh Tomar
with allegation of receiving Rs.30 Lacs has been made
witness and all this have been done with a deliberate
move on the part of STF as on a later stage when all
memorandums would be testified in the competent
criminal court. Other co-accused persons would gain
benefit of the shortcomings of the prosecution and the
culprits then would be acquitted. It is apt to mention
here that reportedly one Vipin Goel who is owner of
M/s Raksha Builders got his sister's son admitted in
Pre-PG Exam through Nitin Mahindra adopting illegal
means and in lieu of the same he then helped Nitin
Mahindra to invest his black money by booking
duplex/flats in the housing project. It is further
submitted that, the political patronage enjoyed by Nitin
Mahindra is clear from the fact that, in the year 2004 a
crime bearing Crime No.26/2004 was registered by the
Economic Offence Wing regarding purchase of
computers at VYAPAM in which one Ajay Singh and
Nitin Mahindra were accused No.6 and 7 respectively.
But the government refused to grant sanction in this
case. It is further submitted that, it was surfaced,
subsequent sanction has been accorded to the above
mentioned persons and supplementary challan has
been filed. The petitioner posses a question that who
were the officials/politicians and what were the reasons
for refusing the sanction initially and now under
peculiar circumstances the Government has decided to
accord sanction. All the above mentioned
circumstances command a detailed investigation as the
links are connected with the VYAPAM scam however,
the STF failed to focus its attention on arresting the
middlemen, the beneficiaries and others. The petitioner
herewith marks and encloses a copy of statements of
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
30
Raghvendra Singh Tomar under section
b) It is submitted that an FIR No.17/2013 Mr.
       Laxmikant Sharma was found involved but he has not
       been impleaded as accused nor has been arrested. The
       students and parents from Sironj District Vidisha has
       deposed that they have given the roll number to the
       then Minister Shri Laxmikant Sharma however the
       STF has not made his accused in the case and challan
       has been filed as such. With respect to FIR No.17 the
       statement of one Sanjiv Kumar Mutele and his mother
       Pushpa Devi Mutele has been filed along with the
       challan. From the statements it is apparently clear that
       the above mentioned persons had visited Shri
       Laxmikant Sharma at his residence and he had taken a
       photocopy of entrance card. Despite being sufficient
       evidence, Laxmikant Sharma deliberately has not been
       made accused in the crime. The petitioner herewith
       marks and encloses a copy of statements of Sanjiv
       Kumar Mutele and his mother Smt. Pushpadevi Muele
       as Annexure P/25 and P/26."
(emphasis supplied)
29. In response to these averments the reply filed by the

respondents in the writ petition sworn by Mr.Ashish Khare, AIG,

STF, M.P. reads thus :-
"56. Re: Para 3.30: Allegations regarding pick and
       chose method adopted by the STF are specifically
       denied. The facts mentioned in this para are being
       clarified as under :
Regarding Raghevendra Singh Tomar: The
       allegation of any influence by Shri Santosh Singh Gour
       is specifically denied. Mr. Raghvendra Singh has
       become witness of the crime. It is not necessary to
       arrest him and this will facilitate the STF to proceed
       even against other accused persons who are key
       accused of the crime. It is submitted that neither Bharat
       Mishra nor any other person has given any concrete
       evidence against involvement of Raghvendra Tomar. It
       is the discretion exercised by the Investigating Officer
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
31
that the statement under
section 164
CrPC of
Raghvendra Tomar will facilitate the investigating
agency to ensure that the main culprits are punished. In
the crime No.14/13 the statement of Raghvendra
Tomar under
Section 164
of CrPC was very much
useful as the same has become concrete evidence of
linking other accused persons to expose the entire
conspiracy.
Till date the entire investigation no fact has come on
record to show that there was any investment made by
Nitin Mohindra in the company of Raghvendra Tomar
in his Faith Builders construction company. However
efforts in this regard were already made any necessary
interrogation was also done in this regard. It is
submitted that as far as the involvement of nephew of
Vipin Goel in Pre PG 2012 course is concerned, the
issue is still under consideration and if it is found that
Prakhar Singhal who is nephew of Vipin Goel is
involved in the conspiracy a prompt action would be
taken against him. Regarding allegations of non grant
of sanction in EOW case No.26/2004 by the State is
concerned it is submitted that the then Chairman of
VYAPAM had refused the sanction against Nitin
Mohindra and Ajay Sen. However, the said order has
been reviewed and the sanction has been granted by
the VYAPAM, in which investigation was done by
EOW.
Regarding Vipin Goel : Allegations regarding Vipin
Goel and his sister's son admitted in Pre PG is denied.
The prosecution sanction in Crime No.26/04 to EOW
was denied by the then Chairman of the VYAPAM.
However, the said order was reconsidered and fresh
sanction has been granted. So far as arrest of
Lakshmikant Sharma in FIR 17/13 is concerned, when
the arrest is to be made is to be decided by the
investigating officer. The fact remains that
Lakshmikant Sharma is already in jail.
It is submitted that petitioner is incorrectly stating that
in Crime No.17/13 Lakshmikant Sharma is not
accused. So far as the arrest is concerned, it will make
no difference when the said person is already in jail in
connection with other case and it is up to the
investigating officer as to on which date he will arrest
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
32
any particular person. However, it is submitted that
        witnesses in this case were mostly from the
        constituency of the ex-minister and, therefore, with the
        efforts of the investigating agency statement under
section 164
CrPC have been recorded against him,
        they will prove the case against him and his arrest will
        also be made as and when the same is required."
(emphasis supplied)
30. With reference to the assertion concerning the applicant,

Vipin Goel it is stated that the issue is still under consideration

and if it is found that Dr. Prakhar Singhal nephew of Vipin Goel

(applicant herein) is involved in the conspiracy, prompt action

will be taken. The affidavit then denies the allegations regarding

Vipin Goel and his sister's son admitted in Pre-PG course. This

affidavit was filed on the basis of record available in the office

of STF till 18.9.2014. However, thereafter on 26.11.2014, on the

basis of material gathered by the Investigating Agency, notice

was issued to the applicant for enquiry in connection with

subject Crime No.14/2013. No doubt, the applicant appeared

before the Investigating officer and was questioned on certain

matters. However, as the investigation proceeded further on the

basis of other material besides the memorandum of Nitin

Mohindra recorded under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act, the

Investigating Agency was of the opinion that the applicant was
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
33
not cooperating during further investigation and that his

custodial interrogation had become necessary. That plea of the

Investigating Agency was tested by the Courts and was accepted

whilst rejecting the anticipatory bail application filed by the

applicant. In the first place, by the Trial Court and then by the

High Court which finding was affirmed by the Supreme Court

by a speaking order whilst rejecting S.L.P. (Cri) No.2480/2015

filed by the applicant vide order dated 30.3.2015.
31. Thus understood, it is not open to the applicant to raise the

same plea in support of the prayer for grant of bail. The reliance

placed by the applicant on the subsequent order passed by the

Supreme Court on 19.5.2015, while dismissing the S.L.Ps. filed

by the applicant will be of no avail to the applicant. The

question whether the applicant should be arrested by the

Investigating Agency and his custodial interrogation, has

become final. The observations of the Supreme Court made in

order dated 19.5.2015 pressed into service by the applicant are

in the context of challenge to the process issued against the

applicant under
Section 82
of the Code and to the non-bailable

warrant. The said observations are limited - to consider the
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
34
prayer for regular bail by the Court expeditiously without being

influenced by the order of the High Court in those proceedings.

To wit, orders dated 24.4.2015 and 5.5.2015 challenged in the

said Special Leave Petitions. Those observations cannot be used

by the applicant to contend that the applicant cannot be arrested

nor subjected to custodial interrogation, notwithstanding the

rejection of successive appeals of the applicant to the Supreme

Court for grant of anticipatory bail in subject Crime No.14/2013

and more particularly the explicit findings and opinion given by

the coordinate Bench of the Supreme Court in its order dated

30.3.3015.
32. Suffice it to observe that the Supreme Court having asked

the applicant to resort to regular bail application presupposes

that the applicant should be taken in custody. It is well

established position that prayer for grant of bail can be

entertained only when the person applying for bail is in custody
- police custody/judicial custody or surrendered before the

Court. For that reason, the applicant was called upon to first

surrender before this Court, before commencing the arguments

on the prayer for grant of bail in connection with Crime
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
35
No.14/2013. In that sense, he is already arrested in connection

with Crime No.14/2013 and is in judicial custody, until final

decision on this application.
33.   As aforesaid, accepting the prayer for release of applicant on

bail without the Investigating Agency being allowed to resort to

custodial interrogation of the applicant in connection with Crime

No.14/2013, will inevitably result in denying the Investigating

Agency of the said opportunity already affirmed by the Supreme

Court. Therefore, until custodial interrogation is done by the

Investigating Agency in Crime No.14/2013, the question of

releasing the applicant on bail does not arise.
34.   Presumably, realizing this position, the applicant has now

been advised to take a plea to question the fairness of investigation

and, in particular, custodial interrogation by Investigating Officer,

D. S. Baghel with reference to the events which have now been

mentioned in the further affidavits filed during the pendency of the

bail application. There is force in this submission of the

respondents. We have already referred to the circumstances

mentioned     in    the     further successive affidavits filed        by

the   applicant,      as      the   hearing     of   the      application

progressed.    In     the     original   bail   application    there   is
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
36
no reference to this aspect but other grounds have been taken

which, as aforesaid, cannot be considered in view of the opinion

already recorded right up to the Supreme Court that the

Investigating Agency is entitled to subject the applicant to

custodial interrogation in connection with Crime No.14/2013.
35. It has been faintly suggested in the application that

custodial interrogation is not mandatory. This point was also

argued before us. However, entertaining that argument would

tantamount to circumventing the opinion already recorded right

upto the Supreme Court whilst accepting the stand of the

Investigating Agency that custodial interrogation of the

applicant has become necessary in the fact situation of the

present case. Presumably, for that reason, the applicant chose to

file application for taking additional facts and submissions on

record supported by his affidavit sworn on 14.6.2015. In this

application, the applicant has highlighted the circumstance

indicating the proximity of the Investigating Officer, D. S.

Baghel and Dr. Ajay Goenka at whose behest, according to the

applicant, the Investigating Officer was persecuting the

applicant. Amongst others, the applicant has mentioned that as
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
37
per his information said Dr. Ajay Goenka and Investigating

Officer, D. S. Baghel were constantly interacting on telephone

and which fact can be established from the call records between

the two. In respect of telephone numbers mentioned in

Paragraph No.15 of this application, however, no specifics or

material facts have been mentioned about the source of

information or the period between which and the number of

times the telephone calls were exchanged between the two. That

has been stated only after the Court gave opportunity to the

applicant for filing better affidavit, vide affidavit dated

17.6.2015. The applicant in this affidavit has, no doubt,

mentioned about the number of telephone calls exchanged

between the two, but has not disclosed as to when the applicant

become privy to this additional information and the source from

where the information has been derived. The applicant as per the

liberty given by the Court has filed further affidavit sworn on

19.6.2015 to state that he became suspicious after he obtained

certified copy on 3.6.2015 of the objection filed by the

Investigating Officer to oppose his bail application. Assuming

that the applicant has now revealed the details as to when he
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
38
became suspicious against the Investigating Officer, but has not

disclosed the source of information and the authenticity of the

figures about the date and number of telephone calls exchanged

between the two. Moreso, inspite of specific stand taken by the

respondents to counter that plea in the response filed by the

Investigating Agency on affidavit sworn by Mr. Ashish Khare,

AIG, STF dated 22.6.2015, the applicant has not filed any

rejoinder. On the other hand, it is noticed from the affidavit of

Mr. Ashish Khare, AIG, STF that he has made enquiries with the

concerned telephone company to find out whether the applicant

at any point of time obtained information regarding the call

details between Investigating Officer, D. S. Baghel and Dr. Ajay

Goenka. The informal response received by him from the

officials of the telephone company was that no such information

has been given to the applicant. Moreover, a formal request has

been made by him to the concerned telephone company to give

response in that behalf, which is still awaited.
36. Suffice it to observe that it is not possible to accept the

vague and unsubstantiated plea taken by the applicant in his

further application and additional affidavits. Notably, in the
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
39
context of the apprehension of the applicant that the

Investigating Officer, D. S. Baghel may not act fairly, the

respondents volunteered, without prejudice, that the Head of

STF Shri Sudhir Sahi, DGP can be asked to supervise the

custodial interrogation session of the applicant by D. S. Baghel.

However, the applicant for the reasons best known to him, has

rejected this offer through counsel and instead has invited the

decision on merits.
37. As noted earlier, the question of releasing the applicant on

bail before the Investigating Agency subjects the applicant to

custodial interrogation does not arise in the fact situation of the

present case. The applicant must undergo custodial interrogation

as is the opinion of Supreme Court in its order dated 30.3.2015

in S.L.P. (Cri) No.2480/2015, which was filed by the applicant.

It is also not possible to countenance the argument of the

applicant that there is no material whatsoever before the

Investigating Agency to proceed against the applicant. Even that

question has been considered and answered against the applicant

in the same proceeding whilst rejecting prayer for anticipatory

bail. On this count alone the prayer for regular bail even before
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
40
the formal arrest of the applicant by the police in connection

with Crime No.14/2013 and more so custodial interrogation,

cannot be countenanced. For, granting bail to the applicant will

inevitably result in circumventing the earlier opinion formed by

the Courts for rejecting his anticipatory bail application.
38. We may now turn to the ground urged by the applicant that

he is a small time businessman and not likely to influence the

ongoing investigation, prosecution evidence or witnesses, in any

manner. Although, this specific plea is taken in the original bail

application filed on 1.6.2015, in Paragraph No.5.18. However,

from the further affidavits filed by the applicant, in particular,

the averments in the application I.A. No.11502/2015, it leaves

no manner of doubt that the applicant is engaged in construction

business in a big way as is evident from the volume of

transaction entered by the company of which the applicant

claims to be the Director. That speaks volumes about the status

of the applicant in the society. Further, the applicant in his

application has accepted the fact that he has had fair association

with the persons staying in the colony like Nitin Mohindra and

Bharat Mishra, who are also residents of Eden Garden Colony .
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
41
They have been named as principal conspirators in the

commission of offence pertaining to VYAPAM Scam Cases.
39. The Investigating Agency, therefore, wants to rule out the

possibility of involvement of applicant as middleman for other

candidates in conspiracy with Nitin Mohindra and Bharat

Mishra. The statement made by the Investigating Agency on

24.3.2015, that it is fairly accepted by the State that, as of today

(i.e. 24.3.2015), from the information gathered by the

Investigating Officer the applicant was concerned only with Dr.

Prakhar Singhal - one candidate. That cannot be the basis to

ignore the perception of the Investigating Agency which may

have changed with the further evidence collected during the

ongoing investigation. That being a continuous process till the

filing of the final police report (charge sheet). Moreover, the

statement clearly mentions that it was made on the basis of

information available as on that date i.e. 24.3.2015. In any case,

these are issues for investigation and the Investigating Agency

cannot be asked to confine the investigation in a particular

direction, notwithstanding the other material becomes available

to it during the ongoing investigation.
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
42
40. Be that as it may, we are not at all impressed by the stand

taken by the applicant that he is a small time businessman.

Firstly because of his own revelation in the further affidavit and

also because it has been stated on instructions by the counsel for

the respondent/State that the applicant is none else but President

of the Builders Association in Indore. The status of the applicant

in society has been reinforced from the news item which

appeared in local newspaper "Patrika Daily"on 25.6.2015. In

that, though the applicant was ordered to be kept in judicial

custody, he was having free time in Subhash Chandra Boss,

Medical College, Jabalpur. He was allowed to freely interact

with several visitors; and his family members were in

attendance throughout in the hospital, but no Police Officer was

found anywhere nearby the separate room allocated to the

applicant. The circumstance in which the applicant was shifted

to hospital from the Jail without the permission of this Court,

much less, a formal intimation to the Court, is a mystery. That

issue, indeed, is being enquired into in the suo moto proceedings

W.P. No.6385/2014 (PIL for monitoring the investigation of

crimes related to VYAPAM Examination Scam Cases). The
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
43
Division Bench (of which one of us A. M. Khanwilkar, Chief

Justice) is party has already directed enquiry into that episode

on 26.6.2015. The relevant extract of the order reads thus :-
"12.One intriguing situation has been noticed very
       recently when another Division Bench of this Court
       (to which one of us was party - A. M. Khanwilkar,
       Chief Justice) dealing with M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
       (
Vipin Goel Vs. State
). The said applicant was
       ordered to be taken in judicial custody vide order
       dated 18.6.2015, to be kept at Jabalpur until further
       decision in that application. The said applicant was
       taken in judicial custody on the same day, but the
       local newspaper "Patrika Daily" dated 25.06.2015
       has mentioned that Vipin Goel was having free time
       in Subhash Chandra Bose Medical College,
       Jabalpur. Notably, the said application is still
       pending in this Court. However, the newspaper
       report mentions that many visitors interacted with
       the said Vipin Goel in the stated hospital including
       his family members who were in attendance
       throughout but no police officer was found
       anywhere nearby the said Vipin Goel, who was seen
       resting in company with his family members in a
       separate room allocated to him. The circumstance in
       which the said Vipin Goel was moved to the
       hospital from Jabalpur jail without the permission
       of this Court will have to be enquired. Further, how
       the said applicant was allowed to mingle with
       visitors, will also have to be examined. Moreover,
       how many visitors and the particulars of those
       visitors who interacted with Vipin Goel during the
       time he was in hospital, will also have to be
       ascertained. We direct the Head of STF to inquire
       into these matters and submit a report in a sealed
       cover on the next date. If any Government Officials
       and in particular Police Officials are found to be
       involved, whether the State Government has
       initiated any action against such officials (Doctors,
       Jail Authorities/Police Authorities) be placed on
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
44
record in these proceedings. Further, the Head of
            STF must immediately visit the said hospital today
            before proceeding to Bhopal to ascertain whether
            the lobbies in the hospital have been provided with
            CC TV Cameras and if yes, to obtain that record,
            for the relevant period, when the applicant was kept
            in that hospital and to inquire into all relevant
            matters."
41. This, direction was required to be given because of the

stand taken by the applicant when called upon to explain the

circumstances in which he was admitted in the hospital. Instead,

he argued that the explanation should be sought from the State

and not the applicant.
42. We shall now revert to the Supreme Court decision relied

by the counsel for the applicant in the case of
Shri Gurbaksh

Singh Sibbia and others
(supra). Relying on the exposition in

Paragraph No.19 of this decision, it was contended that arrest of

the accused for recording his memorandum of statement under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act is not a sine qua non.
The

Supreme Court while referring to the decision of
State of U.P.

Vs. Deoman Upadhyay4
has noted that when a person not in

custody approaches a police officer investigating an offence and

offers to give information leading to the discovery of a fact,
4
(1961) 1 SCR 14
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
45
having a bearing on the charge which may be made against him,

he may appropriately be deemed to have surrendered himself to

the police. It is further noted in this decision that
Section 46
of

Cr.P.C. does not contemplate any formality before a person can

be said to be taken in custody; submission to the custody by

word or action by a person is sufficient. These observations, in

our opinion, will be of no avail to the applicant in the fact

situation of the present case since his prayer for grant of

anticipatory bail has already been rejected by the Courts right

upto the Supreme Court consequent to upholding the plea of the

Investigating Agency that the applicant was not cooperating in

the investigation of the subject crime and his custodial

interrogation has become necessary.
43. Reliance was then placed on the decision of the Supreme

Court in the case of
Padmakar Tukaram Bhavnagar
(supra),

in support of the argument that the applicant was not an

influential person and that the decision in the case of
CBI Vs.

Anil Sharma5
has been explained.
The dictum in
Para No. 6 of

Anil Kumar Sharma
's case (supra) is about the efficacy of the

custodial interrogation. As aforesaid, it is not open to the
5
(1997) 7 SCC 187
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
46
applicant to contend that he cannot be subjected to custodial

interrogation.
Further, for the finding already recorded about the

status of the applicant in the society, the observations in the case

of
Padmakar Tukaram Bhavnagare
(supra) are inapposite in

the case of applicant. In that case, the Court proceeded on the

finding that the appellant before it was aged, rustic and

uninfluential person and did not have propensity of bringing

pressure on the Investigating Agency. None of this would apply

to the case of the applicant, as has been noticed earlier.
44. Reliance is then placed on the decision of the Supreme

Court in the case of
Babubhai
(supra), in particular Paragraph

32, to contend that the investigation of a criminal offence must

be free from objectionable features or infirmities which may

legitimately lead to a grievance on the part of the accused that

investigation was unfair and carried out with an ulterior motive.

In the present case, however, it has been found by the Courts

whilst rejecting the prayer for grant of anticipatory bail, right

upto the Supreme Court, that there was fair amount of material

before the Investigating Agency to proceed against the applicant

in Crime No.14/2013 and also to subject the applicant to
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
47
custodial interrogation. Further, we have held that the

apprehension of the applicant is vague and unsubstantiated. The

applicant, as the proceeding has progressed, has improvised his

plea. That is an argument of desperation. Having said this, we

may note that the respondents have voluntarily offered, without

prejudice, whilst refuting the allegations of the applicant against

the Investigating Officer, that the Head of the STF will

supervise the custodial interrogation session of the applicant by

D. S. Baghel (I. O.). That would meet the ends of justice and

enough to dispel even the slightest of apprehension of the

applicant that the Investigating Officer, D.S.Baghel will forcibly

extract incriminatory statements from the applicant during his

custodial interrogation. Even though the applicant has rejected

that option, as was conveyed to us through counsel; and inspite

of rejecting the prayer for bail, we would still ask the Head of

STF, Shri Sudhir Sahi, D.G.P., to supervise the custodial

interrogation session of the applicant conducted by the

Investigating Officer, D.S.Baghel in connection with Crime

No.14/2013. This, however, will not be treated as a precedent.

For, we are doing this in the facts of the present case only to
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
48
assuage the misplaced apprehension of the applicant.
45. As a matter of fact, there is no need to show this

indulgence, considering the fact that the investigation of crimes

related to VYAPAM examination scam cases is being monitored

by the High Court for which even a Special Investigation Team

of experts (headed by former Judge of this Court and a former

high ranking Police Official (IPS) and also a former high

ranking official of NIC as IT expert) has been constituted to

assist the High Court, who in turn, analyse the investigation

reports on case to case basis. Indeed, the scope of monitoring of

those cases also encompasses as to whether Investigating

Agency is following the exposition of the Supreme Court while

carrying on the investigation of the concerned crime. For, it is

the duty of the investigating officer to conduct fair investigation

and avoid any kind of mischief and harassment to any of the

accused.
46. For the aforesaid reasons, the applicant's prayer for bail is

rejected, at this stage. In view of the dismissal of this bail

application, the interlocutory applications are also disposed of.
47. As the bail application is rejected, the applicant who has
M.Cr.C.No.8811/2015
49
been directed to be taken in judicial custody at Jabalpur during

the pendency of this application, the Investigating Agency (STF)

is free to take custody of the applicant forthwith and to proceed

with the investigation including custodial interrogation of the

applicant, in connection with Crime No.14/2013, in accordance

with law.
(A.M. Khanwilkar)                        (K.K.Trivedi)
      Chief Justice                            Judge



Anchal/AM.
