Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: AIR 1983 SC 360 wherein it has been
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/164156205/

[Cites
60
, Cited by
34
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
In Refrence (Suo Moto) vs Ankur @ Nitesh Dixit on 9 September, 2019
Author:
Vivek Agarwal
Bench:
Vivek Agarwal
1 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

                    High Court of Madhya Pradesh
                          Bench at Gwalior


DIVISION BENCH : Hon.Shri Justice Sanjay Yadav &
                Hon.Shri Justice Vivek Agarwal

        Criminal Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference)

In reference
[Received      from      Second
Additional Sessions Judge, Bhind
(M.P.).

                                      Vs.
Ankur          @ Nitesh Dixit                 .....Respondent/Accused

                                     with

                    Criminal Appeal No.3539/2019


Ankur           @ Nitesh Dixit               ....Appellant

                                      Vs.

State of M.P. through Police
Station, City Kotwali, Bhind         ...Respondent

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma, learned Senior Counsel as Amicus
Curiae for the accused with Shri Padam Singh & V. K. Agrawal,
learned counsel.


Shri Ankur Mody, learned Additional Advocate General and Shri
F.A.Shah, learned Govt. Advocate for the respondent/State.

Shri V.D.Sharma, learned counsel for the complainant.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Whether approved for Reporting :


                         JUDGMENT
(Delivered on this 9th day of September, 2019)


Per Justice Vivek Agarwal :
This Criminal Reference and appeal arise from the judgment

dated 19.3.2019 passed in Sessions Case No.1500179/2016 by the
2 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

Court of 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Bhind. Learned 2 nd

Additional Sessions Judge has held appellant to be guilty of

charges under
Section 302
of IPC on five counts and
Section 201
of IPC and sentenced him to be hanged till death on confirmation

of such sentence by the High Court under
Section 302
of IPC and

further sentenced him to undergo 7 years RI with fine of

Rs.10,000/- and in case of default in payment of fine, six months

additional imprisonment.
2.    Criminal Reference has been made under the provisions of

Section 366 of Cr.P.C., whereas Criminal Appeal against the said

judgment has been filed under the provisions of Section 374 of

Cr.P.C.
3.    As per prosecution story, incident took place in the

intervening night of 13.5.2016 and 14.5.2016. Allegation is that

appellant was giving tuition to the family members of one Smt.

Reena resident of Bhind and while imparting such tuition he had

developed relationship with Reena who was a widow and was

residing in the house of her father-in-law Rambabu Shukla (PW-
1). Alongwith Reena there were four other persons residing in the

said house namely Ku. Mahima aged about 16 years daughter of

Vedprakash Shukla, Ku. Chavi aged about 10 years daughter of

Shashikant Shukla & Reena Shukla, Ku. Ambika aged about 16

years daughter of Brijmohan Bhardwaj and niece of Reena and

Golu @ Avnish Sharma aged about 13 years son of Ramkumar

Sharma, who was distantly related Devar (brother-in-law) of

deceased Reena.
3 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019
4.    It is an admitted position that there is no direct evidence.

There is no evidence of last seen. It is a case of circumstantial

evidence wherein except for a knife recovered from a mud pool,

no incriminating article was recovered. There was no blood stain

on the knife as per the FSL report and no motive could be gathered

except drawn from the memorandum given by the appellant under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act. Dehati Nalishi (Ex.P/1) was

lodged by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) at about 10 am on 14.5.16 and

was recorded by the T.I. and I.O. of the case Mirja Asif Beg (PW-
28). Apart from knife recovered vide seizure memo Ex.P/12,

having total length of 8" out of which length of handle is 4",

recovery of a soiled glass allegedly containing finger prints of the

accused besides other Articles was made vide Ex.P/8. During

postmortem of Reena vide Ex.P/24A her vaginal swab and slides

were prepared and handed over to the police Constable which

were subjected to DNA examination, report of which is Ex.P/43

and certificate of expertise of fingerprint specialist as Ex.P/46 has

been corroborated with call details of the appellant and deceased

Reena. These call details are Ex.P-16 to Ex.P-20 and on the basis

of such DNA report obtained after matching of vaginal swab and

sample of blood collected from the appellant vide Ex.P/43, so also

on the basis of call details and finger print report, appellant has

been convicted on the charge of committing murder of five

innocent persons.
5.      Learned amicus curiae submits that there are several

loopholes in the prosecution story and appellant has been falsely
        4 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

implicated on account of his relations with deceased Reena. It is

submitted that as per prosecution story in the morning of 14 th May,

2016 Neelesh Sharma (PW-16) son of Sandeep Bhardwaj and

grand-son of Shriram Sharma was asked by his grand-father

Shriram Sharma to visit house of his Bua (aunt), namely Reena, to

look for his sister Ambika, then he visited house of Reena situated

at a distance of 3-4 house from the house of Shriram Sharma i.e.

father of Reena and when he pressed the call bell, there was no

response. There was lock on both the gates and in the meanwhile

his grand-father Shriram Sharma also reached to the house of

Reena and asked Neelesh Sharma @ Betu to climb the terrace of

the neighbourer and look inside the house of his aunt. He

accordingly climbed the terrace and opened the Kundi (chainlet)

of the door, which he opened with the help of an iron rod and

entered in the house of Reena and saw that Reena, sister Ambika,

Mahima, Chhavi and Golu were lying in a blood pool. He returned

back from there using same passage and informed this fact to his

grand-father Shriram Sharma.
6.    It is further submitted that it is very unnatural conduct of

Shriram Sharma that instead of reporting such matter to the police

immediately, he as per the version of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1),

Samdhi of Shriram Sharma and father-in-law of Reena, called him

over his phone and asked as to whether Reena alongwith children

are visiting him at the village as her house is locked. It is

submitted that this version of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) is

doubtful, and therefore, lodging of Dehati Nalishi (Ex.P/1) by
        5 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

Rambabu Shukla causes sufficient doubt as to the story of

prosecution.
7.    It is submitted that there is no explanation to the fact that

keys of the house and mobile of Reena were not recovered from

the same dirt pool from where knife was allegedly recovered vide

Ex.P/12. It is pointed out that there is no explanation for finding a

broken lock inasmuch as an eight lever broken lock of Rainbow

Navtal was recovered, but exact place of such recovery has not

been shown as has been corroborated by Roli Bhadauria (PW-2)

but no cognizance of these facts has been taken by the learned trial

Court. It is submitted that in absence of any eye-witness, in a case

based on circumstantial evidence, chain is to be complete, but

such chain is not complete. Whole investigation has been carried

out on presumptions drawn on the basis of memorandum under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act. Prosecution has not bothered to

examine even Shriram Sharma, father of Reena, who was living in

close proximity of the place of incident and also the neighbourer

of Reena inasmuch as Neelesh Sharma @ Betu (PW-16) had

climbed the roof of a neighbourer touching the boundaries of the

house of Reena and entered in the house of Reena on the

instructions of Shriram Sharma, thus these neighbourers were

important witnesses who could have thrown light so to discover

the truth. Therefore, by merely examining the close relatives,

police has tried to conclude the investigation in a predetermined

manner so to falsely implicate present appellant.
8.    It is further submitted that as per prosecution story appellant
        6 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

had attended the funeral and involvement of the appellant could

not be proved by deploying sniffer dog inasmuch as it is an

admitted position that clothes of the appellant were sniffed by the

so called sniffer dog and prosecution even could not prove the

theory of deployment of sniffer dog. It is further submitted that

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has admitted in para 42 of cross-

examination that accused had visited the scene of crime and when

he heard about deployment of dog squad, then he ran away. He

also admitted that dog squad had reached the place of incident at

12 noon. He further admitted that in his case diary statement

(Ex.D/6) he had not mentioned this fact that accused had visited

scene of crime on 14.5.16 and had run away after hearing talk of

summoning of dog squad and he is intimating said fact in the

Court for the first time. He had also not mentioned about presence

of the accused in the last rite ceremony in his case diary statement

(Ex.D/6).
9.    It is submitted that other witnesses have admitted that

accused had not only visited the scene of crime, but was present in

the District Hospital, Bhind, at the time of postmortem and had

also attended last rites of the deceased, and therefore, when this

statement of Rambabu (PW-1) that accused had run away after

hearing talks of summoning of dog squad is corroborated with the

statement that dog squad reached at 12 noon, the story of dog

squad coming to the scene of crime and appellant running away

loses its sheen inasmuch as if a person would have run away after

hearing talks of summoning of dog squad, which according to
        7 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) was in fact summoned at 12 pm, then

appellant accused would not have shown guts to visit place of

postmortem at District Hospital, Bhind, and last rites of the

deceased. This is an important and major missing link in the chain

of circumstances which has not been explained by the prosecution.
10.   It is submitted that as per the postmortem reports, the way

five deaths have taken place and the position in which the bodies

were found, it was not a handy work of a single person.

Prosecution has not found any blood stains on the clothes of the

accused and the knife recovered at the instance of the accused. No

finger prints were found on either broken lock or other utensils

found in the house. Both Roli Bhadauria (PW-2), tenant in the

house where incident took place, and Manjesh Parmar (PW-21)

who had lifted the finger prints, admitted that house hold goods

were found in a scattered position, and therefore, motive of loot by

some unknown persons could not have been ruled out.
11.   It is submitted that in fact accused was arrested on

14.5.2016, but his arrest was shown on 15.5.2016 and he was

beaten brutally to extract memorandum under
Section 27
of the

Evidence Act. It is also submitted that as per Dehati Nalishi, Merg,

so also Dehati Nalishi (Ex.P/1), date and time of information is

mentioned as 14.5.16 at 9.25 am and 9.30 am respectively,

whereas Rambabu Sharma has deposed that police had already

broken lock of the house prior to his arrival at about 9.30 am. It is

further submitted that Dehati Nalishi Merg Ex.D/11, so also

Dehati Nalishi were recorded against unknown persons. It is also
        8 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

submitted that there was no motive and in absence of any proved

motive, a case of circumstantial evidence could not have been said

to be proved. It is also submitted that trial Court erred in recording

a finding on the basis of a fact that no explanation was given by

the accused in his 313
Cr.P.C
. statement inasmuch as prosecution

was required to prove its case and prosecution has failed to prove

its case beyond reasonable doubt. It is submitted that accused

cannot be convicted for either taking a weak defence or failing to

explain circumstances against him. Suspicion, however strong may

be, it cannot take place of proof.
12.   It is also submitted that Dr.J.S.Yadav (PW-24) had

conducted postmortem alongwith team of other doctors while he

was posted as Medical Officer at District Hospital, Bhind. PW-24

conducted autopsy of Mahima Shukla at 1.30 pm and found a

contusion on her upper lip on which there were marks of four teeth

measuring 3 cm x 1 cm. Similarly injury No.2 was a contusion on

the lower lip having marks of 6 teeth measuring 2.5 cm x 1 cm.

There were four incised wounds and two abrasions, in all eight

injuries, on the body of deceased Mahima. However, no FSL

report was produced in relation to teeth mark on her upper and

lower lip. Trachea was full of froth and both the lungs were

congested. Stomach and intestine had some semi-digested food

and gases. Though swab and slides were prepared in relation to

deceased Mahima also, but they did not match with the sample of

the accused. As per the doctor, cause of death of Mahima was

asphyxia caused by smothering and death was homicidal as per
        9 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) & Cri.A.3539/2019

report Ex.P/21A.
13.   Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) also conducted autopsy on the body

of deceased Chhavi, daughter of Reena and Shashikant, aged

about 10 years and found metallic rings in both the ears and in the

left hand ring finger. There was a ligature mark measuring 32 cm x

1.5 cm around the neck in a transverse manner. On dissection,

margins were found congested with hard and leathery base. There

was congestion in the neck and trachea which was full of froth.

Both the lungs were congested. Hymen was intact and her vaginal

swab and slide were sent for FSL. Even slide and swab of

deceased Chhavi could not match with the blood sample obtained

from the accused for DNA examination. Doctor opined that as per

the postmortem report Ex.P/22A cause of death was asphyxia due

to strangulation within 6 to 24 hours. It is pointed out that no

finger prints were lifted from the face of deceased Mahima who

was smothered to death, so also from the material used to cause

ligature mark on the body of deceased Chhavi resulting in

strangulation.
14.   Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) also conducted autopsy of Reena

and gave autopsy report Ex.P/24A and found an incised wound on

the frontal side of the neck which was transversely placed

measuring    11 cm x 3 cm reaching to trachea. Trachea was

severed. Blood was found deposited on the neck as well as

trachea. Second injury was an abrasion below injury No.1

measuring 2 cm x 8 cm skin deep. Third injury was a contusion on

right side of neck measuring 7 cm x 3 cm. Number of such
                10 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
contusions were 7. There was another contusion on the upper lip

measuring 1 cm x .05 cm. Vaginal swab and slides were prepared

and preserved. According to the doctor, cause of death was

excessive blood loss resulting in shock due to injury caused to the

neck.
15.     Reading opinion of Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) it is pointed out

that SHO, City Kotwali, Bhind, vide Ex.P/54 had forwarded a

knife to Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) for his opinion as to whether such

injuries could have been sustained with that knife or not and he

opined that injuries caused to the neck of the deceased can be

caused by a knife which has teeth. Reading such opinion of Dr.

J.S.Yadav (PW-24) it is submitted that there is absence of

categorical opinion as to whether such injuries as were found on

the dead-body of the deceased/victim could have been caused by

the seized knife or not, and thus this indirect opinion goes in

favour of the defence and prosecution cannot take any advantage

of such indirect opinion.
16.     Referring to para 29 of cross-examination of Dr. J.S.Yadav

(PW-24) it is pointed out that when Dr. Yadav was asked that he

has mentioned in his postmortem report that injuries No.3 to 6

sustained by deceased Mahima had clear margins, then why he has

mentioned that such injuries can be caused by a knife with teeth,

he replied that on 16.7.2016 SHO Kotwali Distt. Bhind alongwith

Ex.P/54 had brought a knife with him which had light teeth over it

and asked as to whether such injuries as mentioned in postmortem

report can be caused by this knife, the he had opined that injuries
               11 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
caused could have been caused by a knife which has teeth.
17.   Reading such evidence, it is pointed out that in para 30 of

his cross-examination Dr. Yadav (PW-24) has deposed that
Article

25
, knife, was almost a new knife and he cannot opine whether

such knife was used or not. It is also submitted that Dr. Yadav has

admitted that after giving his opinion he had not sealed the knife,

therefore, change of knife or misuse of knife cannot be ruled out.

There is no explanation that how the knife produced before Dr.

Yadav was cleaned of mud inasmuch as FSL report Ex.P/60 makes

a mention of this fact in note No.3 that knife was full of mud,

therefore no DNA profile could be obtained from such knife. It is

pointed out that FSL report Ex.P/60 is dated 27.6.16. Such

Articles were received in FSL Laboratory on 18.5.16, whereas

opinion of Dr. Yadav was obtained on 16.7.16, therefore, it was

for the prosecution to explain as to how dirt on the knife was

cleaned, by whom and how, thereby suggesting that knife which

was produced before the doctor was not the same as was produced

before the forensic science laboratory.
18.   It is pointed out that this doctor (PW-24) in para 37 has

admitted that deceased Reena would have sustained so much of

loss of blood from three injuries that it was sufficient to wet

mattress as well as bed-sheet, however, Rambabu Shukla (PW-1)

has admitted that no blood soaked mattress was seized.           This

doctor has further admitted in para 38 that none of the bodies were

received in a sealed condition and on 20.5.16 accused was

produced before him and he conducted MLC and found injuries on
               12 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
his body.
19.   It is further submitted that vide Ex.P/55, it is apparent that

accused was arrested on 15.5.16 at 14.00 hours, whereas Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) has mentioned that on 15.5.16 he gathered

information at about 12-12.30 noon that a person by name of

Ankur Dixit was caught in the case, then he came to Bhind from

his village Ghada and informed his relative, Rajkishore, then

visited police Station, Kotwali, at 2 pm alongwith said Rajkishore

when Ankur was called by the police and interrogated in front of

Rambabu Shukla. He accepted, committing of such murder and

also admitted that after putting lock from the outside he had

thrown mobile of Reena, one knife and keys of the lock in a mud

pool and washed his blood stained clothes. It is submitted that in

fact Ankur Dixit was arrested on 14.5.16 itself, but his formal

arrest was shown on 15.5.16 and he has been implicated on the

ground that he was imparting tuition to the children in the house of

deceased Reena and Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) and was having

relations with Reena. Thus, he was an easy target to be roped in

the crime without putting much of the effort.
20.   It is submitted that Ex.D/1, Ex.D/2, Ex.D/3 and Ex.D/4 are

the photographs of the spot. Ex.D/1 reveals that certain glasses

were lying on the platform of kitchen and few utensils in the form

of plates and bowls with one Kalchhi were lying in the sink of

kitchen. Ex.D/2 is a picture showing three different bodies lying in

one room. Ex.D/3 is a photo of a person whose hands are tied

behind his back, so also his legs are tied with a piece of cloth.
13 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Ex.D/3 and Ex.D/4 are pictures of body of deceased Golu which

was found in a separate room. It is submitted that FSL team has

not produced photographs of the room of deceased Reena from

where allegedly a steel tumbler was seized allegedly containing

finger prints of accused Ankur Dixit as can be seen from the

photographs available on record from Ex.P/32 to Ex.P/39 and

Ex.D/1 and Ex.D/4. According to Manjesh Parmar (PW-21), SI

finger print specialist, she had reached the scene of crime situated

in Ward No.6, Virendra Nagar, Bhind on getting intimation from

police control room on 14.5.16 and examined the scene of crime in

front of Superintendent of Police. She has deposed in para 3 that

after inspecting the kitchen, she found some glasses lying with

water on them. She proceeded further to the room where bodies of

the deceased Reena and three girls were lying and saw a steel glass

on the bedside. On examination, she found certain finger prints on

them which she obtained by putting black powder on them and

prepared Panchnama Ex.P/9. This Panchnama was signed by

witnesses Ramkumar Sharma on 'E' to 'E' part, Rajkishore on 'F' to

'F' part, whereas Rambabu Shukla had signed on it from 'A' to 'A'

part and it contains Tin number from 'G' to 'G' part. She had taken

Ex.P/9 to the office for examination of finger prints. She found

that out of two finger prints lifted by her, one finger print was non-

readable, whereas other finger prints could not be identified from

the available finger prints in the system, then on 18.5.16 through

Constable Sonu Dubey finger prints of accused were received vide

Ex.P/45A, Ex.P/45B and Ex.P/45C. On examination, she found
               14 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
that right hand middle finger marks were matched with the marks

lifted by her from the glass. It is pointed out that prosecution has

not examined either Ramkumar Sharma or Rajkishore who had

affixed their signatures on Ex.P/9 and who are independent

witnesses of taking of finger prints vide Ex.P/9. Rambabu Shukla

(PW-1) is not a witness of such lifting of marks but his signatures

have been obtained as a complainant. There is no proper seizure of

sealed glass vide Ex.P/8 which was prepared on 14.5.16 at about

14.30 hours, whereas there is no mention of any time on Ex.P/9,

therefore in absence of examination of two witnesses of lifting of

chance finger prints much reliance cannot be placed on Ex.P/9 that

it was lifted and prepared on 14.5.16 itself. It is also pointed out

that Ex.P/45 vide which finger prints were taken by Constable No.

717 Sonu Dubey on 18.5.16 did not make any mention or contain

any signatures of the Magistrate/Gazetted Officer in verification of

the fact that impression above were taken before him and they

were impressions of the convict named on the reverse. There are

no signatures of the convict on such sheet Ex.P/45 nor there is

mention of number of copies made, to be sent, which causes

sufficient doubt as to the authenticity of lifting of such finger

prints.
21.   It is also submitted that Rambabu (PW-1) has accepted in

para 2 of his examination-in-chief that on 14.5.16 he had received

a phone call from Shriram Sharma, father of Reena, asking him as

to whether Reena and daughter are visiting him in the village

because house at Virendra Nagar is locked. He informed that
                15 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
ladies had not come to the village and he is coming. Thereafter, he

visited Bhind on a motorcycle from his village Ghada between 9-

9.15 am. It is further mentioned that when he reached Virendra

Nagar, he found that police had already broken the lock of the

house and entered inside.
22.   There is no Panchnama of breaking of lock by the police

and opening of the gate of the house of deceased Reena and this is

another major lapse in the prosecution story. It is submitted that

when Nilesh Sharma (PW-16) had already informed Shriram

Sharma about death of five persons in the morning itself between

7-7.30 am, then there was no occasion for Shriram Sharma to call

Rambabu between 8-8.30 am asking him about the whereabouts of

the ladies. This is a major lacuna in the prosecution story. It is also

stated by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) that material in the kitchen of

deceased Reena was scattered and disturbed and he had seen dead-

bodies in one room. Mahima, Ambika and Chhavi had slit throat

and froth was coming from their mouth, whereas dead-body of

Reena was lying on the bed. Thereafter, he had seen kitchen of

tenant Roli Bhadauria where he saw dead-body of Golu who is son

of Rambabu's brother-in-law. His both the hands and legs were

tied and a cloth was stuffed in his mouth. It is pointed out that

Rajkishore, who is a neighbourer, had also visited the scene of

crime, so also Ramkumar, father of Golu. It is submitted that

Rambabu Sharma is not a witness of document Ex.P/9 but his

name is mentioned only as a complainant and he had signed from

'A' to 'A' part, whereas Ramkumar Sharma and Rajkishore have
                  16 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
not been examined. Rambabu had not deposed that any black

powder was rubbed on the glass and finger prints were lifted from

such glass as is apparent from his deposition in paragraph 6 of the

examination-in-chief which is contrary to the statement given by

Manjesh Parmar (PW-21).
23.       It is further submitted that as per Rambabu Shukla (PW-1)

last rites were performed on 14.5.16 between 6 and 7 pm, whereas

he had received information between 12-12.30 on 15.5.16 that

somebody by name of Ankur Dixit has been arrested when he had

again left for Bhind from his village Ghada and visited police

Station City Kotwali at 2 pm. It is pointed out that Ankur Dixit

was arrested vide arrest memo Ex.P/55 and his memorandum was

obtained vide Ex.P/10, whereas as per Rambabu Shukla he had

already received intimation at 12 noon about arrest of Ankur

which shows that police had already taken Ankur Dixit in custody

and they wrongly showed his arrest at 14.00 hours. It is also

submitted that witnesses of arrest, namely Moni @ Hariom and

Ramprakash have not been examined by the prosecution to prove

arrest.
24.       Reading evidence of Ankit Sharma (PW-4) it is pointed out

that police had visited his house No.97, R.Block, Shatabdipuram,

Gwalior, on 14.5.16. They were carrying a slip of a phone number

and asked him about details of said phone number. Police had also

interrogated his mother Sugandha Sharma when Ankit Sharma

(PW-4) informed that such number is in the name of his mother

Sugandha but is being used by his brother Ankur when police
               17 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
asked him to visit Bhind. Then PW-4 called Rinku, son of his Tau

and was first brought to Malanpur and then in another vehicle to

Bhind. He has deposed that he reached Bhind Kotwali at about

10.00 hours and then Bhind police asked about the address of

Ankur. When he gave address of Ankur, police took him to the

house of Ankur. Thereafter he knocked the doors of Ankur's

house when his Bua responded and on asking she informed that

Ankur was sleeping, then Ankur was woken up and was asked to

wear his clothes and bring his mobile and purse. He gave his

mobile and purse to the police personnel and then police personnel

brought Ankur to Bhind Kotwali where not only interrogated him

but also beat him. Police also brought clothes of Ankur which

contains one white blue and yellow stripped t-shirt and black

colour pant. Police had consigned Ankit Sharma (PW-4) in a lock

up. The clothes which the police had brought from the house of

Ankur were wet and this witness testified that he can identify such

clothes. In para 6 of cross-examination, this witness has clearly

deposed that police had freed him from their custody on the next

date i.e. on 15.5.16 at about 6 pm. Reading such testimony of

Ankit Sharma (PW-4) it is submitted that Ankur was arrested on

14th May, 2016 itself. Secondly wet clothes were recovered which

is not unusual inasmuch as, as per prosecution appellant attended

funeral and as per Hindu customs not only a person attending a

funeral takes bath but also washes his clothes. Thirdly since

clothes were wet and funeral had taken place on 14.5.16 between 6

and 7 pm and the time given by Ankit Sharma (PW-4) is 10
                18 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
though am or pm is missing, there is nothing unusual for his

clothes being wet and further there is no suggestion to this

prosecution witness that such clothes contain any blood stains. All

these things when taken up and considered cumulatively points

out to one fact that arrest memo Ex.P/55 is concocted and has been

prepared after arrest of the appellant. It is also submitted that

Public Prosecutor was allowed to ask only one leading question

from Ankit Sharma in regard to number of the phone and he has

not been declared hostile, therefore, his evidence cannot be

discarded lightly.
25.   It is also submitted that as per Ex.P/10 memorandum given

by Ankur under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act, in presence of

Rambabu Shukla, Ankur had given a missed call to Reena which

is contrary to the call details. It was in fact Reena who had given a

missed call at 23.13.55 hours from her telephone number

7047745138 to the number of the accused 9111515765 as is

evident from Ex.P/17, and therefore, memorandum Ex.P/10

contains, contents contrary to the electronic evidence produced by

the prosecution in the form of Ex.P/17.
26.   It is also submitted that Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has

admitted in para 34 of his cross-examination that on the bed where

dead-body of Reena was lying, there was no other material. It is

submitted that Manjesh Parmar (PW-21) has deposed that she had

seen a steel glass on one side of the bed and obtained finger prints

from such glass. This is contrary to the evidence of Rambabu

Shukal (PW-1), and therefore, seizure of glass and lifting of finger
                19 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
prints also becomes doubtful.
27.   It is also submitted that there is another omission and

contradiction in the prosecution story inasmuch as Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) has stated that he had only seen hands and legs of

Golu tied as has been deposed by him in his examination-in-chief

para 2, whereas in cross-examination he has admitted that even

hands of Chhavi were tied with a torn piece of cloth. He also

admitted that hands and legs of Golu were tied with a piece of

Dhoti worn by woman which was white and yellow in colour and

then admitted that in Ex.D/3 and Ex.D/4 hands and legs of Golu

are being shown to have been tied with a red colour cloth and not

with white and yellow cloth. This witness has also admitted in

para 36 that police had not prepared any seizure memo in regard to

the clothes which were used to tie the dead-bodies lying in the

house.
28.   Another important fact mentioned pointing towards the

loopholes in the prosecution story apart from Shriram Sharma not

informing the police and not informing Rambabu Shukla about

murder of the women and children in the house, is that house of

Shriram Sharma is about 100 meters away from the house of

deceased Reena and Shriram Sharma stays in same Virendra

Nagar. Shriram Sharma accompanied Rambabu Shukla from the

morning till evening, but he did not participate in the last rites. It

is submitted that omission of prosecution to examine Shriram

Sharma is an important omission in the chain of circumstances as

he was the first adult member of the family of deceased Reena
               20 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
besides being father of Reena who has not been examined though

he got information in early morning between 7-7.30 am through

Nilesh Sharma (PW-16) about death of five members of his

family. It is also submitted that this witness (PW-1) in para 38 has

admitted that police had lifted finger prints from 8 glasses which

were lying in the kitchen sink, but there is no mention of such fact

by Manjesh Parmar (PW-21), the finger print expert, who also

visited the scene of crime. It is also admitted that in Ex.D/5 it is

not mentioned that from which room glass from which finger

prints were lifted was seized. Specific part of the house from

where such glass was recovered is also not mentioned, then he

deposed that such glass was recovered from place E marked in the

spot map (Ex.D/5) but he admits that there is no such mention in

Ex.D/5 that glass was recovered from E place. It is also submitted

that Rajkishore is also related to him besides Ramkumar i.e. both

the witnesses of Ex.P/9 are related witnesses and are not

independent witnesses. None of the neighbourers were examined

by the prosecution and no independent witness has been examined

which is also sufficient to disprove the theory of circumstantial

evidence.
29.   It is submitted that as per Ankit Sharma (PW-4) when

Ankur was picked up from his house in his presence at about 10

on 14.5.16, then only police had seized clothes and asked Ankit to

wring out the clothes and dry them in the police Station, therefore,

showing Rambabu Shukla as a witness of seizure of such clothes

on 15.5.2016 (Ex.P/11) is indicative of only one fact that seizure
               21 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
memo has been manipulated. This witness (PW-1) has admitted

that neither signatures of mother of the accused nor any of the

neighbourers were obtained on Ex.P/11, seizure memo. He also

could not point out that on which part of the clothes, blood stains

were visible. It is also submitted that police had not seized call

records of the members of the family of Rambabu Shukla to

corroborate the call details. It is also submitted that there is a

direct suggestion to this witness that Reena was a widow, she was

preparing for D.Ed. examination so to obtain eligibility for

compassionate appointment and further house of this witness at

Virendra Nagar is single storied, whereas on west of this house is

the house of Mr.Goswami with a common wall and in the north is

the house of Mr. Ramlal Sharma with a common wall. Anybody

can approach house of Rambabu Shukla from the house of Ramlal

Sharma and Ramlal Sharma has a pet, big white dog. Thereafter

this witness has stated that since he is not staying permanently at

Virendra Nagar, he has not seen such dog of Ramlal Sharma. This

witness has also admitted in para 21 that there is no relationship

with the family of Ramlal because there is a Chabutara in front of

his house as a result of which house of Ramlal Shrama has gone in

the background. He has denied the suggestion that there was a

dispute between Reena and children of Ramlal Sharma.
30.   It is submitted that Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) in para 14 has

admitted that apart from Chhavi who was elder daughter of his son

Shashikant and Reena, there is one younger daughter named

Anshika, but neither this Anshika has been examined nor her
               22 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
whereabouts have been shown as to where she was staying at the

time and date of occurrence of such incident. This is a major

omission in the prosecution story.
31.   It is also pointed out that there is an indirect suggestion that

the plot at Virendra Nagar over which house was constructed and

Reena was staying has an angle of family dispute inasmuch as

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has admitted that he had purchased said

plot in the year 2007 in the name of his wife Rajni Shukla from

one Pappu who had mortgaged such plot with one Kailash

Narayan and since Pappu could not clear his debt, Rambabu had

paid the amount for such plot and got it registered in the name of

his wife. It is admitted that Shashikant, husband of Reena, was a

party to such discussion in regard to purchase of said plot though

this witness has denied the suggestion that money for plot was

paid by Shashikant. PW-1 has admitted in para 18 of cross-

examination that on 8.5.2016 he had a talk on mobile number of

Reena, namely 917697148002, but this witness has deposed that

on this number he had a talk with Mahima and not with Reena. In

para 19 though this witness has denied but there is a suggestion

that Reena was asking for her share in the house at Bhind and in

the agricultural land at village Ghada. This witness has also

admitted that when he had gone to Ujjain to participate in Kumbh,

at that time Anshika was at village Ghada. In para 22, Rambabu

Shukla has admitted that at Bhind his neighbourer is one Mr.

Bhadauria who is also running a general merchandise goods shop

from his house. House of Mr. Bhadauria was constructed prior to
               23 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
his house and height of his house is higher than that of Bhadauria's

house, as a result of which there is water logging on the way. He

has admitted that because of such water logging, there was a

dispute between Reena and Mr. Bhadauria. This witness has

though deposed that he is not remembering whether her tenant

Roli Bhadauria participated in this dispute or not but admitted that

he has no information that Mr. Bhadauria and his family members

had threatened Reena and her children with dire consequences.

There is another admission that there is one boy by the name of

Chhotu Karhaiya, resident of Virendra Nagar, permanent resident

of village Chiloga, related to him (Rambabu Shukla) who is

unmarried and was visiting house of Reena. Though this witness

has denied the suggestion that this Chhotu was arrested on 30.5.16

for violation of provisions of
Sections 25
,
27
of the Arms Act and

has also denied that he was visiting Reena's house after consuming

alcohol, but learned counsel submits that Reena had enmity with

neighbourers, namely Mr. Bhadauria and Ramlal Sharma and

Chhotu (not a person of good character), who was a frequent

visitor to her house, and therefore, possibility of some other

person taking revenge from Reena and family members cannot be

ruled out.
32.   It is further submitted that there is another missing link in

the prosecution story inasmuch as Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has

admitted that deceased Golu has another brother, namely Sachin

who was staying in the same house in which Reena was staying

since July, 2015. It is pointed out that this Sachin is another
               24 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
missing link in the story of circumstances and prosecution has not

explained presence or absence of Sachin on the fateful day. It is

submitted that in fact it appears to be a case of honour killing

inasmuch as it is evident from case diary statement (Ex.D/6) of

Rambabu Shukla that he had deposed that Neetesh @ Ankur was

taking tuition of children of Roli Bhadauria. His daughter-in-law

used to offer tea to him some time. His intentions were not good,

and therefore, for last two months this witness (PW-1) had stopped

his visits to his house. Ankur is not his relative but he had reached

hospital at the time of postmortem and also at the time of

cremation. This witness has expressed suspicion on Ankur @

Nitesh and has clearly mentioned that there may be other persons

apart from Ankur which needs investigation thoroughly.
33.   Reading such statement of Rambabu, it is pointed out that

even Rambabu has deposed that there are more than one person,

yet prosecution has not taken steps to rule out possibility of more

than one persons being involved inasmuch as a single person

could not have tied hands and legs of Golu who was admittedly

not administered any tranquilizer. It is also pointed out that if

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) had grave suspicion on Ankur Dixit as to

his role in commission of such murder, then there was no occasion

for recording a FIR as contained in Ex.D/7 against unknown

persons. Admittedly, this FIR was lodged at 18.17 hours on

14.5.16 and there is no mention of the fact that Rambabu had any

suspicion on Ankur.
34.   In para 26 of cross-examination, Rambabu Shukla (PW-1)
                 25 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
has admitted that if anybody would have been visiting his

residence at Virendra Nagar in night or early morning, then he has

no such intimation, but on his own stated that Mahima and Chhavi

were grown up children and if there would have been anything

like this, they would have definitely informed him. Reading para

29 of cross-examination, it is submitted that Rambabu has

admitted that Reena was a woman of good character. She was

taking care of her own children, daughter of her brother-in-law

(Jeth) and daughter of her brother. She could not have got these

children murdered. This witness has also admitted that he was not

aware who visited his Virendra Nagar house in the intervening

night of 13th and 14th May, 16 to suggest that there is no evidence

of last seen.
35.   It is also submitted that this witness has admitted that when

he had reached his house at Virendra Nagar, at that time

Superintendent of Police, Bhind, Additional S.P. Mr. Meena and

SHO City Kotwali and other police personnel were inside his

house. Police had called for a dog squad and dog was of black

colour. He had not seen as to in which direction dog had gone.

Reading such statement, it is pointed out that there is material

omission in the prosecution story inasmuch as when dog squad

was called, then it was necessary for the prosecution to have

proved as to what was the finding of such investigation and in

which direction dog had gone after visiting the scene of crime. It is

also submitted that this witness found that three dead-bodies were

lying in a room adjacent to the wall of house of Ramlal Sharma
               26 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
stacked one over the another and there was lot of blood in the

room which had not flown outside and had intermingled with each

other. Police had not taken blood sample from the floor and also

admitted that there was no material lying over the bed where dead-

body of Reena was lying. No burglary was committed from the

house of Reena.
36.   Police had not seized mattress soaked with blood and had

only seized bed-sheet. The suggestion that in said room certain

bundles of Beedi, pouches of Gutka and bottles of beer and

alcohol were lying has been though denied, but there is further

suggestion that brother of Reena, namely Brajmohan, his son

Vedprakash Shukla, father of deceased Golu, namely, Ramkumar,

and his uncle Satish asked the police to seize such material. In

para 39 this witness has admitted that there is no mention of the

fact in Ex.D/5 as to from which place glass from which finger

prints were taken was recovered. Connecting such evidence, it is

submitted that as per statement given by Ankur Dixit before the

Additional Sessions Judge, Bhind (plea of the accused), he was

arrested from his house on 14.5.16 at about 10-11 am and police

had beaten him and obtained his signatures on blank papers.

Police had also obtained his semen at the police Station itself

which was not sealed and at that very time his finger prints were

taken. This gets corroboration from the fact that neither dog squad

has been disclosed by the prosecution nor there is any mention of

this fact in case diary statement (Ex.D/6) of Rambabu Shukla

(PW-1). Participation of Ankur in the last rites of the deceased or
                27 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
his visit to the postmortem room is also not mentioned in Ex.D/6

and this witness has admitted in para 42 that he is narrating such

facts for the first time before the Court.
37.   Another point which has been raised by the learned Amicus

Curiae is that all the witnesses of seizure, memorandum etc. are

close relatives of Rambabu Shukla. He has admitted that

Rajkishore is his relative and is son of maternal uncle of Reena.

This witness has also admitted that before entering house of

accused, neither police personnel had given their search nor he

himself or another witness Rajkishore. According to them, clothes

were lifted by the accused which were lying in the room and this

witness had not gone inside the room from where such clothes

were brought. This witness has admitted that he is not aware as to

whether such clothes were brought by the SHO in his hand or

through someone, bringing the seizure memo (Ex.P/11) under

serious cloud. This witness has admitted that clothes were kept in

a light brown colour paper and this seizure memo did not contain

signatures of either mother of the accused or accused or any other

person belonging to neighbourhood of the accused. It is also

submitted that though this witness has earlier stated that there was

only one mobile in his family being used by all the members of the

family, but later on, in para 46 he has admitted that such other

mobile numbers may belong to other members of his family.

Rambabu Shukla in para 31 has admitted that when he reached

house at Virendra Nagar, at that time portion of Roli Bhadauria

except for kitchen was locked. This is contrary to the statement
                28 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
given by Roli Bhadauria that lock was broken. It is pointed out

then there should have been recovery of two locks rather one.
38.   Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) has deposed that she reached the

scene of crime at about 2 O'clock on 14.5.16 after getting

intimation of such incident at about 10 am. She had seen that locks

of her house were broken and goods in the kitchen were scattered.

Lot of blood was lying in the drawing room. When she looked for

knives at the instance of the police she found that knife from her

kitchen as well as kitchen of Reena were missing. She also

described that there were two knives in the kitchen of Reena, one

of black colour and another of yellow colour and both were

missing. This witness has clearly admitted that except for giving

tuition, Ankur was not visiting house of Reena and she had

stopped taking tuition for her children. This witness has admitted

that there was an altercation between Reena and Ramlal Sharma

because dog of Ramlal Sharma had defecated in front of house of

Reena. She has also admitted that roofs of Ramlal Sharma and

Reena are adjoining, but has denied suggestion that somebody can

enter in the house of Reena from the roof of Ramlal Sharma, but

this fact is corroborated from the evidence of Neelesh @ Betu

(PW-16) that he had entered in the house of Reena from the

terrace of her neighbourer's house. This witness has also admitted

that there was no distinctive mark on her knife and such knives are

easily available in the market.
39.   Sanjeev Kumar son of Shriram Sharma and brother of

deceased Reena (PW-3) has deposed that with the help of JCB
               29 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
machine a knife was recovered from a vacant plot consisting of

swamp and thereafter its seizure memo (Ex.P/12) was prepared but

admitted that it was mud stacked and there was no blood stain on

it and he had seen it from a distance of 5 ft., then improvised it to

2 ft. and further admitted that key and mobile were not recovered

from such swamp. He admitted that police personnel were

standing on the plot and if they would have kept a knife before his

arrival, then he cannot say anything. There is material

contradiction in his examination-in-chief and cross-examination

inasmuch as in his examination-in-chief he has deposed that after

such knife was recovered, then it was cleaned and was informed to

the police personnel that such knife has been recovered, whereas

in his cross-examination he has admitted that knife was full of

mud. This is contrary to FSL report (Ex.P/60) in which it is

mentioned that they received a knife full of mud, therefore, if knife

was already cleaned as has been deposed by this witness (PW-3)

and given to the police by a municipal employee, then there was

no occasion for it to be full of mud when received by the FSL

team. This creates doubt not only as to the recovery of knife, but

also genuineness of seizure memo.
40.   Ankit Sharma (PW-4) is a witness who is related to the

accused and on whose instance not only appellant Ankur was

arrested but SIM used by him was identified by him to be

belonging to Sugandha Sharma, mother of Ankit Sharma.

Statement of this witness clearly reveals that on 14.5.16 police had

reached his house at Shatabdipuram, Gwalior and after beating
                30 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
took him to the house of Ankur Dixit where Ankur was lifted at

10.00 hours. This witness also deposed that when Ankur was

picked up by the police in front of him, then police had collected

his wet clothes, therefore, evidence of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1)

that clothes were recovered before him on 15.5.2016 and his

relative Rajkishore renders such seizure memo doubtful. This

witness has not been declared hostile though he has not supported

prosecution case in toto. This witness has also deposed that he was

released from police custody on 15.5.16 at about 6 pm which

reflects that prosecution had already framed the appellant and then

after formally arresting him only tried to complete the chain of

circumstances as per their convenience. This statement of Ankit

Sharma (PW-4) also corroborates the plea of the accused that he

was arrested, tortured and his semen was taken prior to sealing of

swab etc. on 15.5.16. It also corroborates that his finger prints

were obtained in the police Station itself.
41.   Narendra Tiwari (PW-5), who claims himself to be an

acquaintance of the appellant, has admitted that even Rambabu

Shukla is known to him and he had a talk with Ankur on his

mobile number ending 5765 from his own mobile number ending

2323 when Ankur asked him to visit his house to collect hoarding

required by PW-5 for his coaching class and then he visited Bhind

from Gormi where he came to know that five murders were

committed at Virendra Nagar. He visited Virendra Nagar

alongwith Ankur Dixit. Dead-bodies were being lifted to be taken

to hospital and thereafter they had visited hospital where a
               31 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
journalist was making video recording and Ankur had a talk with

such journalist also. It is submitted that Ankur had asked him

whether such crime can be detected and at that time his face was

down and he was upset. This witness has admitted that in Ex.D/9

he had informed the police about such fact. It is pointed out that

there is a material contradiction in the testimony of this witness

(PW-5). In his case diary statement (Ex.D/9) he has admitted that

he had a talk with Neetesh @ Ankur on 14.5.16 at about 2.30 pm.

Thereafter, they visited Virendra Nagar where murder had taken

place. After staying there for five minutes, they visited hospital

where postmortem was taking place and then after staying in the

hospital for 1 ½ -2 hours, they visited Gada on the Scooty of

Ankur to participate in the last rites. However, in his examination-

in-chief he has mentioned that when they reached house of

deceased at Virendra Nagar, dead-bodies were being lifted for

being taken to the hospital. This statement in para 2 of his

examination-in-chief is contrary to Ex.D/9, so also postmortem

reports Ex.P/21A to Ex.P/25A inasmuch as time of receipt of

dead-bodies in the hospital is mentioned as 1.30 pm (Ex.P/21A &

Ex.P/22A, 1.00 pm (Ex.P/23A), 2.00 pm (Ex.P/24A) and 1.30 pm

(Ex.P/25A). So if they had reached Virendra Nagar after 2.30 pm,

then dead-bodies were not there at Virendra Nagar house but were

already in the postmortem house and postmortem was performed

on them at 2.30 pm, therefore, testimony of this witness Narendra

Tiwari becomes doubtful and cannot be relied on.
42.   Imran Ali Khan (PW-6) has mentioned that he is bureau
               32 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
chief of D.B.C. 24 News Channel. This witness has deposed in

cross-examination that he had only informed police in his case

diary statement Ex.D/10 that Ankur had informed him that since

he was taking tuition in their house, therefore, police may not take

cognizance of him. But fact of the matter is that such thing is not

mentioned in Ex.D/10 and this clearly reveals that this witness has

given statement contrary to his case diary statement. It is not clear

as to how police took his statement and examined him as a

prosecution witness. There is no explanation to this aspect, and

therefore, even evidence of this witness becomes doubtful and is

not reliable to record any adverse finding against the appellant.
43.   Neeru @ Neetu (PW-7) is a cleaning employee of Municipal

Council, Bhind. He had segregated knife from the mud and clearly

deposed that he is not in a position to give description of such

knife as was recovered by him. This witness also admitted in

cross-examination that what happened with such knife is not

known to him. He further admitted that recovery was made from

an open plot and 3-4 plots were open which were frequently

visited and people were dumping their waste. Reading such

evidence of PW-7, it is submitted that recovery from an open place

of which no seizure was made immediately, as is evident from the

statement of Neeru @ Neetu (PW-7) is of no consequence.
44.   Dharmendra Singh (PW-8) is a JCB driver who had taken

out waste from a swamp from which a knife was segregated.

According to this witness, knife was recovered by Gaurav, another

municipal employee, and police had kept it in a polythene bag
               33 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
(Panni). After seeing article A-25 this witness deposed that it is

the same knife but then said that it was soiled with mud at that

point of time. This witness in cross-examination admitted that

accused was brought to the spot and he was standing there for 10-

15 minutes and then further admitted that he had seen him on the

date of cleaning and then in the Court today. Thereafter on his

own accepted that he had seen the accused on his mobile on

several occasions. This testimony of Dharmenra Singh (PW-8) is

contrary to that of Neeru @ Neetu (PW-7) inasmuch as PW-7 has

deposed that accused was sitting in a police vehicle and had not

come outside, whereas this witness (PW-8) has deposed that

accused was standing there at the scene of cleaning.
45.   Gaurav (PW-9) is another person who had discovered knife

from the swamp. He is a witness of seizure memo (Ex.P/12) and

the envelope (Ex.P/13). This witness has clearly deposed that at

the time of cleaning of swamp to look for certain articles

accused/appellant was not present. This is contrary to the evidence

given by Neeru @ Neetu (PW-7) and Dharmenra Singh (PW-8).

He has also deposed that police had taken such knife in a Panni

and no documentation had taken place at that point of time. This

prosecution witness Gaurav has been not declared hostile,

therefore, it is submitted that it cannot be said that recovery was

made at the instance of appellant/accused, but was made from an

open place and such recovery from an open place has its own

limitations as has been held in the case of
Kora Ghasi Vs. State

of Orissa
as reported in AIR 1983 SC 360 wherein it has been
               34 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
held that much importance cannot be attached to recovery as it was

from an open place accessible to all.
46.   Pradeesh (PW-10) has deposed that he is working as a

Principal at Patiram Shivhare Group of Institute, a Nursing

College, where accused had taken admission in G.N.M. course in

the year 2013-14. Course was for a duration of 3 years including

six months internship. In the first year, anatomy and physiology

are taught, whereas in the second year medicine pharmacology and

surgery while in third year midwifery and child health are the

subjects which are taught. This witness has been examined to

corroborate prosecution story that appellant/accused was having

exhaustive knowledge that 'alprazolam' can be used as a sedative.

It is pointed out that in cross-examination this witness (PW-10)

has admitted that alprazolam is not a sedative.
47.   Anand Dixit (PW-11) is a person who had collected call

details. In para 15, this witness has admitted that Subhash

Chauraha, Indira Gandhi Chauraha and Lahar Chungi, S.P. Office

are different tower locations.    He has admitted that from the

concerned cellular company information regarding exact tower

location could have been obtained, but specific tower location was

not obtained. When a question was put to him that why he had not

obtained call details of phone number 9165731870, he replied that

since it was in the name of Rambabu, a member of the family of

the deceased, therefore, such call details were not obtained. In para

17, this witness has admitted that he had not obtained tower

location in regard to call which was made from the number ending
                35 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
with 5138 to number ending with 5765 digits in the night of 13 th

May, 2016 at about 23.13.55 hours.
48.   Dr. K.K.Dixit (PW-12), Medical Specialist, has also

deposed that alprazolam is not a tranquilizing medicine. It is not

used as a sleeping pill but to relieve mental tension. He admitted

that such medicine is available in the store of District Hospital,

Bhind, and is issued to staff nurse in-charge of ward which she

administers to the patients on the advice of doctor. If some

common man uses it, then he may fall asleep. He has stated that he

has no knowledge as to whether any dissoluble alprazolam is

prepared by any company or not. He also admitted that alprazolam

tablets are used in case of high blood pressure. Reading such

statement, it is submitted that contention of prosecution that

alprazolam tablets were dissolved in water and dispensed to

Mahima, Chavi and Ambika is not made out because tablets are

not dissoluble. Secondly, as per the characteristics of alprazolam

tablets, it is not soluble in water and does not cause such smell as

has been mentioned by prosecution witnesses necessitating them

to apply a test for alprazolam. It is submitted that in fact there is

no occasion for the FSL team to have applied alprazolam test to

the viscera of the deceased persons as has been applied by the

prosecution vide Ex.P/58 and has reported that in the viscera

samples of Chhavi, Mahima and Ambika alprazolam was found.

Reading such expert evidence, it is submitted that allegation is that

accused had given tablets of alprazolam but alprazolam is not a

sedative but a tranquilizer.
36 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
49.   Sonendra Singh (PW-13) is a witness who had collected

various articles from the District Hospital including swab etc. of

deceased Reena vide Ex.P/24 and this witness has admitted in

cross-examination that he had handed over all such articles to

Head Constable Kamal Singh in the police Station who had kept

them in the Malkhana and he is not aware as to what happened to

such samples as he had not seen them again. How they were

deposited and given an identification number could not be

deposed by this witness.
50.   Kamal Singh (PW-14) has stated that he had seized

underwear, pubic hair, semen slides of accused vide seizure memo

Ex.P/31, but has admitted that he is not aware as to which doctor

had sealed such items. Sunil Girwal (PW-15), Constable No.750,

is a witness of videography and photography and he reached the

spot alongwith In-charge of FSL unit. This witness in cross-

examination has admitted presence of In-charge of FSL unit Dr.

Soni and also presence of fingerprint expert and dog squad.

According to this witness, he had reached the place of incident at

6.30- 7 am. He further mentioned that date is not in his memory.

He also admitted that FSL In-charge had also prepared a video and

such video CD is not available. He also admitted that such camera

which was used for videography and photography and memory

card have not been produced in the Court. He admitted that a

bottle of fruity, some pouches of Namkeen and one spoon were

lying close to the sink. This fact is not evident from Ex.D/1 in

which neither any bottle of fruity is visible nor any pouch of
               37 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Namkeen is visible. It is pointed out that this witness (PW-15) has

mentioned that he reached the place of incident at 6.30-7 am,

therefore, prosecution story that they got intimation about such

murder at about 9 am and then they came into action is not made

out. It is also contrary to the statement of Manjesh Parmar (PW-
21) who was also a member of FSL team and had reached at the

scene of crime between 10-10.30 am. In trial Court, DVD bearing

article No.26 was played for 4 minutes 38 seconds though total

duration was shown as 5 minutes 55 seconds on which this witness

explained that there may be problem either in the drive of laptop

or in the DVD. Court in a note observed that accused was in a

yellow colour T-shirt in police custody and is narrating about

rooms of the house and the way incident was given effect to. He

was limping. There is another note that accused expressed before

the Court that police had threatened him before preparing DVD

and asked him if he will not follow their instructions, then they

will kill his mother and sister and out of such fear he had narrated

what has been mentioned in the DVD. We have already discussed

that Neelesh Sharma (PW-16) is the person who had opened door

at the instance of his grand-father Shriram Sharma and testified

presence of Shriram Sharma.
51.   Rakhi Chaudhary (PW-17) is a staff nurse at District

Hospital, Bhind. She has deposed that Bhind Kotwali police had

seized a box of alprazolam from her as was kept in the drug store

on 19.5.16. It was containing alprazolam tablets probably of 0.5

mg. Police had reached hospital alongwith accused Ankur and
                38 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Ankur had informed that earlier he used to take away alprazolam

tablets. It is submitted that this witness has admitted that before

any seizure from the District Hospital, permission of Civil

Surgeon is necessary and then stated that police had taken such

permission from the Civil Surgeon, then improvised that such

permission was taken on mobile phone. It is submitted that this

witness has admitted that she had not signed on seizure chit, and

therefore, in absence of there being any written permission of

Civil Surgeon, any identification of signatures of this witness on

the seizure chit, seizure becomes doubtful.
52.   In paragraph 52 Mirza Asif Beg, IO of the case (PW-28) has

admitted that he had not taken any permission from the Civil

Surgeon or CMO to seize alprazolam from the hospital premises.

Even in Ex.P/10, memorandum under
Section 27
of the Evidence

Act, accused did not disclose that he had obtained such tablets

from the hospital, and therefore, it is ridiculous that seizure has

been made from the hospital. It is also submitted that evidence of

this witness (PW-17) is in the shape of conjectures and surmises

inasmuch as this witness has admitted that she is not in a position

to depose as to when such drug was taken away by the accused. It

is also submitted that taste of alprazolam is bitter, and therefore,

this theory of dissolving it in water and administering without

being noted by the administree (means person who had consumed

such drug) as has been developed by the police is contrary to the

fact that a bitter pill cannot be administered in plain water. Further

alprazolam leaves a residue which is visible to naked eyes,
                39 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
therefore, that is another omission that four children being

administered liquid containing alprazolam and none of them

noticed its texture, colour and bitter taste.
53.   It is further submitted that in a hospital, stock register is

maintained showing issue and consumption of each of the drugs,

and therefore, just saying that drug was taken away by the accused

without giving details of specific issue and consumption i.e. stock

register, such seizure is of no relevance. This witness (PW-17) has

admitted that nobody had signed on such seizure memo in front of

her which completely renders such seizure inadmissible in

evidence. Even date of manufacture & date of expiry is also not

mentioned in the seizure memo.
54.   Janved Singh (PW-18) had taken sample for DNA

examination to FSL Sagar. He had taken all the samples to Sagar

on 19.5.2016. Malkhan Singh (PW-19) is a witness who had taken

Ankur from Kotwali Bhind to District Hospital, Bhind, for

medical examination where Dr. Rajoriya had obtained his blood

sample for DNA examination. Sonu Dubey (PW-20) is a witness

who had deposed that he had obtained fingerprints of accused on

18.5.2016 in the police custody in three copies. However, it is

pointed out that such taking of fingerprints is not admissible in

evidence inasmuch as this witness has admitted in para 5 of his

cross-examination that when such fingerprints were obtained on

Ex.P/45A, Ex.P/45B and Ex.P/45C, then no person of public was

present in the police Station. It is pointed out that his statements

are contrary to the statement of the IO inasmuch as he has
                40 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
admitted in para 5 of his cross-examination that such fingerprints

were obtained by Mirja Asif Beg, IO of the case, and not by him

and Mirja Asif Beg has denied that he had obtained any

fingerprints of the accused.
55.   Narveer Singh (PW-23) is a person who allegedly had taken

appellant Ankur to District Hospital, Bhind, for his medical

examination and obtained his clothes like underwear, pubic hair,

semen slides and bottle of semen sampling vide Ex.P/31. It is

pointed out that this witness has admitted that he had not

mentioned such fact of taking accused to District Hospital, Bhind,

in Rojnamacha, then he has improvised by saying that such

authorization is with H.C.M. There is no mention as to which

doctor was contacted who had taken such sample of semen. This

witness has admitted that he has no information as to whether any

permission from the Court was taken or not to obtain semen

sample of the accused.
56.   Reading evidence of Dr. Himanshu Bansal (PW-25), who

was a member of team of doctors which conducted postmortem, it

is submitted that deceased Avnish Sharma was brought in a

condition where his both the hands were tied behind, both the legs

were tied with a bed-sheet at ankle joint and one piece of bed-

sheet was stuffed inside his mouth. He had sealed such clothes and

given them for investigation. It is submitted that such clothes were

never produced and it is a major lapse on the part of the

prosecution.
57.   Dr. R.N.Rajoria (PW-26) was also one of the doctors from
               41 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
the team of doctors who had conducted postmortem and besides

this, on 19.5.16 when he was posted as Medical Officer and In-

charge blood bank officer, then accused was brought to him for

collection of blood sample for DNA testing. Dr. Ranjana

Chaudhary (PW-27) was another member of team of doctors who

had conducted postmortem and and she had collected vaginal

slides and swabs from the bodies of four ladies. It is pointed out

that none of the four doctors examined by the prosecution have

deposed that they had collected semen sample of accused on

16.5.16, therefore, there is no corroboration to the statement of

Narveer Singh (PW-23) that he had obtained packet of underwear,

pubic hair, semen slide and a bottle containing semen sample vide

Ex.P/31 from a doctor and semen sample of accused was obtained

in front of the doctor. This fact is also corroborated from the

evidence of Mirja Asif Beg (PW-28), IO of the case, who has

admitted in para 54 that he had not obtained semen sample of the

accused but it must have been obtained by a doctor. This statement

in para 54 of the IO itself casts doubt inasmuch as to taking of

blood sample of the accused, he submits that he had obtained

permission from the Court, but for semen sample he does not talk

about obtaining such permission.
58.   However, in paragraph 56, I.O. has admitted that semen

sample of accused was taken because there were four women out

of 5 deceased persons and keeping in mind possibility of rape,

semen sample was obtained. He further admits that if semen would

not have been obtained and rape would have been verified, then
                42 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
there would have been difficulties in proceeding against the

accused. It is submitted that this act of the IO and the officers of

the police clearly corroborates the theory of the defence that firstly

semen sample was obtained from the accused before sending any

of the articles to FSL laboratory and then all the samples were

tampered with such semen so to falsely implicate the appellant. It

is also submitted that there was no occasion for obtaining semen

sample of Ankur as there was no finding of the doctors that any

rape was committed on Reena, therefore, when semen was sent on

19.5.16, police had ample opportunity to mix semen of Ankur with

various samples so to obtain their desired results. It is also pointed

out that no DNA profile of the accused has been obtained from

any other material like clothes etc. which were used to tie legs and

hands of Golu or to stuff his mouth or to tie body parts of Chhavi.
59.   In para 59, IO has admitted that semen of the accused was

procured prior to obtaining postmortem report because there was

possibility of rape being committed on the women. This is another

glaring discrepancy. IO has admitted that Imran Ali (PW-6) had

not disclosed in his case diary statement Ex.D/10 that accused had

expressed his apprehension of being taken into cognizance as he

was giving tuition to some of the deceased.
60.   It is submitted that IO Mirja Asif Beg (PW-28) has admitted

that when he reached the place of incident, then several people

were standing outside and when he went inside the house, there

was nobody inside the house. He made his police force to stand

near the gate and secured the place of incident. It is submitted that
                 43 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
there is no mention of opening of lock of gate of the house,

inasmuch as, as per the memorandum of the accused, he had

locked the house and thrown the keys in a swamp, then there

should have been a Panchnama of breaking of the lock, but there is

no such Panchnama. It is unnatural that when the house was

opened and relatives of the deceased and the persons from public

had already gained knowledge about five murders, that too in the

close vicinity of the house of father of deceased Reena and

relatives of other deceased persons, then contention of the IO that

nobody was inside the house is factually incorrect. This statement

of the IO has not been corroborated by any independent witness

who was present on the scene of incident prior to arrival of the

police force.
61.   In para 38, IO has admitted that when he had reached the

place of incident, then lock was already broken. He states that it

must have been broken by dial 100 personnel. He further stated

that he is not in a position to say whether any person had entered

in the said house after breaking of the lock and before his reaching

to such place of incident. This is another major omission on the

part of the prosecution, to point out that there was tampering with

the scene of crime before police and FSL team reached there.
62.   It is submitted that IO has admitted in para 4 that fingerprint

specialist, dog squad, photographer, FSL team and senior officers

had reached the scene of crime. He had recorded Dehati Nalishi

Ex.P/1 as per the instructions of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) and

thereafter he had prepared spot map (Ex.D/5).
44 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
63.   In para 7, IO has mentioned that when he inspected the spot,

then he found steel glasses lying in the kitchen sink of Reena and

when he smelled it, then he found that there was a distinct smell

and some water was lying in a steel tumbler containing some

intoxicating substance and on the basis of it, water in the tumbler

was collected in a plastic bottle and 7 glasses and such tumbler

were seized from the sink. ASI Manjesh Parmar (PW-21) was with

him and she had seen some fingerprints on steel glass which she

lifted and asked him to seize such glass which was seized by him.

Reading such testimony, it is pointed out that water from the

tumbler was allegedly collected in a Fruity bottle. It was not

collected in a sterilized jar. Similarly, there is no mention of the

place from where fingerprints were lifted from the steel glass and

all these facts create doubt on prosecution story.
64.   Reading Ex.P/8, seizure memo, it is submitted that at serial

No.5 there is a mention of one steel glass depicting some

fingerprints, but place where such glass was kept has not been

shown, but in Ex.P/9 it is mentioned that such steel glass was

recovered close to the bed. Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has deposed

that no glass was seen by him on or close to the bed. Therefore,

story of lifting of fingerprints, specially when its witnesses

Ramkumar Sharma and Rajkishore were not examined in the

Court, becomes doubtful.
65.   Another glaring omission is that IO had recorded statements

of Rambabu Shukla, Roli Bhadauria, Rajkishore Sharma on

15.5.2016 and asked cyber cell to trace details of missing mobile
                45 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
phone of Reena, but before getting such intimation which

naturally was proceeded on 15.5.16 as is mentioned in para 10,

accused was picked up from his house on 14.5.16 itself, as has

been deposed by prosecution witness Ankit Sharma (PW-4).
66.   It is submitted that in para 12, IO has deposed that accused

had given him a memorandum, that after locking the house, he had

thrown mobile, keys and knife in a swamp nearby and washed his

clothes on returning home, but it is submitted that seizure of

clothes vide Ex.P/11 has been shown to be made on 15.5.16 at

15.20 hours, whereas as per Ankit Sharma (PW-4) these clothes

were recovered when Ankur was picked up from his home on

14.5.2016 itself. Besides this, it is pointed out that IO has admitted

in para 49 that there was another mobile in possession of deceased

Reena which was used by her and which was not found during

investigation. He had neither obtained documents in regard to such

other mobile, nor made any attempt to recover it. It is pointed out

that this is a major lapse in the story of prosecution inasmuch as

when IO admits that there were two mobiles used by Reena, then

even if statement of the accused in the memorandum is that he had

thrown one mobile in the swamp, recovery of another mobile is

important to complete chain of circumstances.
67.   In para 38, I.O. has admitted that probably he had received

intimation regarding four seconds call in the late night. This is

contrary to the statement of Ankit Sharma (PW-4) that Ankur was

arrested during day time of 14.5.16 itself. That takes date of

information to I.O. in the night of 13.5.16.
46 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
68.   There is another contradiction in para 9 where IO has

deposed that during search, family members of deceased Reena

had informed that knife from both the kitchens and mobile of

Reena were missing, on the contrary Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) has

deposed in para 1 of her examination-in-chief that when police

asked her to look for knives, then she had informed that knives

were not present either in her kitchen or in the kitchen of Reena.
69.   In para 18, I.O. admits that he had taken permission from

the Court on 19.5.16 for obtaining DNA sample of the accused,

but it is submitted that there is no deposition as to the permission

taken by him for obtaining semen sample. There is no mention of

the fact that small containers in which froth from the mouth and

neck of the deceased was collected were sterilized or authorized

for such collection. Another glaring irregularity is that though four

women were found dead in the house, but no female constable was

taken. This witness has admitted overwriting in Merg Intimation

(Ex.D/11).
70.   Reading testimony of Mirza Asif Beg (PW-28), it is

submitted that there is a categorical admission that if somebody

would have entered in the house after breaking of lock, then IO

was not aware. This is a material omission which has not been

explained by the prosecution. It is also submitted that it is apparent

from the photographs contained in Ex.P/32, Ex.P/34, Ex.P/35 and

Ex.P/36 that scene of crime was not secured properly as there are

several persons seen standing with their shoes on and that could

not have been done if they wanted to obtain proper results on
                   47 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
deployment of a sniffer dog. In para 41, this witness has admitted

that he is not aware as to who had gone to bring Ankit Sharma

(PW-4), then he stated that after such incident SIT was

constituted. No order constituting Special Investigation Team is

on record. It is not revealed that who all were members of SIT,

when was it constituted. But no name has been given as to who

brought Ankit Sharma from Gwalior. It is pointed out that there is

an indirect corroboration of story given by Ankit Sharma that he

had reached police Station on 14.5.16 at about 10 inasmuch as IO

has admitted that he was not at police Station. It is also admitted

that Ankit Sharma (PW-4) is a minor and no consent of his parents

was obtained before summoning him and there is no search

warrant on record to show that any search warrant was issued to

summon Ankit Sharma. There is also ambiguity in timings when

dead-bodies were sent for postmortem. IO says that he had sent

dead-body of Ambika for postmortem at 1.20 pm but if doctor has

mentioned about receipt of dead-body at 1 pm, then only doctor

can explain as to how he has mentioned time of 1 pm.
71.    Though I.O. PW-28 has denied that he had taken accused

Ankur in custody on 14.5.16, but could not give any explanation

for the statement given by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) in para 44 that

SHO had asked Ankur in front of him to narrate what he had

narrated to him in the night "(Lor% dgk fd Fkkuk izHkkjh us dsoy bruk

dgk Fkk fd tks rqeus gesa jkr esa crk;k gS og bUgsa Hkh crk nks½ ".
72.    It is submitted that IO has admitted that spot map was

prepared on 14.10 hours on 14.5.16 in presence of Rambabu
               48 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Shukla (PW-1), whereas as per the postmortem report Rambabu

Shukla was present in the hospital where postmortem was going

on at 2 pm onwards as is apparent from Ex.P/24-A, therefore, his

presence within a gap of 10 minutes at two places simultaneously

casts doubt as to the authenticity of spot map (Ex.D/5). IO has

failed to explain such ambiguity in para 62 of his cross-

examination. IO has also admitted that he had not taken statement

of Suganda Sharma during investigation in whose name SIM

ending with 5765 digits was allotted. He further admits in para 66

that he is unable to give potency and name of the company which

is making seized alprazolam tablets.
73.   It is submitted that in Ex.D/11, which is examination of

accused, Ankur Dixit, available at page 164 of the paper-book, no

date has been given by Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) and no injury has

been shown, but when on 22.5.2016 he was examined as per

requisition at 12.35 pm vide Ex.D/12 following injuries were

found on the body of the accused caused by hard and blunt object:-
"1.bruises over the buttocks (both), reddish
          brown in colour, umbrella shaped 5 x 1 cm in
          both the buttocks.
2. Complaining of ear pain (right), pus drainage
          complaint. No fresh pus seen.
3. Abrasion .5 cm x .5 cm over the left ear lower
          back.
4. Small abrasion .5 x .5 over left knee joint.
5. Superficial cut 0.2 cm over the penis, hesitate
          cuts."
He was referred to ENT specialist, but there is no report of ENT

specialist on record. There is no explanation for such injuries

sustained by Ankur while he was in police custody and when
                49 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
medical Ex.D/11 was conducted prior to lodging him inside the

jail. It is also pointed out that IO has admitted that there is no

criminal track record of the accused. He is an educated person and

is not a habitual offender.
74.   Dr. K.K.Gupta (DW-2) has admitted that he was posted in

District Hospital, Bhind, as emergency medical officer when

Ankur was brought to him on 22 nd May, 16. He had bruises on his

both the buttocks which were red brown in colour and were in

umbrella shape. There was a hesitate cut on the penis which were

caused within 2-3 days. Admittedly Ankur was in custody 2-3

days prior to such medical examination, but there is no

explanation by the IO that how such injuries were sustained by the

accused while he was in police custody.
75.   In the alternative, it is submitted by learned amicus curiae

that there is no direct evidence. There is no pre- planning to give

effect to such crime nor the accused had allegedly taken any

weapon with him. He is neither a habitual nor a hardened criminal.

He is an educated person with degrees of B.Sc., B.Ed., P.G.D.C.A.

and has a mother who is a school teacher and an unmarried sister.

Trial Court has not noted the fact that there are good chances of

reform and even if it is presumed that appellant was present at the

scene of crime though hypothetically, there are brilliant chances of

not only reform, but also it is a case of sudden loss of balance,

capital punishment is not warranted. Accused is facing agony for

last three years. His socio- economic condition is not taken into

consideration and there is no history of any previous enmity.
50 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Further the trial Court has failed to apply itself, as sentence, was

pronounced on the same day after recording conviction without

affording an opportunity to adduce evidence, and therefore, such

kind of judgment is perverse and needs to be set aside. It is also

submitted that trial Court has failed to balance mitigating

circumstances vis-a-vis aggravating circumstances and that has

caused prejudice in awarding appropriate sentence.
76.   Learned amicus curiae has placed reliance on the judgment

of the Supreme Court in the case of
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda

v. State of Maharashtra
as reported in AIR 1984 SC 1622 to

point out that in a case of circumstantial evidence Supreme Court

has held as under :-
"152.A close analysis of this decision would show that
       the following conditions must be fulfilled before a
       case against an accused can be said to be fully
       established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of
        guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the
       circumstances concerned 'must or should' and not 'may
       be' established. There is not only a grammatical but a
       legal distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be
       or should be proved' as was held by this Court in
Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade and Anr. vs. State of
       Maharashtra
, (1973) 2 SCC 793 where the following
       observations were made:
"Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused
         must be and not merely may be guilty before a
         court can convict and the mental distance between
         'may be' and 'must be' is long and divides vague
         conjectures from sure conclusions."
(2) The facts so established should be consistent only
       with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is
       to say, they should not be explainable on any other
       hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,

       (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature
       and tendency.
51 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis
       except the one to be proved, and

       (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as
       not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion
       consistent with the innocence of the accused and must
       show that in all human probability the act must have
       been done by the accused.
153. These five golden principles, if we may say so,
       constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based
       on circumstantial evidence."
None of these circumstances are available in the present case.
77.   Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of the

Supreme Court in the case of
Kuna @ Sanjaya Behera v. State

of Odisha
as reported in (2018) 1 SCC 296 wherein in para 20

aspect of motive has been discussed and it is submitted that no

motive is made out for committing murder of five persons.
Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of the Division

Bench of this High Court in the case of
Hem Singh v. State of

M.P.
as reported in 2019(2) JLJ 39 wherein again in para 23 and

25 aspect of motive has been discussed and it has been held that in

absence of motive prosecution cannot take advantage of weakness

of defence.
Reliance has further been placed on the judgment of

the Supreme Court in the case of
Kansa Behera v. State of

Orissa
as reported in AIR 1987 SC 1507 wherein it has been held

that if no blood is found on the weapon and Serologist has neither

given the blood group nor indicated dimensions of blood stains on

clothes, then evidence of blood group cannot be taken into

consideration as a circumstance against the accused.
78.   Reliance has also been placed to the judgment of the
               52 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. v. Chhayaram
as

reported in 1993 JLJ 744 (SC) para 8, that no human blood was

found on weapon and clothes, and therefore, circumstances are not

proved beyond doubt against the appellant.
Similar is the ratio in

the case of
Arjun Singh v. State of M.P.
as reported in 1998 (2)

JLJ 350 para 13.
Reliance has further been placed to the judgment

of the Supreme Court in the case of
Nesar Ahmed and another

vs. State of Bihar
as reported in 2002 SCC (Cri) 1100 wherein in

para 4 and 6 principles have been reiterated as to when conviction

can be recorded in a case of circumstantial evidence. It has been

held that if the presence of the appellants at the crucial time has

not been explained in the house, all other circumstances would not

complete the chain of circumstantial evidence to lead to any

irresistible conclusion only with the hypothesis of guilt of the

appellants and inconsistent with their innocence.
Reliance has also

been placed to the judgment rendered in case of
Lakhanlal v.

State of M.P.
as reported in 2008(2) J.L.J. 19 and Uma Verma

vs. State of M.P. as reported in 2010(1) M.P.WN 2 in regard to

presence of accused in the house of the deceased.
79.   Reliance has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme

Court in the case of Raj Kumar Singh alias Raju alias
Batya v.

State of Rajasthan
as reported in AIR 2013 SC 3150 to point out

that suspicion however strong may be cannot take place of proof.

There is difference between must be true and may be true.
Similar

is the ratio in the case of
Sujit Biswas vs. State of Assam
as

reported in (2013) 12 SCC 406 and in the case of Jose alias
               53 Cri.
Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Pappachan v. Sub-Inspector of Police, Koyilandy and another

as reported in AIR 2016 SC 4581.
80.   Reliance has also been placed to the judgment of the

Supreme Court in case of
Vijay Pal v. State (GNCT) of Delhi
as

reported in 2015 Cri.L.J. 2041 wherein in para 13 it has been held

that expert evidence is not conclusive in nature where eye-witness

account is found credible and trustworthy.
In this regard, reliance

has also been placed to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the

case of
Debapriya Pal vs. State of West Bengal
as reported in

AIR 2017 SC 1246.
81.   Learned amicus curiae submits that on the basis of

presumption a person cannot be roped in a crime. Placing reliance

on the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of
Nagaraj vs.

State
represented by Inspector of Police Salem Town, Tamil

Nadu as reported in (2015) 4 SCC 739 it is submitted that even

fault of defence cannot be considered against the accused. In the

instant case, High Court erred in drawing an inference against the

appellant/accused and convicted him under
Section 302
of IPC of

what he stated or what he failed to state in his examination under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C. when the remaining evidence did not

inspire confidence. Appellant was held to be entitled to benefit of

doubt and acquitted.
Same is the ratio in the case of
Digamber

Vaishnav and another v. State of Chhattisgarh
as reported in

AIR 2019 SC 1367 wherein it has been held that onus of

prosecution cannot be discharged by referring to existence of

highly suspicious factors to inculpate accused nor falsity of
               54 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
defence could take place of proof required to be established by

prosecution to succeed.
Similarly, reliance has been placed to the

decision in the case of
Ankush Maruti Shinde and others v.

State of Maharashtra
as reported in AIR 2019 SC 1457 wherein

in paragraph 14, Supreme Court observed that where there is no

fair investigation and fair trial and the fundamental rights of the

accused guaranteed under
Articles 20
and
21
, of the Constitution

of India, have been infringed and where the accused remained

under constant stress and in the perpetual fear of death as they

were facing death penalty, they have lost their valuable years of

life in jail and family members have also suffered; in exercise of

its powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, Supreme

Court, directed the State of Maharashtra to make payment of sum

of Rs. five lacs to each of the accused by way of compensation.
82.   Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of the

Supreme Court in case of
State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Wasif

Haider and others
as reported in (2019) 2 SCC 303 wherein it

has been held that in case of defective or illegal investigation

benefit of doubt arising out of faulty investigation accrues in

favour of the accused.
Reliance has also been placed on the

judgment of the Supreme Court in case of
Mahavir Singh vs.

State of Madhya Pradesh
as reported in (2016) 10 SCC 220

wherein again the ratio is that benefit of faulty investigation

should go in favour of the accused. In para 26, Supreme Court has

laid down the duties of the investigating officer dealing with a

murder case and has held that investigating officer dealing with a
                55 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
murder case, is expected to be diligent, truthful and fair in his

approach and his performance should always be in conformity

with the police manual and a default or breach of duty may prove

fatal to the prosecution case. Supreme Court noted that

investigation was carried out with unconcerned and uninspiring

performance. There was no firm and sincere effort with the needed

zeal and spirit to bring home the guilt of the accused.
Reliance has

also been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case

of Kumar vs. State represented by Inspector of police as

reported in (2018) 7 SCC 536 wherein in para 27 and 28 it has

been held that if there is irregularity and illegality of arrest, it by

itself would not affect culpability of offence, if the same is

otherwise proved by cogent evidence. However, in a murder trial

such irregularity should be shown deference, as investigating

authorities are responsible for suppression of facts.
83.
In regard to alternative submission, learned amicus curiae

has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the

case of
Chhannu Lal Verma v. State of Chhattisgarh
as

reported in AIR 2019 SC 243 wherein recording a fact that

accused has no previous criminal record apart from acquittal in

rape case and he is in jail since pendency of appeal before the

Supreme Court for past four years and had displayed good

behaviour in prison showing he is not beyond reform, it is held

that case is not fulfilling test of "rarest of rare case" and death

sentence being not only option, hence commuted death sentence to

life imprisonment.
56 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
84.      Similarly, reliance has been placed on the judgment of the

Supreme Court in case of M.A. Antony alias
Antappan v. State

of Kerala
as reported in AIR 2019 SC 194 wherein it has been

held that Court should take into consideration probability of

reform or rehabilitation and social integration of the accused into

society reducing death sentence to life imprisonment.
Reliance has

also been placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of
Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra
as

reported in AIR 2019 SC 1, wherein, it has been held that

previous bad character of the accused showing pendency of two

similar cases cannot be considered for awarding death sentence.

Past adverse conduct of convict ought not be taken into

consideration for the purposes of determining quantum of sentence

except in specified circumstances.
Similarly, in case of
Vijay

Kumar v. State of Jammu & Kashmir
as reported in AIR 2019

SC 298 taking into consideration motive and circumstances of the

case that accused was guilty of committing murder of three minor

children and causing serious injuries to other minor child, but he

being neither a previous convict or a professional killer and

committed offence with motive to eliminate family of co-brother

out of family dispute, death sentence was altered to life

imprisonment till death without remission.
Learned amicus curiae

has also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in

case of Sonvir alias
Somvir vs. State (NCT of Delhi
) as reported

in (2018) 8 SCC 24 wherein in paragraph 26.5 it has been held

that :
57 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
"26.5 Forensic report regarding matching finger impressions
        26.5.1. The prosecution relied upon the report tendered by the
        Senior Fingerprint Expert of the Fingerprint Bureau, RN Rawat
        (PW-35), to state that the finger impressions obtained from
        Sonvir @ Somvir matched with the chance prints obtained
        from the scene of crime.
26.5.2 The Trial Court and the High Court considered the six
        chance prints lifted from the first floor of the house by SI
        Naresh Kumar Sharma (PW-8), In- charge of the Fingerprints
        Bureau, Crime Branch. Chance prints Q1 to Q3 were lifted
        from the iron box on the first floor, Q4 from the showcase
        glass, and Q5 and Q6 from the iron safe. The Senior
        Fingerprints Expert of the Fingerprint Bureau, RN Rawat (PW-
35), vide his reports (Ex. PW-35/A and Ext. PW-35/B), opined
        that the chance print marked Q1 was identical to the specimen
        right palm impression of Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused 1), while
        chance print marked Q5 was identical to the specimen left palm
        impression of Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused 2).
        26.5.3.The specimen chance prints of both these accused viz.
        Rajesh @ Sultan (Accused 1) and Sonvir @ Somvir
        (Appellant-Accused 2) were taken by the I.O. - SI Amrit Raj
        (PW-32A), without obtaining any order of a Magistrate whilst
        the accused were in police custody.
26.5.4 This leads to the issue as to whether the report of the
        Forensic Expert is admissible in evidence, in light of the
        provisions of the
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
("the
        Act") since no rules have been framed prescribed by the
        Government of NCT of Delhi. This issue is being dealt with in
        the separate Judgment by Justice Ashok Bhushan."

In a concurring judgment Hon'ble Justice Ashok Bhushan has

dealt with the issue of validity of fingerprint samples obtained

without there being any order of Magistrate existing under
Section

5
of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 and has held that

absence of rules under
Section 8
does not mean that Magistrate's

permission is mandatory.
In this judgment, Supreme Court has

referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of
Mahmood v. State of U.P.
(1976) 1 SCC 542.
In the given facts

and circumstances, it is observed that the perusal of the judgment

of this Court in
Mahmood
case (supra) indicates that there was

complaint by the accused that his fingerprints were forcibly taken

by the Police on some round object which has been noticed in para
               58 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
10 of the judgment. This Court noticed that specimen fingerprints

of the appellant were not taken before or under the order of the

Magistrate which was held suspicious feature on the conduct of

the investigation. It is held that even if it is assumed that only a

gandasa bore fingerprints of the appellant then also it would not

inexorably and unmistakenly lead to the conclusion that the

appellant and none else was the murderer. Paragraphs 16, 18 and

19 read as under :
"16. Furthermore, the specimen fingerprints of the
        appellant were not taken before or under the order of a
        Magistrate in accordance with
Section 5
of the
        Identification of Prisoners Act. This is another suspicious
        feature of the conduct of investigation. It has not been
        explained why this Magistrate was kept out of the picture.
18. Secondly, even if it is assumed that the handle of this
        gandasa bore the fingerprints of the appellant, then also it
        would not inexorably and unmistakably lead to the
        conclusion that the appellant, and none else was the
        murderer of Dwarka, unless it was firmly proved further
        that the fatal injury to the deceased was caused with this
        weapon. Definite proof of this link was lacking in this
        case. The missing link could be best supplied by showing
        that there was blood on this gandasa, and that blood was
        of human origin. But this was not done.
19. Lastly, it may be observed that Inspector Daryao
        Singh, PW 15, has not given any reasons in support of his
        opinion. Nor has it been shown that he has acquired
        special skill, knowledge and experience in the science of
        identification of fingerprints. It would be highly unsafe to
        convict one on a capital charge without any independent
        corroboration, solely on the bald and dogmatic opinion of
        such a person, even if such opinion is assumed to be
        admissible under
Section 45
of the Evidence Act."
In the above background Supreme Court held that the solitary

piece of circumstantial evidence on which prosecution have staked

their claim is too shaky, suspicious and fragile to furnish a sound

foundation for conviction and held in paragraph 20 as under:
59 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
"20. In the light of the above discussion, we are of the
         view that the solitary piece of circumstantial evidence on
         which the prosecution have staked their case, is too
         shaky, suspicious and fragile to furnish a sound
         foundation for conviction."
85.   Thus, placing reliance on these judgments, it is submitted by

learned amicus curiae that even the evidence of fingerprint being

not wholly reliable and adequate to complete the chain of

circumstances pointing guilt of the accused and of accused alone,

it is a fit case for acquittal as there was no identification mark on

the steel glass from which allegedly fingerprints were lifted.

Therefore, it cannot be said that they were properly lifted and are

in relation to the scene of crime only as Rambabu Shukla has

deposed that there was no glass on the bedside, in the room of

Reena.
86.   Learned Additional Advocate General in his turn submits

that there is recovery of a knife. In statement under
Section 313
of

Cr.P.C. accused admits his presence in a police van by side of a

muddy plot where said knife was recovered. There is no challenge

to the procedure adhered to for obtaining blood sample for DNA

examination. Sonendra Singh (PW-13) has clearly deposed that he

collected viscera etc. of the deceased persons on 15.5.16

corroborating the statement of Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24). D.N.A

report Ex.P/60 corroborates presence of the accused and thus

presence of fingerprint on a steel glass, matching of DNA in the

vaginal swab of deceased Reena with blood sample of the accused

are sufficient circumstance to maintain conviction of the appellant.
87.   Reliance has been placed on the judgment of the Supreme
                60 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Court in case of
State of A.P. v. S.Rayappa and others
as

reported in AIR 2006 SC 3709 wherein it has been held that

evidence of eye-witnesses when corroborated by medical

evidence, then same cannot be discarded on the ground of

interestedness.
Reliance has also been placed on the judgment of

the Supreme Court in case of
Raju Manjhi v. State of Bihar
as

reported in AIR 2018 SC 3592 wherein it has been held that

recovery of used polythene pouches of wine, money, clothes,

jewellery based on disclosure by accused and corroborating with

his confessional statement and guilt, is admissible in evidence.
Reliance is also placed to the judgment of the Supreme Court in

the case of
Asar Mohammad and others v. State of U.P.
as

reported in AIR 2018 SC 5264 wherein it has been held that in a

case of circumstantial evidence, word fact used in
Section 27
is

not limited to actual physical material object. Placing reliance on

these judgments, learned Additional Advocate General prays for

maintaining conviction and sentence and submits that minor

omissions in investigation or testimony of prosecution witnesses

are not sufficient to gloss over such a ghastly crime. It is submitted

that lust of the accused was so deep that he could not accept any

interference and has committed murder of five innocent persons

single handedly, and therefore, his conviction under Section 302

on five counts is fully justified.
88.   Learned trial Court has decided the first issue namely

whether Smt. Reena, her daughter Chhavi, her niece Ambika &

Mahima, so also her relative (brother-in-law) Golu @ Avnish died
                  61 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
because of homicidal death. This finding that such deaths were

homicidal have not been challenged or questioned by learned

amicus      curiae,   therefore,   this    issue   needs   no    elaborate

examination. As per the opinion of Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24), Dr.

Himanshu Bansal (PW-25) and Dr. R.N.Rajoria (PW-26) the

deaths of the deceased were homicidal.
89.   It is also an admitted fact that this is not a case of direct

evidence or eye-witness account but is based on circumstantial

evidence,     and     therefore,   Court     has    considered      various

circumstances to connect various evidence so to complete the

chain of circumstances. The circumstances which have been taken

into consideration are namely :-
(i)     Availability of mobile call details showing calling

              details (Ex.P-17 to Ex.P-20) of calls made by accused

              to deceased Reena or vice versa.
(ii) DNA report (Ex.P/60).
(iii) Fingerprint obtained from the steel glass.
(iv) Admittedly accused used to give tuition to the children

              in relation to which he was visiting house of Reena,

              and therefore, they were known to each other.
(v) Reena giving a call from her number ending with 5138

              to the mobile of the accused ending with 5765 on

              13.5.16.
(vi) Recovery of knife (Ex.P/12) at the instance of the

              appellant and thereafter memorandum (Ex.P/10) under
Section 27
of the evidence Act prepared at the instance
                 62 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
of the accused.
(vii) Presence of      alprazolam in the viscera of Mahima,

              Chhavi and Ambika.
(viii)Recovery of alprazolam from the drug store of District

              Hospital, Bhind, where accused had taken training for

              GNM course.
(ix) Recovery of blood stained clothes from the house of

              the accused.
90.   In these chain of events, learned counsel for the appellant

has not disputed that appellant Ankur was giving tuition to the

children in the house of Reena, and therefore, they were known to

each other.
91.   Learned trial Court has found that there is plethora of

evidence supported by Anand Dixit (PW-11) who had issued a

certificate under
Section 65
b of the
Evidence Act
vide Ex.P/16

and call detail record (Ex.P/17) that on 13 th May, 2016 at 23.13.55

hours a four second call was made from the mobile number of

Reena to the mobile number of the accused. Call details reveal

that accused and Reena were frequently talking at different hours

of the day. This aspect too has not been disputed by the learned

counsel for the appellant that they both were young and possibility

of their having relations cannot be ruled out. However, learned

trial Court has dealt with the issue of fingerprint on the steel glass,

presence of alprazolam in the viscera of three persons, namely

Mahima, Ambika and Chhavi, DNA report received from FSL,

Sagar, and has treated them to be the conclusive proof of presence
               63 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
of the accused at the time of such murder, and therefore, has

attributed motive to the accused and has held him guilty of murder

on five counts.
92.   Learned trial Court has overlooked certain vital facts which

goes into the root of the case, namely Mirza Asif Beg, IO (PW-28)

could not explain breaking of lock. He could not explain that who

had broken the lock and entered into the house at Virendra Nagar

where dead-bodies were lying, when police had reached the scene

of crime.
93.   There is no explanation to the fact that when Shriram

Sharma, father of Reena, who was staying 4-5 houses away from

the house of Reena, had asked his grand-son Neelesh Sharma

(PW-16) to look for Ambika and as per the deposition of Neelesh

Sharma since both the doors of the house of deceased Reena were

locked, he climbed the roof of a neighbourer touching the

boundaries of the house of Reena and entered into the house of

Reena and this he had done in presence of Shriram Sharma, then

non-examination of Shriram Sharma is another important missing

link in the chain of circumstances.
94.   There is no explanation as to why Shriram Sharma did not

attend funeral of his daughter and other relatives as has been

admitted by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1).
95.   Another important element missing in the chain of

circumstances is non-examination of any of the neighbourers of

Reena though Rambabu Shukla has admitted that there were two

immediate neighbourers, namely Ramlal Sharma and Mr.
               64 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Goswami who share common wall with the house of

Reena/Rambabu Shukla on north and west respectively.
96.   Another missing link is that IO has failed to explain the lead

given by sniffer dog which was deployed at the scene of crime as

has been deposed by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) and admitted by IO

Mirza Asif Beg (PW-28).
97.   Another missing link in the story of prosecution which has

not been considered by learned trial Court is that Rambabu Shukla

(PW-1) has admitted in para 31 that when he had reached the

place of incident, at that time, portion of Roli Bhadauria was

locked, but contrary to this, Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) has deposed

that lock of her house was broken when she reached the place of

incident at about 2 pm on 14.5.16. Prosecution has also not been

able to explain that when Shriram Sharma had already come to

know about death of five of his relatives through Neelesh Sharma

(PW-16) at about 7.30 am, then why he called Rambabu Shukla at

about 8.30 am asking him that house of Reena is locked and

whether children are in the village. This is an important aspect

which has been glossed over by the learned trial Court inasmuch

as there was no occasion for Shriram Sharma to have waited for

Rambabu Shukla without lodging any report to the police and

without making any attempt to enter in the house of Reena.
98.   Neither Rambabu Shukla nor the IO could explain this

discrepancy that when death of five persons was already known to

Shriram Sharma, then why he informed Rambabu Shukla that

children are not available at home.
65 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
99.   There is also no explanation to the suggestions given to

Rambabu Shukla that Reena was preparing for D.Ed. so to seek

compassionate appointment in place of her husband and also she

was claiming share in the house inasmuch as there is a clear

suggestion to Rambabu that said plot was purchased from one

Pappu which was negotiated by his son Shashikant i.e. husband of

Reena and it was in fact Shashikant who had paid for the plot and

not Rambabu though such plot was registered in the name of wife

of Rambabu, namely Smt. Rajni Shukla. Further there is no

explanation that Reena was claiming share in the ancestral

property at village Ghada where Rambabu was staying.
100. Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has admitted in para 34 of his

deposition that there was no other material in the room in which

four dead-bodies were found and bed was soaked with blood

except for books lying in a almirah which contained four bags of

children. This witness has also admitted that there was no material

on the bed in or around the dead-body of Reena. It is also admitted

that none of the valuables, cash or jewellery were stolen from the

house at Virendra Nagar. This part of evidence is very crucial

because in seizure memo (Ex.P/8) at serial No.5 it is mentioned

that a steel glass was seized on which some fingerprints were

visible but it is not mentioned as to from which place in the house

such glass was seized. In fact, Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has

admitted that such glasses were recovered from the kitchen and

police had taken out these glasses from the kitchen and shown

them to him. He has admitted that there is no mention in Ex.D/5 as
                66 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
to from which room such glass was recovered from which

fingerprints have been obtained, even on Ex.P/9, there is only

mention of the fact that steel glass was picked up near the bed, but

from which room is not mentioned in Ex.P/9 also. When this is

corroborated with the evidence of Rambabu Shukla, who stated

that there was no material on the bed, then seizure of steel glass

from which fingerprints have been allegedly obtained becomes

doubtful and this is another important circumstance against the

prosecution which prosecution has failed to connect.
101. Another important and glaring omission is that one of the

witness to Ex.P/8, seizure memo, Rajkishore is close relative of

deceased Reena and he has not been examined by the prosecution

though Rajkishore and Ramkumar Sharma have been shown to be

witnesses to various seizure and other memos prepared by

prosecution. On Ex.P/9, signatures of Rambabu Shukla were

obtained as a complainant and not as a witness. Since Ramkumar

Sharma and Rajkishore have not been examined, therefore, lifting

of fingerprint in absence of any independent witness from the steel

glass is not proved. Rambabu Shukla could not have been

examined as a witness of lifting of such fingerprint from the steel

glass as he is not a witness to such act.
102. Prosecution has not made any attempt to lift fingerprints

from two broken locks in the house of Reena.
103. Another unnatural circumstance in the case is that the room

in which steel glass was allegedly kept has been marked as place E

in Ex.D/5 and there is no mention of availability of steel glass at
               67 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
place E in Ex.D/5. Another circumstance is, as per, Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) when dog squad reached Virendra Nagar, then

accused ran away. Same Rambabu, then deposed, that he had seen

accused in the postmortem room, so also at the place of cremation.

If accused had run away after presence of dog squad at the place

of incident, then there was no occasion for him to have visited

postmortem house or place of cremation.
104. Narendra Tiwari (PW-5) has deposed that he had given a

call to the accused and accused asked him to come and pick

hoarding and then he reached Bhind. He visited Reena's house

alongwith the accused on his Activa scooter after 2.30 pm as in

cross-examination he has admitted that he had called Ankur for

hoarding at 2.30 pm. This is another glaring contradiction in the

prosecution story inasmuch as if Rambabu Shukla is to be believed

to be a truthful witness, then Ankur had run away after arrival of

dog squad at about 12.00, then there was no occasion for Ankur to

have visited their house after 2.30 pm. Also Rambabu had when

observed that Ankur had run away after witnessing dog squad,

then why this fact was not mentioned to the IO or in the FIR.
105. As has been discussed above, there is contradiction in the

testimony of Narendra Tiwari (PW-5) inasmuch as as per the

postmortem reports (Ex.P/21A to Ex.P/25A), postmortem was

conducted between 1 pm to 3 pm, therefore, contention of

Narendra Tiwari that when they had reached Virendra Nagar, at

that time, dead-bodies were lifted for being sent to the hospital is

factually incorrect from the documents available on record and
                 68 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
there is no suggestion by the prosecution to the doctors that they

had ante-timed the postmortem reports for some ulterior motive.

He appears to be a planted witness. His call details have not been

corroborated besides other statements. Even his presence has not

been corroborated by Imran Ali (PW-6), though Narendra Tiwari

(PW-5) claims to have visited dead house with Ankur on 14.5.16.

Thus, evidence of Narendra Tiwari does not inspire confidence

and needs to be rejected and is rejected.
106. In this continuation, evidence of Imran Ali Khan (PW-6)

also does not inspire confidence. There is a material contradiction

in his evidence i.e. in his case diary statement (Ex.D/10) he never

informed the police that Ankur had expressed any apprehension of

police taking cognizance about him as he was giving tuition in the

house of Reena, and therefore, statement of Imran Ali Khan is

nothing but exaggeration which is not corroborated with any other

documentary evidence. In fact, Imran Ali Khan is a photo

journalist and he could have easily picked a photo if Ankur had

visited dead house in the hospital and could have produced the

same in support of his contention that Ankur had visited District

Hospital and had a chat with him where he had expressed his

apprehension.
107. Another missing link is that in the FIR (Ex.D/7) time

mentioned for getting such information regarding such crime is

mentioned as 17.50 on 14.5.2016. Dehati Nalishi (Ex.P/1) was

recorded at 10 am and in the Dehati Nalishi as well as FIR

(Ex.D/7), name of the accused is mentioned as -unknown one.
69 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
This is contrary to the statement of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) who

categorically deposed that he had an apprehension that there were

more than one person involved in the incident, but this is

contradicted with FIR as well as Dehati Nalishi.
108. Statement of Ankit Sharma (PW-4), relative of Ankur, has

remained unrebutted. He has clearly deposed that he is son of

Suganda Sharma who had obtained a Sim ending with digits 5765

and same was given to Ankur Dixit. Police had visited him at his

house at Shatabdipuram, Gwalior, on 14.5.2016 and took him to

Bhind via Malanpur where he had gone with his cousin Rinku. He

has admitted that he had reached Bhind at about 10. He was beaten

and then police asked address of Ankur where he had taken the

police. When gate of Ankur was knocked, it was opened by

mother of Ankur and it was informed that Ankur was sleeping.

Ankur was woken up and was asked to bring his mobile and purse.

This witness has clearly deposed that on the next day i.e. 15 th

evening he was released at about 6 pm. When this statement is

examined in the light of statement of Rambabu Shukla that he had

received intimation about arrest of Ankur in the morning hours of

15th, then he had visited police station at about 2 pm alongwith his

relative Rajkishore when police had interrogated Ankur in front of

him and obtained his memorandum under
Section 27
of the

Evidence Act, goes to prove that arrest of Ankur at 2 pm vide

Ex.P/55 (arrest memo), becomes doubtful. It reveals that Ankur

was arrested on 14.5.16 and his formal arrest was shown by the

police subsequently. This fact is corroborated from the evidence of
                70 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) when he deposed that IO had asked

Ankur to narrate those facts which he had narrated to him on the

previous night (for reference please see paragraph 44 of PW-1).

Therefore, arrest of Ankur on 14.5.16 itself, as can be safely

deduced from the statement of star witness of prosecution,

Rambabu Shukla and Ankit Sharma (PW-4), casts suspicion as to

the story developed by the prosecution. This aspect has been

overlooked by learned trial Court. If Ankur was arrested on

14.5.16 and while entering in his house, as has been admitted by

Rambabu Shukla, none of the witnesses had given their search,

then any material could have been planted or lifted from the house

of accused Ankur. No blood stains have been found on the clothes

of the accused. Ankit Sharma (PW-4) has admitted that he was

asked to pick such wet clothes and he wrung out and dried them in

the police station.
109. There is another contradiction in the prosecution story. Roli

Bhadauria (PW-2) has deposed that when she had reached

Virendra Nagar at about 2 pm, she was asked to look for the

knives in her kitchen and in the kitchen of Reena and then she

informed that two knives from the kitchen of Reena and one from

her kitchen are missing. This witness has admitted that police had

broken locks of her house, but neither any Panchnama was

prepared nor any broken lock has been seized from the spot. This

witness has also admitted that except for giving tuition accused

was not visiting Reena. She has also admitted that there was some

animosity between Ramlal Sharma and Reena Shukla. Another
                71 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
angle is that when three knives were reported to be missing, then

either there were three persons who were the assailants or else

three knives should have been mentioned in the memorandum

under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act of Ankur. There is no

explanation to demonstrate that any attempts were made either to

trace two other knives or correlate their use.
110. Sanjeev Kumar (PW-3) has deposed that at the instance of

Ankur one knife was recovered from the swamp. He has admitted

that when he reached near the plot, police party was already

standing there and plot was being cleaned, therefore, he cannot say

if police party had kept such knife as such knife is easily available

in the market, therefore, this prosecution witness could not prove

much about the recovery of knife.
111. Neeru @ Neetu (PW-7) is a cleaning employee and his

services were taken to search for the items allegedly thrown in the

swamp. This witness clearly deposed that knife was full of mud,

and therefore, he cannot give its description. This is contrary to the

evidence of Sanjeev Kumar (PW-3). Dharmendra Singh (PW-8)

was driver of JCB and since he was busy in operating the JCB, he

admitted that he had not seen the knife closely but had seen it from

a distance while sitting in the JCB machine itself. This witness has

deposed that police had kept this knife in a polythene bag but no

polythene bag has been produced by the prosecution.
112. Another glaring omission in the testimony of this witness is

that he admits that he (PW-8) had seen the accused on his mobile

on several occasions which shows that he was a tutored witness to
               72 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
whom accused was exposed on several occasions. Though Sanjeev

Kumar (PW-3) and Dharmendra Singh (PW-8) have shown

presence of accused when knife was recovered and have attributed

such recovery at the instance of the appellant, but prosecution

witness Gaurav (PW-9), clearly accepts in cross-examination that

at the time of clearing of the swamp accused was not present. This

witness has not been declared hostile, and therefore, statement of

prosecution that knife was recovered at the instance of accused is

belied by an independent witness Gaurav, who is also a cleaning

employee of the municipality. This witness (PW-9) contradicts the

testimony of Sanjeev Kumar (PW-3) and Dharmendra Singh (PW-
8).
113. Pradeesh (PW-10) claims himself to be Principal of Patiram

Shivhare Nursing College, Bhind. His evidence is to the effect that

appellant had taken admission in GNM course in his college in the

year 2013-14 and such course is of 3 years duration including 6

months internship. Accused took admission in the first and second

year course, but did not attend classes for the third year. He has

been examined to show that accused had knowledge of medicine

and pharmacology as these are the subjects taught in the second

year. This witness has also deposed that accused had taken

training at District Hospital, Bhind, and during such training he

also learned how to administer injectables and medicines.

Information about surgery is also imparted.
114. In cross-examination, this witness has admitted that

alprazolam is not a sedative. He has also admitted that anti allergic
               73 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
drugs cause higher sedation with higher doses as compared to

alprazolam. This witness has also admitted that attendance sheet

enclosed by him as Annexure P/14 does not contain name of the

college. Rakhi Chaudhary (PW-17) working as staff nurse in the

District Hospital, Bhind, has been examined in support of seizure

of box of alprazolam from her which was obtained by police from

the drug store in the duty room in which alprazolam tablets were

kept. She has admitted that accused had visited her alongwith team

of police officials at the time of such recovery and Ankur had

informed at that time that earlier he used to steal alprazolam

tablets from the hospital. This witness has admitted that the chit of

seizure memo does not contain her signatures. This witness has

also admitted that there is no entry of the tablets (given in seizure

to the police) in the register of the drug store. This witness has

also admitted that accused had not stolen any of alprazolam tablets

in front of her and she cannot give any time frame if such tablets

were taken away earlier. She also admitted that except for her,

police had not obtained signatures of anybody else on the seizure

memo and she had not obtained any written consent of the Civil

Surgeon before giving such tablets in seizure.
115. When evidence of Pradeesh (PW-10) and Rakhi Chaudhary

(PW-17) are read in conjunction, then it is apparent from Ex.P/14

that admittedly accused had taken admission in the year 2013-14

in GNM course and attendance sheets demonstrate that he did not

attend third year course as has been clearly deposed by Pradeesh.

But in the attendance sheet (Ex.P/4) name of the accused has been
                 74 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
shown as a student of GNM third year showing his presence for

some time and then recording his continuous absence. This name

is mentioned at serial No.32, which causes doubt about the

authenticity of the attendance record, inasmuch as on previous

sheet, giving attendance for GNM third year course, name of the

appellant has been shown at serial No.33 and all these attendance

sheets are for the third year which accused had admittedly not

attended. Thus, manipulation in such documents cannot be ruled

out, rather it is writ large on the face of it.
116. Dr. K.K.Dixit (PW-12), Medical Specialist, has deposed that

he was working as In-charge, Civil Surgeon, for about three and

half years prior to 7.5.17. He admitted that students of Patiram

Shivhare Nursing College, Bhind, visit him for training and they

are being deployed turn by turn in all the wards of the hospitals.

Such students are given training in the field of nursing care.

Hospital maintains records of such training and they are also

taught about the medicines which are to be administered. This

witness has admitted that alprazolam is a tranquilizing medicine

and is used in patient suffering from insomnia or mental tension.

Such medicines can be used only when prescribed by a doctor and

is available in the store of the District Hospital and is provided to

staff nurse, in-charge of the ward and staff nurse administers such

medicine on the advice of the doctor. This witness has admitted in

cross-examination that he had seen the accused only once when

police had brought him to hospital in some case. He also admitted

that if any medicine is to be seized from the District Hospital, then
               75 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
permission of Civil Surgeon or CMHO is must. He further admits

that no permission was obtained from him or CMHO before

seizure of such medicine.
117. Rakhi Chaudhary (PW-17) or any other prosecution witness

has not given batch number, manufacturing date and expiry date of

alprazolam which was allegedly taken away by the accused

showing that such medicines had not expired when they were

allegedly administered to some of the deceased. Thirdly, there is

no mention of exact potency of the tablets inasmuch as Rakhi

Chauchary has deposed that probably they were 0.5 mg. When

tablets were given in seizure by the staff nurse from the drug store

of the duty room, then she was required to specify that what was

the exact potency of the drug. In fact, in Ex.P/41 there is no

mention of potency besides other specifications because potency

will have a direct bearing on the tranquilizing effect. Fourthly,

there is no mention of the fact that how many tablets were found

missing from the stock to corroborate the statement of the accused

that he had taken away alprazolam tablets from the store of the

hospital.
118. It is also not clarified by prosecution witnesses Rakhi

Chaudhary (PW-17) that when they are maintaining stock register

of issue of tablets, then if anybody, may it be the accused, had

taken away some tablets at some point of time, then why such

discrepancy in the stock was not brought to the notice of the

higher authorities. In absence of any such documentation being

made available to the IO and in absence of it being proved by the
               76 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
IO, theory of accused stealing some alprazolam tablets and then

passing it to Reena to administer them to the deceased (minors) is

not made out. Thus, through these two witnesses Pradeesh (PW-
10) and Rakhi Chaudhary (PW-17) prosecution has miserably

failed to prove their theory of stealing of alprazolam by the

accused and passing it to Reena for administration to children.
119. In fact, when evidence of Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) is

revisited, then this prosecution witness has clearly deposed that

except for giving tuition, accused was not visiting house of Reena.

Even if hypothetically, it is assumed that he was visiting house of

Reena, then in the same vein, it can be presumed that since all the

children were school going, he had sufficient time for privacy,

rather than sneaking in the house of Reena with so much of

planning and design, that too at the odd hour of the night.
120. Anand Dixit (PW-11) is a Constable posted in cyber cell

branch in the office of Superintendent of Police, Bhind. This

witness had obtained call details for mobile numbers 7697148002,

7047745138, 9111515765 and 8269486770 from the concerned

cellular company through e-mail. He stated that from mobile

number ending with 5138 used by deceased Reena a four second

call was made to the number ending with 5765 digits allegedly

used by the accused on 13.5.16 at 23.13.55 hours. This witness has

admitted that call details of mobile No.9165731870 was not

obtained because it was of some Rambabu, a family member of the

deceased. This witness has also admitted that he cannot give tower

location in regard to the call made from number ending with 5138
                77 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
to number ending with 5765 digits in the night of 13 th May, 2016.

He also admitted that he is not in a position to give any

documentary evidence to show that mobile No.7047745138 was

being used by Reena. Thus, through the call details in absence of

tower location nothing specific could be proved by the

prosecution. Possibility of 4 second call being a panic call can also

not be ruled out, but there is no investigation in this direction.
121. Sonendra Singh (PW-13) Constable No.715 has admitted

that he had taken the dead-bodies alongwith the requisition letter

to the District Hospital for postmortem which he had given to the

concerned doctor in the District Hospital. On 15.5.16 doctor had

given him two sealed boxes pertaining to deceased Mahima, one

sealed bottle, two sealed Potalis and one sample of seal and he had

given acknowledgment on Ex.P/21. Similarly, he has collected

such material for deceased Chhavi, Ambika, Reena. In relation to

Reena, he had also collected vaginal slide. In relation to Golu also,

he had obtained such material from the District Hospital. He

admits that he had handed over all these material to Head

Constable Kamal Singh who had prepared seizure memo. Kamal

Singh (PW-14) had also recorded FIR (Ex.D/7) and admits

receiving material handed over to him by Sonendra Singh (PW-
13). He also deposed that police Constable Narveer Singh had

given him a sealed Potali containing underwear, pubic hair, semen

slide of the accused vide Ex.P/31. Kamal Singh has admitted that

he is not in a position to give name of the doctor from whom such

sealed packets were received. Narveer Singh (PW-23) from whom
               78 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
such semen slides of the accused were allegedly received has

deposed that he had taken accused to District Hospital for

examination on 16.5.16. After medical examination, doctor had

handed over a Potali containing underwear, pubic hair, two semen

slides and semen sampling bottle in a sealed condition alongwith

sample of seal of the hospital which he had handed over on

16.5.16 to the Head Constable Kamal Singh and it contains his

signatures from 'B' to 'B' part. He had taken all these material for

FSL examination to FSL, Gwalior, on 20.5.16 and had deposited

such material vide draft statement Ex.P/52 and Ex.P/53 to the

Forensic Science Laboratory, Gwalior. This witness has admitted

that he has no knowledge whether permission was obtained from

the Court or not for collection of semen. He also admits that he

had not marked his departure in the Rojnamacha when he had

taken Ankur for medical examination. He also admits that he is not

in a position to depose as to who had accepted such draft and

material packets from him at FSL, Gwalior. However, there is no

requisition of the doctor showing collection of semen from the

accused unlike a requisition for collection of blood sample from

the accused which was obtained by the doctor vide Ex.P/43. On

Ex.P/43 in the raw mentioning; description of sample, there is

only one tick over blood; semen stain/bones/hair are blank.
122. A perusal of the order-sheets dated 16.5.16 from the Court

of JMFC, Bhind reveals that in crime No.232/16 since Presiding

Officer was on leave, matter was presented before the JMFC who

had given police remand of the accused uptil 20.5.16 for recovery
               79 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
of Ala a Zar (tool of offence) and keys etc., also for obtaining

fingerprints. From the order-sheet dated 16.5.16, it appears that

there was no counsel with the accused, and therefore, Court had

appointed a counsel from Legal Aid for the accused. Thereafter,

on 19.5.16 again accused was presented before the Court and since

CJM was on leave, same Court permitted drawal of blood sample

for DNA profiling. On 20.5.16 he was taken into police custody

and his jail warrant was prepared and he was sent to judicial

custody. Thus, permission given by the competent Court was for

drawing a blood sample & not for drawing semen sample.
123. It is true that as per
Section 53(1)
Cr.P.C. examination of

accused can be made by a medical practitioner at the request of

police officer and registered medical practitioner as per the

provisions contained in
Section 53(2)(b)
means a medical

practitioner who possess any medical qualification as defined in

clause (b) of
section 2
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956,

but in absence of report from the registered medical practitioner

that he is a registered medical practitioner within the meaning of
Section 53(2)(b)
and he on the instructions of an officer not below

the rank of Sub-Inspector had examined the accused and had

obtained samples of semen and prepared such semen slide, such

seizure of semen becomes doubtful. Prosecution has not produced

any letter of requisition of police official not below the rank of

Sub-Inspector asking the registered medical practitioner to obtain

such sample from the accused and moreover, there is no request

for such sampling and no certification from the concerned doctor
               80 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
about such sampling, leaves a sufficient gap in the prosecution

story which should have been mandatorily proved specifically in a

case of circumstantial evidence. This lacuna attains graver

dimensions, as there is evidence on record to show that there was

non-compliance of
Section 57
of Cr.P.C. inasmuch as accused was

detained in police custody for more than 24 hours as he was taken

in custody on 14.5.16 itself as is corroborated by Ankit Sharma

(PW-4) and indirectly by Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) and was

admittedly produced before the Court on 16.5.16 as is apparent

from the order-sheets from the Court of JMFC, Bhind.
124. Sunil Girwal (PW-15) is a Constable who had carried out

videography and photography of the spot as a part of FSL team

under the leadership of the then in-charge of the team Dr. Ajay

Soni. This witness has not produced any videography or

photography to show recovery of glass which was recovered vide

Ex.P/9 allegedly containing fingerprints of the accused. When

evidence of this witness (PW-15) is read with the case history

produced by the prosecution before the CJM alongwith the charge-

sheet, then according to the prosecution story, Reena had given a

missed call to Ankur which was received and after talking to

Reena, Ankur reached house of Reena. She opened the gate.

Thereafter they established physical relationship and were talking

in the hall of the house when brother-in-law of Reena, namely

Golu, who had come to Bhind on the same day and was staying in

the house of the complainant, saw Reena and Ankur talking,

expressed his annoyance. When they tried to explain to Golu, he
                81 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
refused to accept anything and started raising din, then both Reena

and Ankur acting in tandem took Golu to the kitchen adjacent to

the hall and tied his hands and legs and then stuffed a cloth in his

mouth and then Ankur slit the neck of Golu from a knife lying in

the kitchen. In the meanwhile, girls sleeping in the room of Reena,

namely Chhavi, Mahima and Ambika got up and started running

towards the gate when Reena and Ankur tried to pacify them, but

when they could not be pacified, then Reena caught hold of

Chhavi and Mahima and Ankur threw Ambika on the floor and slit

her neck. When Mahima and Chhavi shouted, then Ankur pressed

mouth of Mahima and attacked her throat with a knife and then

killed Chhavi also. When Reena got annoyed seeing dead-bodies

of the girls and started quarreling with Ankur, then Ankur with an

object to destroy evidence threw her on the bed and smothered her

with a pillow and slit her throat and thereafter locked the house

from outside and left the scene of crime.
125. This chronology as has been put forth by the prosecution in

their first version before the CJM, if is taken as it is, then all the

dead-bodies of three girls and Reena could not have been

recovered from the same room i.e. the room of Reena. Secondly,

physical relationship was not established between Reena and

accused in the room of Reena from where allegedly glass was

recovered because as per prosecution's own version, these girls

were sleeping in the room of Reena, therefore, principle of

prudence will show that physical relationship would not have been

established between Reena and Ankur in the bedroom of Reena
                 82 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
where girls were sleeping. Thirdly, if these girls had woken up on

hearing the cries of Golu who was admittedly murdered, when he

had seen Reena and Ankur talking to each other in the hall and he

was taken to the kitchen adjacent to the hall which is incidentally

kitchen of Roli Bhadauria (PW-2), then girls started running to

escape from the house, then their dead-bodies should have been

found in the hall and not in the bedroom of Reena from where they

have been actually recovered. Further, there was no occasion for

the accused to have taken Reena back to the same room from the

hall and then smother her and kill her. These aspects have been

totally overlooked by learned trial Judge and no pains were

undertaken to reconstruct the scene of crime with the help of spot

map (Ex.D/5).
126. Another glaring fact which has come in the cross-

examination of Sunil Girwal (PW-15) is that he admits in

paragraph 4 that on the place of incident, FSL team constituting of

he himself as a photographer, Dr. Soni as In-charge of FSL team,

fingerprint expert and dog squad, was present. According to PW-

15, he had reached the place of incident between 6.30 and 7 am.

He had collected photographs etc. on 14.5.16 itself though he has

pleaded ignorance as to the date of incident. This is an important

break in the chain of circumstances inasmuch as when

photographer of the FSL team had reached at the place of incident

between 6.30 and 7 am, then what was the occasion for Shriram

Sharma, father of Reena to have asked Neelesh Sharma (PW-16)

at about 7 O'clock to look for his sister Ambika in the house of his
                83 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Bua. This date 14.5.16 gets corroborated from the evidence of

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) who has accepted presence of dog squad

on the spot on 14.5.16, so also from the evidence of IO Mirza Asif

Beg (PW-28) who has also admitted presence of fingerprint expert

and dog squad, photographer and FSL team on the spot when he

reached there. Thus, there is ample material on record to show that

this case of circumstantial evidence has many uneven contours

which have not been explained by the prosecution and which has

been overlooked by the Additional Sessions Judge for the reasons

best know to him. Evidence of this witness (PW-15) further

reveals that he had seen a bottle of fruity, pouches of Namkeen,

but there is no seizure of such bottle of fruity and pouches of

Namkeen vide seizure memo Ex.P/8. He did not obtain any

photograph of an isolated steel glass allegedly recovered from the

room of Reena on which fingerprints were found by Manjesh

Parmar (PW-21), a fingerprint specialist. Therefore, when

Manjesh Parmar (PW-21), Sunil Girwal (PW-15), Dr. Soni In-

charge of the FSL team and dog squad were part of the same team

and prosecution has not examined Dr. Soni, then there should have

been some coordination in methodology and production of

evidence which is totally absent in the present case. PW-15 has

admitted that DVD,
Article 26
was prepared when FSL team was

taking fingerprints.
127. There is a note by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge

showing that
Article 26
, DVD, was when played with the

computer system installed on the Dias, then DVD did not play
               84 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
properly in regard to which system officer informed that the

format in which DVD has been prepared cannot be played on the

computer system installed on the Dias of the learned ADJ or

secondly DVD is corrupt, then prosecution was directed to arrange

for suitable equipment to run the DVD when Special Public

Prosecutor, Praveen Dixit expressed that on the same day laptop

can be called from the office of Superintendent of Police from the

possession of concerned employee of cyber cell so to play such

DVD. Such permission was granted.
128. After adjourning statement of PW-15 for some time, oath

was administered to him and DVD,
Article 26
, was played on the

laptop brought by Constable 281 Anand Dixit from the cyber cell.

Duration of DVD was shown 5 minutes 55 seconds which stopped

at 4 minutes 38 seconds in regard to which Constable of cyber cell

expressed that either there is problem in the drive of the laptop or

in the DVD. Thereafter Court has mentioned in its note that while

DVD was played, accused was seen in a yellow colour T-shirt

explaining in detail about the rooms of the house and the goods

placed in such house, so also the methodology adopted by him in

executing the crime. Court observed limping in the movement of

the accused and thereafter took out
Article 26
, DVD, and attached

it with the case file. After witnessing such DVD, accused

expressed before the Court that before preparing such DVD police

had threatened him if he will not narrate the things as per their

instructions, then they will take away his mother and sister and kill

them, therefore, out of fear he had narrated what is shown in the
                85 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
DVD.
129. There is a phenomenal lacuna in the testimony of Sunil

Girwar (PW-15). He has deposed in his examination-in-chief that

he had prepared a DVD in presence of fingerprint expert, dog

squad, in-charge of FSL team Dr. Soni and on the same day when

DVD
article 26
was prepared FSL team had obtained fingerprints

(para 6 of PW-15). Ex.P/9 reveals that fingerprints were obtained

on 14.5.16, therefore, as a natural corollary, DVD,
Article 26
, was

prepared on 14.5.16, but as per prosecution, accused Ankur was

arrested on 15.5.16 vide arrest memo (Ex.P/55) at 14.00 hours,

therefore,
Article 26
in which Court has observed accused in a

yellow T-shirt limping is not the DVD which was prepared by this

witness (PW-15) on 14.5.16, and therefore, prosecution owes an

explanation as to where such DVD has been kept & why it was not

produced before the trial Court. In fact, it is a direct evidence of

manipulation of prosecution evidence which not only hampers the

prosecution case, but also creates sufficient doubt about the

impartiality, neutrality and fairness of the prosecution.
130. Neelesh Sharma @ Betu (PW-16) is a witness who had first

seen the dead-bodies at the instance of his grand-father Shriram

Sharma. He has testified that when he reached house of his Bua

Reena, he found locks on both the doors. Thereafter, he pressed

the call bell and was waiting for the response, at that juncture, his

grand-father Shriram Sharma reached there and asked him to

climb the roof of the neighbourer and look inside the house of his

Bua. He reached the roof of neighbourer and opened the gate with
               86 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
the help of a rod and entered inside the house where he saw five

dead-bodies. He returned back through the same way and

informed this fact to his grand-father Shriram Sharma. When both

the gates were locked, then how Neelesh Sharma could get access

inside the house by opening the lock with the help of a rod is an

issue which has not been explained by the prosecution. There is no

recovery of such rod with the help of which Neelesh Sharma had

opened the latch of Reena's house and entered inside the house.

Thereafter, there was no occasion for Shriram Sharma to have

made a call to Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) asking him about the

whereabouts of ladies at about 8.30 am when at about 7 am

Neelesh Sharma had already seen five dead-bodies in the house of

Reena. When this evidence is cross-checked from the evidence of

Sunil Girwal, who admits that he had reached the place of incident

for videography and photography between 6.30 and 7 am, then the

natural question which arises is that who had informed the FSL

team so to facilitate their presence at the spot between 6.30 and 7

am. Therefore, tower location of the call allegedly made from the

mobile of Reena at 23.13.55 on 13.5.16 attains importance which

has not been proved by prosecution witness Anand Dixit (PW-11).

Nilesh Sharma (PW-16) has also deposed that once he had

informed his grand-father about such incident, his grand-father

asked him to go back to home, and therefore, he came back to his

home and is not aware what his grand-father did. He had not seen

which goods were lying close to the dead-bodies. When police had

come, he was in his home. This witness has also accepted in cross-
87 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
examination that police had interrogated him and he had answered

such interrogation. However, there are no case diary statement of

this witness in the file. This evidence of PW-16 creates a suspicion

as to the role of Shriram Sharma. Another aspect which remains

unanswered is that when gate was opened by Nilesh Sharma (PW-
16), then where was the occasion for the police to break open the

lock of the house. Even story of appellant locking the house and

leaving the house appears to be unnatural and these gaps in the

case of circumstantial evidence are vital which have not been

reasonably explained by the prosecution.
131. Janved Singh (PW-18) is a witness of collection of blood

sample obtained from the hospital and transmission of the same to

FSL Sagar. He was authorized by Superintendent of Police to

carry such sample.
132. Manjesh Parmar (PW-21) has shown recovery of a glass

allegedly containing fingerprints of the accused, however,

Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) has deposed that accused was arrested

from his home and at that time before entering in his home neither

he nor the officer who had arrested him or other witnesses had

given their search. There is discrepancy in the prosecution case as

to the time of arrest of the accused inasmuch as, as per the version

of Ankit Sharma (PW-4) arrest of accused was effected on 14.5.16

in the morning itself. There is no photograph of such seizure as

per Sunil Girwal (PW-15), photographer and videographer who

was part of the FSL team of which Manjesh Parmar was also a

member. Seizure memo (Ex.P/8) does not reflect as to from where
               88 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
such steel glass was lifted on which fingerprints have been shown.
Prosecution has failed to explain the place & time of lifting of

such glass inasmuch as independent witness of seizure memo,

namely Rajkishore has not been examined, whereas Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) has admitted that there was no object lying on or

around the bed of Reena. As has been discussed above when

reconstruction of scene of crime is appreciated, physical

relationship was not established between accused and Reena in her

bed room where allegedly such glass was seized as per Manjesh

Parmar (PW-21), as three girls were sleeping in that room as per

prosecution's own story. Therefore, in absence of specific place of

seizure of such glass, contradiction in the evidence of Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) and Manjesh Parmar (PW-21), coupled with the

fact that there is no photograph of this vital prosecution evidence

by Sunil Girwal (PW-15), seizure of steel glass and consequent

verification of fingerprints becomes doubtful. Though in the case

of
Malkiat Singh vs. State of Punjab
as reported in 2004(3)

R.C.R. (Criminal) 55 where fingerprints of accused were found

on glass of liquor, it was held by the Supreme Court that

fingerprint impression is a pointer towards guilt of accused and

science of identifying thumb impression is an exact science and

does not admit of any mistake or doubt and it further observed that

there is no reason to disbelieve the opinion of the Director,

Fingerprint Bureau and similarly, in the case of
M.A.Antony vs.

State of Kerala
as reported in 2009 AIR (SCW) 4448 where

presence of the accused in the house of deceased established by
               89 Cri.
Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
presence of his fingerprints and presence of his hair on the body of

the deceased, the Supreme Court held the conviction proper as in

this case the fingerprint was tallied with the report, but it is also

true that specimen fingerprint ought to have been taken before the

Judicial Magistrate as per identification of
Prisoners Act
and this

procedure having not been followed, no reliance can be placed on

these circumstances as has been held in the case of
Mohd. Aman

& Anr. Vs. State of Rajasthan
as reported in (1997) 10 SCC 44.

It is true that expert evidence must be viewed not as a piece of

substantive evidence, but as a piece of corroborative (tending to

confirm) evidence to other evidence in the case. It is also true that

Court is not bound to accept the opinion of the expert

automatically, but the ground on which he gives his opinion would

carry value to the evidence.
In the present case, it is an admitted

fact that specimen fingerprints were obtained vide Ex.P/45 on

18.5.16 at City Kotwali and the same was verified by Mirza Asif

Beg (PW-28) TI, but not in presence of the Magistrate and

secondly when seizure of the article from which fingerprints were

taken for sample and matching with the specimen fingerprint is

doubtful, then prosecution cannot take advantage of the law
laid

down in
the case of Malkiat Singh or in the case of
M.A.Antony
(supra)
133. Niranjan Singh Rajput (PW-22) is a witness to Ex.P/43

whereby blood sample was obtained from the accused by Dr.

Rajoriya (PW-26) who was also a part of the team which

conducted postmortem of five deceased persons. It will not be out
               90 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
of place to mention that for taking blood sample permission was

obtained, but for taking semen sample no such permission was

taken. Further there is no evidence to show as to which doctor had

obtained semen sample, and therefore, sampling of semen

becomes doubtful.
134. Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24), who had conducted postmortem on

Mahima, Chhavi and Reena, has admitted that knife was brought

to him alongwith Ex.P/54 to seek his opinion as to whether

injuries which were found on the body of the deceased could have

been caused by such knife, then he had given an opinion that

injuries found on the neck of the deceased could have been caused

by such knife in which there are teeth. Postmortem reveals that

there was no sharp weapon injury on the body of Chhavi, on the

contrary a ligature mark was found measuring 32 cm x 1.5 cm,

black in colour surrounding the neck transversely and on

dissection of such ligature mark margins were congested and base

was hard and leathery. There is no seizure of such ligature and

other material with which Chhavi was allegedly smothered &

strangulated. Dr. Yadav, who had performed postmortem on the

body of Mahima, Chhavi and Reena, found presence of rigor

mortis on the whole body of these three persons and similarly Dr.

Rajoriya (PW-26) had also found rigor mortis on the body of

Golu. Cadaveric Regidity or Rigor Mortis which is also known as

death stiffening, comes on immediately after the muscles have lost

the power of contractility, and is due to the irreversible changes in

the muscles of the body both voluntary and involuntary. As per
               91 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
Textbook of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology by Modi, 24 th

Edition Reprint 2012 time of onset varies greatly in different

cases, but the average period of its onset may be regarded as three

to six hours after death in temperate climates, and it may take two

to three hours to develop. In India, it usually commences in one to

two hours after death. In temperate regions, rigor mortis usually

lasts for two to three days. In northern India, the usual duration of

rigor mortis is 24 to 48 hours in winter and 18 to 26 hours in

summer. When this report is read with the report of Dr.

R.N.Rajoriya (PW-26) who has admitted that rigor mortis takes 24

hours to complete and start receding in the same order and was

present in full in all the dead-bodies, then time of death attains

importance as to whether rigor mortis could have been set in

totality within 13-14 hours when postmortem was conducted

inasmuch as call from Reena to the mobile of the accused is at

about 11.13 pm.
135. Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) has admitted injuries caused to

Reena were sufficient to cause so much of blood loss that bed-

sheet, mattress would have been soaked in blood, but prosecution

has not seized mattress. This when corroborated with the scene of

crime, shows that four members of the female folk were murdered

at different places and then their bodies were dumped in one room.

This finding finds support from the prosecution case that girls

were running for their life and were trying to escape from the

room, therefore, their bodies could not have been found trampled

one over another from one single room where they had allegedly
               92 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
seen accused and Reena.
136. Another ambiguity which is apparent from the cross-

examination of Dr. Yadav (PW-24) is that none of the bodies were

received in a sealed condition. Other ambiguity is that he admits to

have conducted medical examination of Ankur on 20.5.2016 and

did not find any injury on the body of Ankur, whereas as per
Article 26
, Court had seen Ankur limping when trial run was

carried out on 19.5.16.
137. Dr. Himanshu Bansal (PW-25) has admitted that he was part

of the team which conducted postmortem and he had conducted

postmortem on the body of Ambika and given his report Ex.P/23-

A. He also conducted postmortem on deceased Avnish @ Golu

and gave report Ex.P/25A. In cross-examination, this witness has

admitted that hands of Golu were tied behind and his ankle joint

was also tied. A bed-sheet was stuffed inside his mouth. These

clothes have not been seized by the police. When read in

conjunction with the testimony of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1), then

there is ambiguity in the colour of these clothes as were first seen

by Rambabu and when bodies were sent for postmortem. This

could not be explained by the prosecution. Himanshu Bansal (PW-
25) has admitted that incised wound is smooth and no weapon was

produced at the time of postmortem. Deceased Ambika must have

consumed some food two hours prior to her death. Since carotid

vessel was ruptured which supplies blood directly to the heart,

there must have been excessive blood loss. There was hematoma

present over head of Avnish which could have been caused due to
                93 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
fall on a hard surface.
138. Dr. R.N.Rajoriya (PW-26) has admitted that he had taken

blood sample of accused for DNA sampling and preserved it and

sent it in a ice box and complete rigor mortis was present on the

dead-bodies.
139. Dr. Ranjana Chaudhary (PW-27) admitted that she had

prepared vaginal swabs and slides of Mahima, Chhavi, Ambika

and Reena separately. She admits in cross-examination that such

slides were sealed by Dr. J.S.Yadav. This witness has admitted

that hands and legs of Golu were bluish in colour i.e. postmortem

staining was present as has been concurred by Dr. Himanshu

Bansal (PW-25).
140. Mirza Asif Beg (PW-28) is IO of the case. He has deposed

that on 14.5.16 when he was posted as SHO, City Kotwali, Bhind,

he received an intimation that five bodies are lying in a house at

Virendra Nagar, then he informed his superior officers and visited

Virendra Nagar alongwith his team. On the spot, he saw that

several people were standing outside the house and inside nobody

was there. He secured the campus and found that in one room four

dead-bodies of four ladies were lying, one on a Takhat and other

three on floor. Cloth was stuffed in the mouth of Chhavi and her

hands were tied. In the kitchen of tenant, dead-body of Golu was

found whose hands were tied behind and a cloth was stuffed inside

his mouth and all five bodies had cut marks on throat. This is

contrary to the postmortem report of Chhavi (Ex.P/22A) in which

it is mentioned that only a ligature mark was present around the
               94 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
neck, blackish in colour measuring 32 cm x 1.5 cm. This witness

has admitted that he had recorded Dehati Nalish as per the

instructions of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1), father-in-law of Reena.

This witness has also deposed that when he had inspected the spot,

then he found steel glasses lying in the sink of kitchen of Reena

which were stinking and some water having dissolved substance

was kept in a steel bowl which was seized on suspicion of it

containing some sedative substance in a plastic bottle alongwith 7

glasses and one bowl.
141. SI Manjesh Parmar (PW-21) saw fingerprints on a glass

which were lifted by her and she seized such glass. There is no

mention of seizure of any glass separately other than seven glasses

which is contradictory to the evidence of Manjesh Parmar (PW-
21) who deposed that the glass from which she had lifted

fingerprint was seized from the room in which dead-body of

Reena and other girls were lying. This witness has deposed that

during search, relatives of Reena had informed that both the

knives from the kitchen and mobile of Reena are missing. When

he had a discussion with persons who had assembled, then he was

informed about visits of Ankur Dixit to the house of Reena and

about illicit relationship of Ankur with deceased Reena. This

witness admits that such persons had not given any statement to

him. Thus, when such fact of a suspected accused was already

known to the IO, then there was no reason for non-mentioning of

such vital fact either in Naksha Panchayatnama or in the FIR

which all have been recorded against unknown person. This is
               95 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
another glaring omission in the testimony of this prosecution

witness.
142. Another fact and contradiction is that Roli Bhadauria (PW-
2) has deposed that she had reached her house at 2 pm, then she

was asked to search for missing knives and then she looked inside

the kitchen of Reena and her own kitchen and found three knives

missing which is contrary to the statement of the IO.
143. IO has deposed that during investigation when he had not

found mobile of Reena, then he asked cyber cell to trace it, on

which cyber cell informed that Reena at most of the times talked

on mobile number ending with 6770 digits and on investigation

this mobile was found to be of Ankur Dixit. Cyber cell had also

given him information about Ankur Dixit using another mobile

ending with 5765 and then on the basis of suspicion, he called the

accused who accepted his guilt, and therefore, arrest memo

(Ex.P/55) was prepared. This testimony of IO is contrary to the

testimony of Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) and Ankit Sharma (PW-4)

inasmuch as when during investigation IO had come to know

about name of Ankur Dixit as a suspect, then there was no reason

for him to have waited for the call details. Neither the IO nor the

witness of collection of cyber details Anand Dixit (PW-11) has

given any date or time of collection of information from the cyber

cell, even on the computer printouts (Ex.P/17 to Ex.P/20) there is

no mention of date as to when such printout was taken from the

computer. There is no material on record to show as to when

Anand Dixit (PW-11) had taken concurrence of service provider
                96 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
for obtaining such details. Ankit Sharma (PW-4) has deposed that

he was picked up from his house on 14.5.16 itself in the morning

and Ankur Dixit was picked up from his house at about 10 am on

14.5.16 itself. In this regard, reference to plea of Ankur will not be

out of place where he has admitted that he was arrested on 14.5.16

between 10-11 am and was brutally beaten and his signatures were

obtained on blank papers and his semen was also obtained against

his will in the police Station and that was also not sealed. During

obtaining such semen sample, his finger prints were also obtained.

Rambabu (PW-1) has admitted that when Ankur was interrogated

in the afternoon of 15.5.16 in his presence, IO (PW-28) had asked

Ankur to reveal those facts which he had given to him on previous

night. This witness has also admitted that he had come to know of

arrest of Ankur in the early hours of 15.5.16, and therefore, he left

his village to come to Bhind where he informed Rajkishore in this

regard and then they reached police station at 2 pm. This shows

that Ankur was already in illegal custody of police from 14.5.16,

and therefore, to this extent, testimony of Mirza Asif Beg (PW-28)

is not reliable. Preparation of memo (Ex.P/10) under
Section 27
of

the Evidence Act at the instance of Ankur on 15.5.16 also

becomes doubtful because he was already in custody from the

previous day and to that extent testimony of Rambabu Shukla

(PW-1) showing him to be a witness of arrest memo (Ex.P/55) is

contradictory and remains unexplained. None of the witnesses of

arrest, namely Moni @ Hariom and Ramprakash have been

examined by the prosecution.
97 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
144. Ankit Sharma (PW-4) has deposed that he had picked up

wet clothes of Ankur on 14.5.16 and after wringing out the same,

put them for drying in the police station, therefore, even seizure

memo of clothes of Ankur Dixit vide Ex.P/11 in presence of

Rambabu Shukla becomes doubtful. As has been discussed above,

recovery of a knife from a swamp in the presence of the accused

has become doubtful in the light of evidence of Gaurav (PW-9)

who has clearly mentioned in his cross-examination that when he

had taken out knife, at that time or during time of cleaning of the

swamp, accused was not present. This witness has not been

declared hostile, and therefore, in the light of the law
laid down in
the case of
Raja Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan
as reported in

(2005) 5 SCC 272 defence is entitled to take advantage of such

lapse of the prosecution.
145. Sealing of knife is doubtful inasmuch as, as per the

prosecution witness Niru (PW-7) it was kept in a polythene bag

but no polythene bag has been produced and such knife was found

to be mud studded when examined at forensic lab whereas it was

found to be like a new one when sent for opinion of Dr. J.S.Yadav

(PW-24).
146. There is no explanation for collecting semen sample of the

accused Ankur on 16.5.16 vide Ex.P/31 and even it has not been

explained as to which doctor had collected such sample at District

Hospital, Bhind, therefore, absence of evidence of such doctor and

statement of Ankur that his semen sample was collected in the

police station after coercing him, creates a bonafide doubt as to
               98 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
whether prosecution had manipulated the samples in connivance

of Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) after collecting semen sample of Ankur

Dixit. Another unexplained aspect is that semen sample and blood

sample were taken on two different dates, namely 15.5.16 and

19.5.16, whereas permission was sought to collect blood sample

on 19.5.16, but no such permission was obtained for collection of

semen sample. Further IO has admitted that on 15.5.16 viscera,

kidney, lungs, slides etc. were brought by the Constable from

hospital and were handed over to Kamal Singh. Dr. J.S.Yadav

(PW-24) has deposed that such samples were handed over to the

Constable on 14.5.16 itself. Thus, there is another ambiguity in the

prosecution story that when such sample of swab, slide, viscera

were handed to the Constable on 14.5.16 itself, then why they

were deposited by him on 15.5.16, after collection of semen

sample of the accused.
147. IO has admitted in paragraph 15 that on 17.5.16 he had

received postmortem report of the deceased and cyber cell report.

If cyber cell report was received on 17.5.16, then there was no

occasion for the IO to have arrested accused Ankur Dixit as per

his own admission on 15.5.16 and this is another gap in the

prosecution story. Another glaring omission is that in paragraph

21, IO, has admitted that he had recorded case diary statement of

Neelesh @ Betu and that of Shriram Sharma and Sachin Sharma,

but such statements have not been filed alongwith the charge-

sheet. They are even not available in the file of the trial Court.

Similarly, statements of Satyaveer Singh and Krishnakumar,
               99 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
recorded on 23.5.16 are also not on record, even the date of

recording of statement of Ankit Sharma (PW-4) on 27.5.16

appears to be doubtful and does not match with the testimony of

Ankit Sharma (PW-4). In paragraph 27 of his examination-in-

chief, IO has admitted that on 16.7.16, Ankur Dixit washed knife

used in the incident, so also the blood stains on his pant and shirt

and destroyed the evidence of mobile and keys, thus
Section 201
of IPC was added. The fact of the matter is that recovery of knife

is dated 17.5.16, therefore, there was no occasion for the accused

to have washed blood stains from the knife as it was admittedly

thrown in the swamp, and therefore, there is contradiction in the

prosecution story as to removal of blood stains from the knife.
148. This IO (PW-28) has admitted that on 18.7.16 accused in

front of senior officials had given a narration of the whole

incident. Therefore, there was no occasion for him to be limping in

the video which was prepared vide
Article 26
as was observed by

the Court. There is ambiguity in the statement of the IO inasmuch

as he has attributed
Article 26
, to have been prepared on 18.7.16,

whereas Sunil Girwal (PW-15) photographer has deposed that he

had carried out videography and photography on 14.5.2016.

Therefore, prosecution has failed to explain as to why they have

not produced such videography as was carried out by Sunil Girwal

(for reference please see paragraph 2 of PW-15) and what

happened to such videography and such DVD of videography and

photography prepared by him with the help of computer kept in

FSL Bhind. This witness has not deposed anything about
                 100 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
preparation of a DVD on 18.7.16, and therefore, this is a material

contradiction in the evidence of IO and it is apparent that IO is

trying to bridge the gaps in the testimony of prosecution witnesses,

and therefore, he cannot be considered to be a trustworthy witness

specially in regard to DVD prepared by Sunil Girwal (PW-15). In

view of such discussion without there being any occasion, IO had

obtained semen sample of the accused and that too without

justifying its requirement. No doctor has testified that he/they

obtained     such     semen    sample,    therefore,   possibility   of

contamination of other sample with that of the semen procured

from the accused at the police Station cannot be ruled out.
149.    Prosecution was duty bound to produce all such documents

on record because its responsibility is not to punish somebody but

to assist in fair trial.
150. Another ambiguity in the evidence of Mirja Asif Beg (PW-
28) is his inability to explain as to who had broken the lock of the

said house of Reena. His evasive reply that it must have been

broken by people of Dial 100 is not satisfactory and nobody from

Dial 100 has been examined to specify this aspect of prosecution

evidence.
151. Contention of the IO that when he reached the spot there

was a crowd outside the house and still nobody was inside the

house, specially when Rambabu Shukla (PW-1) had arrived as per

prosecution's own version, Shriram Sharma had seen the dead-

bodies in the morning, so also Nilesh Sharma (PW-16), appears to

be unnatural that scene of crime was found intact by the IO and it
               101 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
was not crumpled upon if not tampered by the crowd. This is

another missing link in the chain of circumstances. IO has

admitted that there were no women police force in his troop. When

he had received intimation about five dead-bodies lying in a house

out of which four were of women, not taking any woman

constable alongwith the investigation team creates doubt about

knowledge of investigation of the IO.
152. In para 39, IO has contradicted Sunil Girwal (PW-15) and

denied having any information as to whether any videography was

conducted on 14.5.16 or not. This is in contradiction to the

statement of Sunil Girwal (PW-15) who has not been declared

hostile, therefore, it is apparent that IO is trying to cover up the

lapses of non-production of such videography as was carried out

on 14.5.16 as that would have given correct information as to

recovery of glass and the position of dead-bodies vis-a-vis scene

of crime to give some estimate as to how much blood was lying on

the floor when four deaths occurred due to slit of throat. In

paragraph 41, this witness has admitted that he is not in a position

to say as to who had gone to take Ankit Sharma (PW-4) and then

said that SIT was constituted and somebody from such SIT had

gone to take him, but there is no document on record to show

constitution of such SIT and to that extent statement of the IO is

contradictory and false. It is also contradictory to the statement of

Ankit Sharma (PW-4) who has admitted that he was picked up on

14.5.16 in the morning and this witness has not been declared

hostile.
102 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
153. In paragraph 44, IO has admitted that he is not in a position

to say as to how much blood was lying on the floor, but has

admitted that in Ex.P/32, photograph, only some blood was seen

on the floor. In fact, these photographs, Ex.P/32, Ex.P/34, Ex.P/35

and Ex.P/36 show flow of blood only from neck of one girl shown

in yellow top (upper apparel). Even Ex.P/37, which appears to be a

photo of dead-body of Reena, reveals froth on the throat of Reena

but the quantity of blood on the bed is not commensurate to the

statement of Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-24) who had carried out

postmortem on the body of deceased Reena and admitted in para

25 that the flow of blood will be of very high volume if the vein is

small and then in paragraph 34 has admitted that lot of blood loss

must have taken place which must have spread around but the

photographs are not supporting such medical evidence, and

therefore, there is a mismatch in the ocular and medical evidence.

In paragraph 45, a question was put to the IO that why Rambabu

in his Court statement has stated Þfnukad 15-5-2016 dks eseksj.Me ds le;

Fkkuk izHkkjh }kjk vkjksih ls dgk x;k fd tks rqeus jkf= esa crk;k gS og bUgsa Hkh

crk nksß then IO has replied that he is not in a position to say as to

why such statement has been given by Rambabu. This is another

contradiction      which      hampers       completion        of    chain     of

circumstances.
154. Failure of the prosecution to make any attempt to recover

another mobile of Reena and even not making any attempt to

recover the same and not collecting any details of SIM of such

mobile of Reena are other lapses on the part of the IO. There is
               103 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
admission of the IO that he had not sought permission of the Civil

Surgeon or CMHO before seizure of alprazolam. In paragraph 54,

he denies that he had asked accused to give semen sample on

16.5.16, but admitted that such sample must have been taken by

the doctor, but no doctor has been examined as has been discussed

above. In paragraph 59, IO has admitted that he had obtained

semen sample before receiving postmortem report only on the

basis of probability of rape being committed on deceased ladies.

The explanation which has been given for obtaining semen sample

in paragraph 56 is also hypothetical that if they would not have

taken semen sample of the accused and later on if rape would have

been verified, then it would have been difficult for prosecution to

have obtained semen sample. This statement is contrary to the

medico-legal evidence inasmuch as there was no need for

obtaining semen sample to verify the factum of rape inasmuch as

such semen on vaginal swab or vaginal slide or any of the clothes

could have been verified with the DNA profile of the accused by

simply obtaining blood sample of the accused, therefore,

justification given by the IO for obtaining semen sample appears

not only bogus, but concocted and cannot be expected in such a

sensitive case of five murders where more sensitivity and

professionalism was expected from the IO.
155. Another contradiction is though presence of Rambabu

Shukla (PW-1) has been shown in the hospital from 1 pm to 2 pm

as he had identified all the dead-bodies as per the evidence of Dr.

J.S.Yadav (PW-24), Dr. Himanshu Bansal (PW-25) and Dr.
               104 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
R.N.Rajoriya (PW-26) in the hospital, whereas spot map (Ex.D/5)

has been prepared at 14.10 hours at the instance of Rambabu

Shukla which clearly indicates that all the documentation of the IO

was manipulated and he put timings on his own on such

documentation as per his convenience. We say so because neither

the doctors were recalled nor it is the case of the prosecution that

doctors had any malafide intention of putting timings on

postmortem as per their own convenience, therefore, in absence of

any such allegation on prosecution witnesses; Dr. J.S.Yadav (PW-
24), Dr. Himanshu Bansal (PW-25), Dr. R.N.Rajoriya (PW-26)

and Dr. Ranjana Chaudhary (PW-27), it is apparent that spot map

was concocted and prepared by the IO as per his convenience.

This is another missing link in completion of chain of

circumstances. He has admitted that he is not in a position to say

that alprazolam seized by him was of which potency and company

and how seizure of alprazolam could connect the accused when

there is no reporting of shortage or pilferage which makes its

seizure doubtful. At least, these details, as has been mentioned

above, should have been mentioned. Above this, testimony of

Sunil Girwal (PW-15) that he had reached the scene of crime in

between 6.30 and 7 am on 14.5.2016 remained unexplained by the

IO, and therefore, IO has failed to complete the chain of

circumstances, rather he has added to lacunas in the prosecution

story.
156. Therefore, the only vital piece of evidence which is to be

considered to assess the presence or absence of the accused is
               105 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
DNA report (Ex.P/60) which shows that DNA of the accused

marked as Article N obtained from the blood sample of the

accused matched with DNA of deceased Reena obtained from

Article H namely vaginal slide swab and Article I, clothes of the

deceased Reena.
157. As per the report Ex.P/60 though DNA profiling of Reena

and that of the accused has matched, but it was not for the accused

to explain factum of timing of intercourse with Reena inasmuch as

the medical literature available in this regard points out that sperm

can be collected from the vagina or more particularly from the

cervix if a woman undergoes an intercourse within nine days of

collection of such sample either on a swab or a slide. As per third

edition of book 'Review of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology,

including Clinical & Pathological Aspects by Gauram Biswas,

time of assault can be assessed (i) through the wounds; age of

abrasions and contusions should corroborate with the alleged time

of assault (ii) seminal fluid; survival time of sperm in vagina of

living individual is invariable. Normally sperm remains motile in

vagina for about 6-8 hours and occasionally upto 12 hours and

very rarely upto 24 hours. In the later case, it is probable that

specimen was obtained from cervical mucus.
158. Non-motile forms are detectable upto 24 hours with

occasional reports of 48-72 hours. If motile sperms are seen in wet

semen on a slide, it would mean that intercourse took place within

about 12 hours. If the sperms are not motile, it is not possible to

say exactly when intercourse took place, expect that it may be over
               106 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
12 hours and within 24-48 hours and occasionally upto 72 hours.
159. In microscopic examination detection of spermatozoa on

microscopy     is the confirmatory test for semen. When wet

specimens are used for sperm motility, then it is found that motile

sperms -(i) in vaginal samples are found up to 24 hours [100% are

motile up to 3 hours; 50% are motile by 8 hours; 10% are motile

by 24 hours]. (ii) In endocervix up to 6 days. (b) Non motile sperm

heads are detected in the living (i) up to 7 days in the vaginal

cavity, (ii) 2-3 days in the anus and rectum, and (iii) 24 hours in

the mouth.
160. In the book, titled as the 'Essentials of Forensic Medicine &

Toxicology, 29th Edition- 2010 by Dr. K.S.Narayan Reddy, M.D.,

D.C.P., PhD., F.A.M.S., F.I.M.S.A., F.A.F.Sc., F.I.A.M.S.,

F.A.F.M., Honarary Professor of Forensic Medicine, S.V.S.

Medical College, Mahabubnagar and retired Principal of Osmania

Medical College, Hyderabad, has noted that sperms have been

identified in the vagina of dead 1-2 weeks after death. In view of

such factum of books of medico-legal evidence, despite having

proper tools to observe motility of sperm so to correlate the timing

of intercourse with Reena, such basic tool has not been used by the

prosecution though they had an aid of expert from the FSL team. If

this tool would have been used, then prosecution could have

pinpointed presence of the accused in the intervening night of 13-

14th May, but having failed to put such motility test which as

discussed (supra) could pinpoint whether intercourse was within

24 hours or beyond 24 hours, thus another important aspect to
               107 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
pinpoint a person on the basis of circumstantial evidence has been

missed.
161. This issue of conclusiveness of DNA test came to be

discussed by Supreme Court in case of
Smt. Kamti Devi &

another vs. Poshi Ram
as reported in AIR 2001 SC 2226

wherein in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 the Supreme Court held as

under :-
11.We may remember that
Section 112
of the
           Evidence Act was enacted at a time when the modern
           scientific advancements with Dioxy Nucleic Acid
           (DNA) as well as Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) tests were
           not even in contemplation of the legislature. The
           result of a genuine DNA test is said to be
           scientifically accurate. But even that is not enough to
           escape from the conclusiveness of
Section 112
of the
           Act, e.g. if a husband and wife were living together
           during the time of conception but the DNA test
           revealed that the child was not born to the husband,
           the conclusiveness in law would remain
           unrebuttable. This may look hard from the point of
           view of the husband who would be compelled to bear
           the fatherhood of a child of which he may be
           innocent. But even in such a case the law leans in
           favour of the innocent child from being bastardized if
           his mother and her spouse were living together
           during the time of conception. Hence the question
           regarding the degree of proof of non-access for
           rebutting the conclusiveness must be answered in the
           light of what is meant by access or non-access as
           delineated above.
12. Whether the burden on the husband is as hard as
           the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused in a
           trial deserves consideration in the above background.
The standard of proof of prosecution to prove the
           guilt beyond any reasonable doubt belongs to
           criminal jurisprudence whereas the test of
           preponderance of probabilities belongs to civil cases.
           The reason for insisting on proof beyond reasonable
           doubt in criminal cases is to guard against innocent
           being convicted and sent to jail if not to extreme
           penalty of death. It would be too hard if that standard
           is imported in a civil case for a husband to prove
           non- access as the very concept of non-access is
           negative in nature. But at the same time the test of
               108 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
preponderance of probability is too light as that
           might expose many children to the peril of being
           illegitimatised. If a court declares that the husband is
           not the father of his wife's child, without tracing out
           its real father the fall out on the child is ruinous apart
           from all the ignominy visiting his mother. The
           bastardized child, when grows up would be socially
           ostracised and can easily fall into wayward life.
           Hence, by way of abundant caution and as a matter of
           public policy, law cannot afford to allow such
           consequence befalling an innocent child on the
           strength of a mere tilting of probability. Its corollary
           is that the burden of the plaintiff-husband should be
           higher than the standard of preponderance of
           probabilities. The standard of proof in such cases
           must at least be of a degree in between the two as to
           ensure that there was no possibility of the child being
           conceived through the plaintiff-husband.
13 In
Goutam Kundu vs. State of West
           Bengal
{1993(3) SCC 418} this Court after
           considering an early three-Judge Bench decision in
Smt. Dukhtar Jahan Vs. Mohammed Farooq
{1987(1)
           SCC 624} held that "this presumption can only be
           displaced by a strong preponderance of evidence, and
           not by a mere balance of probabilities."
162. Similarly, Supreme Court in case of
Hemudan Nanbha

Gadhvi vs. State of Gujarat
as reported in 2018 SCC OnLine

SC 1688 has considered the aspect of criminal trial being a quest

for truth and has held that the nature of inquiry and evidence will

depend on the facts of each case. The presumption of innocence

will have to be balanced with the rights of the victim and above all

the societal interest for preservation of the rule of law.
163. This is a case of circumstantial evidence and it is to be

viewed from the perspective of two circumstances; one of

intercourse and another of murder. As has been discussed earlier

DNA report only corroborates circumstance of intercourse

between the accused and deceased Reena.
164. Trial Court did not consider the aspect of motive as there
               109 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
was no satisfactory motive to commit murder of five persons. The

witness of first scene i.e. the witness who had reached the place of

incident for the first time i.e. Shriram Sharma has not been

examined and why Shriram Sharma had not lodged any report

after coming to know of such gruesome murder through Neelesh

@ Betu (PW-16) has not been explained. Prosecution has failed to

prove who had broken the locks of the house, how goods were

lying scattered and in disorderly manner as has been admitted by

Roli Bhadauria (PW-2) and the IO when as per Rambabu Shukla

(PW-1) no burglary was committed in the house and above all no

attempt was made to recover fingerprints from the lock which was

found broken at the place of incident. As has been discussed

above, only one lock has been found, whereas as per Roli

Bhadauria, even lock of her portion of the house was broken, then

prosecution was required to show as to what happened to that lock

and who had broken such lock. Even Neelesh @ Betu (PW-16)

has not deposed that whether the house was locked from inside or

outside when he climbed to look for members of the family of

Reena in the said house. Non-examination of Reena's younger

daughter so also brother of deceased Golu who was allegedly

staying in the same house alongwith Golu are important and

telling circumstances.
In case of
Nagendra Pal Singh v. State of

U.P.
as reported in AIR 1993 SC 950 it has been held that the

Courts are to advert to all important and telling circumstances of

the case and to proceed against the accused only on the ground

that one of the persons of the prosecution party was dead is
               110 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
incorrect approach. Prosecution has not been able to explain its

own story that when five persons were present at the place of

incident, all young and able bodied and full of youth and vigour,

then under what circumstances none of them could escape the

rigour of the accused. Tying of hands and legs of deceased Golu

and deceased Chhavi clearly points out that it was not a work of

one individual, specially when as per the viscera report no

alprazolam or any other sedative was found in the viscera of Golu.
Thus, reliance on the judgment in case of
Sharad Birdhichand

Sarda
(supra) is applicable that Court should examine evidence

of interested witnesses with great care and caution and in a case of

circumstantial evidence conditions precedents mentioned above

should be fulfilled and a case can be said to be proved only when

there is certain and explicit evidence and no person can be

convicted on pure moral conviction (paragraph 156). Similarly, it

is well settled that where on the evidence two possibilities are

available or open, one which goes in favour of the prosecution and

the other which benefits an accused, the accused is undoubtedly

entitled to the benefit of doubt.
165. Similarly, law
laid down in
the case of
Hem Singh
(supra)

is applicable that when no motive could be proved by the

prosecution, then prosecution cannot be permitted to take

advantage of weakness of defence. In view where of, since there

are major contradictions and omissions in the evidence led by the

prosecution resulting in non-completion of chain of circumstances

indicating and establishing the guilt of the accused, the accused
                           111 Cri. Reference No.06/2019 (Death Reference) &
Cri.A.3539/2019
cannot be sent to the gallows on the basis of such evidences.
166. In view whereof, we have no hesitation in holding that the

           prosecution having failed to establish the charges levelled against

           the accused person beyond reasonable doubt, the reference

           deserves to be answered and is answered against the prosecution

           and in favour of the accused. Accordingly, we set aside the

           conviction and sentence as proposed by the trial Court and sent for

           affirmation of this Court. Consequently, the appeal preferred by

           the accused is allowed. The accused be released forthwith if not

           wanted in any other case.
We place on record our appreciation for the able assistance

           rendered by respective counsel; more particularly learned senior

           counsel who at the request of the Court and despite his

           professional preoccupation readily agreed to render legal aid. As a

           token of his service for advancement of cause of effective legal

           aid, we direct the State Legal Service Authority to pay Rs.10,000/-

           (Rs. Ten Thousand Only) as an honorarium to him.
Office is further directed to send a copy of the judgment

           forthwith to the jail authorities for taking appropriate action in

           accordance with law.
(Sanjay Yadav)                           (Vivek Agarwal)
                  Judge                                    Judge

ms/-

       MADHU
       SOODAN
       PRASAD
       2019.09.12
       14:49:48 -07'00'
