Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: 2




                        MAT 1239
Citation: SCC 492. Mr. Mukherjee, argued that if the petitioners are
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/168798384/

[Cites
54
, Cited by
2
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Dr. Md. Babul Aktar And Others vs Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain And Others on 1 October, 2019
Author:
Sambuddha Chakrabarti
Bench:
Sambuddha Chakrabarti
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                     APPELLATE SIDE

Present:
The Hon'ble Justice Dr. Sambuddha Chakrabarti
               and
The Hon'ble Justice Hiranmay Bhattacharyya

                   MAT No. 1222 of 2019
                             +
                      CAN 8412 of 2019

              Dr. Md. Babul Aktar and Others
                            Vs.
             Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                           With

                   MAT No. 1223 of 2019
                            +
                    CAN 8411 of 2019
                            +
                    CAN 8548 of 2019

             Dr. Madhumita Basu and Others
                            Vs.
             Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                           With

                    MAT 1224 of 2019
                           +
                    CAN 8410 of 2019

           Parthasarathi Bhattacharya and Others
                             Vs.
              Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                           With
                                2




                        MAT 1239 of 2019
                               +
                        CAN 8489 of 2019

                   Debasis Sil and Others
                             Vs.
              Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                             With

                        MAT 1245 of 2019
                               +
                        CAN 8664 of 2019

              State of West Bengal and Others
                             Vs.
              Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                             With

                        MAT 1267 of 2019
                               +
                        CAN 8981 of 2019

    The Vice Chancellor, West Bengal University of Health
                    Sciences and Others
                             Vs.
              Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others

                             With

                        MAT 1333 of 2019

              Dr. Md. Nazir Hossain and Others
                             Vs.
    The Vice Chancellor, West Bengal University of Health
                    Sciences and Others



For the appellants in       : Mr. Shakti Nath Mukherjee, Sr. Advocate
MAT 1222 of 2019 and          Mr. Suman Banejee, Advocate
                              3




MAT 1223 of 2019            Mr. Samik Sarkar, Advocate

For the appellants in   : Mr. Soumendra Banerjee, Sr. Advocate
MAT 1224 of 2019          Mr. Suman Banejee, Advocate
                          Mr. Samik Sarkar, Advocate

For the appellants in   : Mr. Pratik Dhar, Sr. Advocate
MAT 1239 of 2019          Mr. Kartik Kumar Roy, Advocate
                          Mr. Samir Haldar, Advocate
For the appellants in   : Mr. Kishore Dutta, Advocate General
MAT 1245 of 2019          Ms. Sirsanya Bandopadhyay, Advocate
                          Ms. Sudeshna Das, Advocate
                          Mr. Arka Das, Advocate

For the state in        : Mr. Tapan Kumar Mukherjee, Advocate
MAT 1267 of 2019          Ms. Susmita Chatterjee, Advocate

For the original writ   : Mr. Jayanta Mitra, Sr. Advocate
petitioners               Mr. Debabrata Sen, Advocate
                          Mr. A. Dutta, Advocate

For the WBMC            : Mr.    Saibalendu Bhowmick, Advocate
                          Mr.    Biplab Guha, Advocate
                          Mr.    Subrata Bhattacharyay, Advocate
                          Mr.    Rajsekhar Basu, Advocate

For the MCI             : Mr. Indranil Roy, Advocate
                          Mr. Sunit Kumar Roy, Advocate

For the WBUHS           : Mr. D. N. Maiti, Advocate
For the state           : Mr. Kishore Datta, Advocate
                          Mr. Amitesh Banerjee, Advocate
                          Mr. Sirsanya Bandopadhyay, Advocate
                          Mr. S. Das Majumdar, Advocate
                          Mr. Arka Kumar Nag, Advocate


                        :
For the State in            Mr. Tapan Kumar Mukherjee, Advocate
MAT 1224 of 2019            Ms. Tuli Sinha, Advocate
                            Mr. Sougata Mitra, Advocate
                                    4




For the State in                : Mr. Swapan Kumar Dutta, Advocate
MAT 1223 of 2019                  Mr. Tapas Kumar Mondal, Advocate

For the State in                : Mr. Jahar Lal De, Advocate
MAT 1222 of 2019                  Ms. Smita Das De, Advocate

For the intervenor              : Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, Sr.
applicants                                                           Advocate
CAN 8548 of 2019                  Mr. Siddhartha Banerjee, Advocate
in MAT 1222 of 2019               Mr. Firdous Samim, Advocate
                                  Ms. Gopa Biswas, Advocate

Heard on                        : 04.09.2019,   06.09.2019,   09.09.2019,
                                  11.09.2019,   12.09.2019,   13.09.2019,
                                  17.09.2019,   18.09.2019,   19.09.2019,
                                  20.09.2019,   23.09.2019,   24.09.2019
Judgement on                    : 01.10.2019




Sambuddha Chakrabarti, J.:
These appeals are directed against the judgement and order,

dated August 19, 2019 passed by a Learned single judge in WP No.

8990 (W) of 2019 inter alia holding that the State has no authority

to reserve 40% seats for the in-service doctors and 60% seats for

open category doctors which has inter alia been held to be

arbitrary,   unconstitutional    and   unsustainable.   The    separate

reservation list and the list of selected candidates prepared on

April 3, 2019 and April 20, 2019 respectively have been set aside

with consequential directions.
5
The writ petitioners, 22 in number, are all medical graduates

who had appeared and succeeded in the entrance examination

through the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test, Post Graduate,

2019 (NEET, for short) conducted by the National Board of

Examination at all India level to get themselves admitted to the

post-graduate degree classes.    Half of the total number of seats

have been reserved for all India quota and half has been reserved

for the state quota in terms of the Rules and Regulations of the

Medical Council of India (MCI, for short). The first round of

counselling started on and from March 15, 2019 and the results

were published on March 27, 2019. The second round of

counselling started from April 5, 2019 and the result was

published on April 11, 2019 for the all India quota states in open

category.   The remaining vacancies from the all India quota

reverted back to the state which was to be filled up by the state

quota seats in the open category following the MCI Rules and

Regulations. It has been alleged that the State was trying to fill up

these reverted back seats in the manner of 60% for the open

category and 40% in-service doctors category.
The petitioners have alleged that the state respondents have

filled up 60% from the open category and 40% for the in-service
6
doctors category and in this manner the Government has

conducted the first counselling. Subsequently, the result of the

candidates for the respective faculties were published on April 3,

2019 as is reflected from the seat matrix available.
Out of the total available 699 seats, for open category

candidates the number of seats was 414 whereas for the in-service

doctors the number was 285 which roughly corresponded to about

40% of the available seats.
The   West    Bengal     University   of   Health   Services   (the

University, for short) after the first round of counselling filled up

60% seats from the open category and 40% from the in-service

quota. The petitioners alleged that for the publication of two lists

there is no provision in the Post Graduate Medical Education

Regulations, 2000 (the Regulations, for short) as well as the entire
Medical Council of India Act, 1956
(the Act, for short). There is no

provision for reserving any seat for the in-service doctors. There is

a provision for awarding 10% incentive marks per year which can

be up to 30% for three years for the in-service candidates who have

served remote or difficult areas and this would be added with the

marks obtained in the NEET examination. It is the case of the
7
petitioners that following the Rules and Regulations of the MCI a

common list may be published instead of two separate lists for two

categories of candidates.
The University has not published any list ascertaining remote

and difficult areas which violates the Regulations, 2000. Further

case of the petitioners is that the common list to be prepared must

contain the percentage of incentives awarded to the respective

candidates and years of service rendered by the respective

candidates along with the place of posting.
On April 18, 2019 the University issued the revised notice for

the second round of counselling. They also published a list for the

eligible candidates for this which included 1499 candidates in the

open category and 410 in the in-service category.
The state respondents were trying to fill up the reverted back

seats by in-service candidates along with the open category

candidates which are against the relevant Regulations of the MCI.

The petitioners have questioned the existence of quota for in-

service candidates in terms of the Regulations, 2000.
8
The petitioners have inter alia prayed for a writ in the nature

of   mandamus commanding the respondents to quash and set-

aside the list, dated April 3, 2019 of the selected candidates after

the first round of counselling and for a direction to publish a fresh

common list combining open and in-service category candidates

mentioning the remote and difficult areas and years of rendering

services and clubbing the incentives with the marks obtained in

the NEET Examination by following
Regulation 9
of the said

Regulations, a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the

respondents to set aside or quash the notice dated April 18, 2019

and the list of eligible candidates published on April 20, 2019 and

to publish a fresh merit list for the reverted back seats only for the

open category candidates and for other ancillary reliefs.
On behalf of the State Respondents the Special Secretary,

Medical Education, Department of Health and Family Welfare

affirmed an affidavit-in-opposition. The respondents inter alia

contended that the writ petition should be dismissed as the

Medical Council of India was not made a party. They further

alleged that the beneficiaries of the list dated April 3, 2019 who are

the in-service candidates had not been made parties. For this

ground also the writ petition was liable to be dismissed. The
9
petitioners had participated in the counselling process on the basis

of the same proportions in respect of the open category and in-

service category candidates and are, therefore, esotopped to

question the validity of the same after completion of the first

counselling and consequent admission of candidates. The schedule

prescribed by the Medical Council of India is mandatory as

declared by the Supreme Court. The examination being on an all

India basis no special schedule is permissible nor can there be any

alteration in it. After the petitioners had participated in the process

of the first round of counselling on the basis of the same ratio of

reservation they cannot be aggrieved that similar proportion in

respect of two categories cannot be applied for the second or the

mop-up counselling.
The last date for taking admission in MD/MS courses in

respect of the state counselling was May 18, 2019. The Supreme

Court had directed that the system of mop-up counselling has to

be done before May 31, 2017 and this schedule must be strictly

followed.
A further point taken by the respondents on the merits of the

writ petition is that the writ petitioners have not challenged the
10
memo, dated April 18, 2013.
Regulation 9(4)
of the Regulations

mentions "as per applicable laws prevailing in States/Union

Territories". The prevailing practice which was continuing since the

year 2013 might not be interfered with as this might result in

violating the mandatory schedule and consequently these seats of

the state quota might remain vacant.
The petitioners could not, the answering respondents alleged,

be affected by this reservation as there has not been any reduction

of seats for them. The rules of the game could not be changed in

the midst after the game had started. The total number of seats

available in the State of West Bengal was 1398. Approximately 50%

of them remain for the state quota seats which comes to 699 seats

excluding 37 management quota seats in private collages. The

remaining seats are made for all India quota for which the in-

service candidates cannot apply. Out of the state quota of 699

seats 40% i.e. 285 seats are reserved for in-service candidates

whereas 60% is for open category. For 37 management quota seats

in the private collages candidates in the open category as well as

in-service may apply.
11
The respondents have calculated that out of the total number

of seats in West Bengal only 285 seats have been set apart for the

in-service candidates which is about 21.4% of the total seats. The

total number of eligible candidates on the basis of NEET

examination for in-service category is 433. The 40% quota for the

in-service candidates includes the quota made for the Schedule

Caste, Schedule Tribes and Other Backward Classes candidates as

per the state norms. The in-service candidates are restricted to

only state quota whereas the open category candidates are free to

compete against the entire all India pool seats.
It has been found that the in-service candidates who are

serving in different hospitals of the state and in rural areas will

help   the     state   medical    facilities   across   the   state.   Trainee

Reservation facilities would be applicable to most of the doctors in

the State service in accordance with various services under the

state. The University by a notice dated March 12, 2019 mentioned

that   those     candidates      who   opted    for   in-service   candidates

categories were not allowed to convert into open category/other

service category and vice-versa.
12
The state respondents alleged suppression of fact against the

writ petitioners as they had not mentioned that they had

participated in the first counselling. Several writ petitioners have

been allotted seats and three of them have already taken

admission in the respective colleges. Their stand is that the writ

petitioners having participated in the first counselling on the basis

of a certain mechanism cannot seek a separate mechanism for

second round of counselling in the same academic year. Only a

small number of seats have been set apart for the in-service

candidates compared to the large number of seats available for the

open category. There has not been any reduction of seats for them.

Once a particular mechanism has been adopted for the first round

of counselling the same method is required to be continued till the

end to maintain uniformity in the process.
The list of eligible candidates was published on March 28,

2018 and the writ petition was filed on April 24, 2019. When the

writ petition had been filed admission on the basis of the first

counselling was over and the stage upto exercising choice for the

second counselling had also been completed. Since the modalities

for giving weightage to the in-service candidates could not be

determined the prevailing practice has been validated. The state
13
claimed that there has not been any violation of the provisions of

the Regulations or the Act. If the prayers of the petitioners are

allowed it would jeopardise the public health care system in the

whole state and the in-service candidates shall neither get any

weightage nor shall they be getting the benefit of the prevailing

mechanism.
In view of the Supreme Court Judgment the mechanism

which is to be adopted for rural, remote and district areas will be

available not only to the post-graduate medical courses but also for

all beneficial schemes of the state. But this is required to be done

at the highest level of the state. Till such steps are taken by the

state the admission process cannot be stalled which shall cause

prejudice to the in-service candidates who have been already

rendering their services to the State Government as well as those

candidates who have been admitted at different institutions after

the first counselling.
The respondents prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.



      In course of hearing before the Learned single judge on two

applications filed by some of the in-service candidates the
14
applicants were added as parties to the writ petition. The Medical

Council of India was also made a party.
The judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge

has been assailed in as many as seven appeals of which five have

been filed by different sets of respondents to the writ petition. MAT

1222 of 2019 has been filed upon obtaining the leave of this court.

The writ petitioners have also taken an independent appeal

assailing the direction of the learned single judge to approach the

Supreme Court for extension of time for admission, if advised.

Again, a set of interested candidates have intervened with the leave

of the court during the hearing of the appeals.
We took up all the appeals together and heard them

analogously.
Mr. Mukherjee, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

appellants in MAT 1222 of 2019, and MAT 1223 of 2019 submitted

that on the day the writ petition was taken up admission to

MD/MS post-graduate medical course was complete. The question

of admission beyond May 31, as provided in
Regulation 9(10)
of the

said Regulations did not arise. Relying on the judgement in Rounaq
15
International Ltd. Vs. IVR construction Ltd. And others, reported in

(1999) SCC 492. Mr. Mukherjee, argued that if the petitioners are

not entitled to any relief the writ petition should not be entertained

and the court also should not embark upon any adjudication.
He

has assailed the judgment and order impugned in the appeals

alleging that the learned single judge has almost entirely proceeded

on the basis of the ratio decided in the case of
State of Uttar

Pradesh Vs. Dinesh Singh Chouhan
, reported in (2016) 9 SCC 749

which   has   been   delivered   without   considering    the   earlier

constitution bench judgments, viz.
R. Chitralekha Vs. State of

Mysore
, AIR 1964 SC 1823,        Kumari Chitra Ghosh Vs. Union of

India, (1969) 2 SCC 228, Modern Dental College & Research Centre

Vs. State of M.P., (2016) 7 SCC 353.
With reference to Regulations, 2000 Mr. Mukherjee argued

that by the impugned order of reservation the state was trying to

upgrade the standard in their respective medical colleges. Since

the candidates sponsored by the state were not qualified to be

admitted in terms of their respective ranks in the merit list the

state decided to secure their admission by reservation.
16
A very major thrust of Mr. Mukherjee's submission is that

what the Medical Council has prescribed is nothing but a

minimum qualification.
Section 20
of the Act deals with the

standard of post-graduate medical qualification the purpose of

which is to prescribe a uniform standard for admission to the post-

graduate medical courses. Regulations have been made under
Section 33
of the Act.
Section 33(l)
also emphasizes the

maintenance of standard and condition for admission to post-

graduate courses. This will be very clear, Mr. Mukherjee submits,

even from the statements and objects of the Act itself. The whole

purpose behind the enactment was to secure a uniform standard

in medical education. Therefore, the state has every right to secure

the standard of education and take a measure to ensure its

upliftment. The decision to reserve 40% of the seats of the state

quota for the in-service candidates is a step towards achieving that

object and that was the concern of Parliament also.
Article 246
of the Constitution of India does not deal with the

Regulations to be made by the Council or any statutory body. It

deals with "laws" to be made by Parliament and by the legislatures

of the states. Emphasizing on the word "laws", Mr. Mukherjee

submitted that the Article does not touch the Regulations made
17
under
Section 33
of the Act as these Regulations are not "laws"

within the meaning of
Article 246
of the Constitution. The

Regulations are at best in the nature of bye-laws and do not have

the force of statutory rules.
Therefore, the right of the state to make laws in respect of the

areas of permissible legislation has not been abridged by the

Regulations 2000. Mr. Mukherjee has referred to Entry 6 of List II

of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution of India. List II is known as

the State List and in respect of the matters appearing thereunder

states have exclusive power to make laws. Entry 6 of List II of the

7th Schedule deals with public health and sanitation; hospitals and

dispensaries.
The West Bengal Health Services Act, 1990
is

relatable to this entry in the State List and, therefore, the state has

exclusive power to make legislations or provisions in respect of

such matters falling in this entry.
In this connection, Mr. Mukherjee referred to entry 66 of the

List I of the 7th Schedule which deals with co-ordination and

determination of standards in institutions for higher education or

research and scientific and technical institutions.
The Act
has

originated from this Entry in the 7th Schedule itself. Mr. Mukherjee
18
relied on
Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Others

Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
, reported in (2016) 7

SCC 353. He particularly relied on the judgment delivered by

Hon'ble Justice R. Bhanumati wherein a part of parliamentary

debate has been reproduced. Taking us through the said portion

Mr. Mukherjee stressed upon the importance of maintenance of

standard in medical education. He particularly drew the attention

of the Court to a part of the speech delivered by late Dr. B. R.

Ambedkar while introducing the Act in parliament. Mr. Mukherjee

submitted that the disparity in standards in different states in

medical teaching was sought to be ironed out by introducing a

uniform standard of medical education by enacting the
Medical

Council of India Act, 1956
.
A major part of Mr. Mukherjee's submission is that beyond

the areas of central enactment if any portion is left out the state

has the exclusive authority to legislate. Even if co-ordination and

determination of standards of medical education comes within

Entry 66 of the Union List the State is not without powers to take

further measures for uplifting the standards of medical education

in the State. Entry 6 of the Sate List which deals with public health

and hospitals confers a wide power on the state government to
19
make laws on the subjects enumerated in that Entry. In exercise of

the power conferred by inclusion of public health in Entry 6 of the

State List the state government has every right to reserve certain

seats for the in-service doctors which shall take care of upgrading

the standards of the hospitals.
The concern of the state relating to the health of the public is

public health, Mr. Mukherjee submitted. By way of an example he

mentioned that an individual hospital is concerned with the health

of the patients but the state is concerned with public health.

Therefore, for improving the standard of public health and hospital

administration it is very much within the authority of the state to

make laws or provision of reservation for the in-service doctors.
Mr. Mukherjee relied on the Note after Rule 3 of West Bengal

Medical Education Service, the West Bengal Health Service and the

West Bengal Public Health-cum-Administrative Service (Placement

of Trainee Reserve) Rules, 2015 and submitted that it confers a

power on the State Government to specify the number of seats in

different post-graduate courses which may be available to the in-

service doctors. By a Regulation made under
Section 33
of the Act

the Rules of 2015 cannot be set aside nor can its power be
20
abridged. The state made the law is in respect of a matter

enumerated in the State List which has the supremacy over

Regulations 2000.
Regulation 9
of the Regulations 2000 deals with the

minimum marks to be obtained by a candidate for admission to a

post-graduate degree course. A candidate in order to be considered

for such admission has to obtain 50% of the total marks and once

such candidate satisfies the criteria he comes within the zone of

consideration for admission. By the impugned action or the state

order that standard has not been compromised and no candidate

has been admitted to a post-graduate degree course who has not

secured the basic minimum marks of 50% which is the cut off

marks fixed by the Medical Council of India. Therefore, the state

was very conscious of not admitting any candidate who has not

secured the minimum marks fixed by the Regulations. No

candidate who has not been included in the merit list has been

sponsored by the state for admission to the post-graduate degree

course.
In this connection, Mr. Mukherjee has interpreted the words

"from the merit list" as distinct from and not carrying the same
21
meaning of the expression "in accordance with the merit list" or "as

per merit list". If the expression in
Regulation 9
had been either

any one of them the authority might not have any option to admit

any candidate other than maintaining their respective ranks in the

merit list. Then there would have been a requirement of admitting

students according to the respective merits of candidates in the

merit list. But since the Regulations permit the authority to admit

students "from the list" it leaves a wide area of discretion to the

state to admit any student who has been included in the list. Thus,

the criteria for admission to a post-graduate degree course is

inclusion of one's name in the list and not his respective rank in

the list. Once a candidate's name is included in the list he can be

chosen   for   the   post-graduate    class   without   flouting   the

Regulations.
Mr. Mukherjee submitted that since the whole purpose

behind the exercise was to promote public health and to upgrade

its standards there is a justification behind the impugned decision

of reservation and there is nothing preventing the state from taking

such a decision if a rational justification for the same exists which

in the present case is ensuring the upliftment of the standard of

medical education and public health. In this connection, Mr.
22
Mukherjee relied on the theory of permissibility of reasonable

classification which is available to the state and which in turn

provides the legal basis for the reservation. He relied on the

judgment in the case of
Pre-PG Medical Sangharsh Committee and

Another Vs. Dr. Bajrang Soni and Others
, reported in (2001) 8 SCC

694, for a proposition that in-service candidates constitute a

distinct class by themselves. The judgment further observed that

mere theoretical excellence or merit alone is not sufficient indicia

of the qualitative merit of the candidates in the field of actual

practice and application. Relying on
the said judgment
he

submitted that what the state has done is not a departure from the

merit list but it made a separate list for the state-sponsored

candidates. It is permissible for the state to fix such a source or

classification of candidates from which selection for admission to

the post-graduate colleges may be made for yet another genuine,

relevant and reasonable cause which has sufficient nexus with the

larger   goal   of   equalization   of   educational   opportunities   to

sufficiently prepare the doctors serving in various hospitals

maintained out of public funds by the government in the absence

of which there will be serious dearth of qualified post-graduate

doctors and experts.
23
A very major part of argument of Mr. Mukherjee is that as per

the Regulations all the process of admission must be completed by

May 31 of the relevant year. Therefore, with the expiry of May 31,

2019 the hearing of the writ petition out of which this appeal

arose, could not continue. Following the Regulations no student

now can be admitted to the post-graduate course.
Relying on an observation made in the case of
Modern Dental

College and Research Centre and Others
(Supra) Mr. Mukherjee

submitted that the whole gamut of medical education is not

covered by entry 66 of List I. A considerable portion has been left

untouched in respect of which the state can make legislation. In

spite of the Regulations 2000 the state is not without its power to

make legislation or to pass necessary order reserving certain seats

for in-service candidates.
ITC Ltd. Vs- Agricultural Produce Market Committee and

Others, reported in (2002) 9 SCC 232 has been relied on to show

how the dispute about the state legislation in respect of an entry in

the Union List was resolved. The Supreme Court observed that a

perusal of List-II shows that whenever a particular entry was

intended to be made subject to an entry in List I and III, it has
24
been so stated specifically. Therefore, an interpretation which

tends to have the effect of making a particular entry subject to any

other entry, though not stated in the entry, deserves to be avoided

unless that be the only possible interpretation. The Supreme Court

observed that although Parliament cannot legislate on any of the

entries in the State List it may do so incidentally while essentially

legislating within the entries under the Union List. Conversely,

state legislatures may encroach on the Union List when such an

encroachment is merely ancillary to an exercise of power

intrinsically under the State List. The fact of encroachment does

not affect the vires of the law even as regards the area of

encroachment. This doctrine of pith and substance does not

amount to an extension of the legislative fields. Such incidental

encroachment does not deprive the state legislature in the first

case or Parliament in the second, of their exclusive powers under

the entry so encroached upon.
Mr. Mukherjee relied on Association of Natural Gas and

others -vs- Union of India and Ors., reported in (2004) 4 SCC 489

where it has been held that entries in the three lists are themselves

not powers of legislation, but fields of legislation. However, an

entry in one list cannot be so interpreted as to make it cancel or
25
obliterate another entry or make another entry meaningless. The

Supreme Court observed that in case of apparent conflict it is the

duty of the court to iron out the crease and to avoid conflict by

reconciling the conflict. The Privy Council in
Prafulla Kumar

Mukherjee Vs. Bank of Commerce Limited
(AIR 1947 P.C. 60)

referred to an observation of the Federal Court in another case that

it must inevitably happen from time to time that legislation though

purporting to deal with the subject in one list touches also on a

subject in another list and the different provisions of the

enactment may be so closely intertwined that blind adherence to a

strictly verbal interpretation would result in a large number of

statutes being declared invalid because the legislature enacting

them may appear to have legislated in a forbidden sphere. Hence

the rule of pith and substance has been evolved to determine

whether it is legislation with respect to matters in this list or in

not.
In Professor Yashpal and another Vs. State of Chattisgarah

and others, reported in (2005) 5 SCC 420, a judgment relied on by

Mr. Mukherjee, the Supreme Court observed that the consistent

and the settled view of the Supreme Court was that in spite of

incorporation of universities as a legislative head being in the State
26
List the whole gamut of the University education which will include

teaching,    quality   of    education,       curriculum,    standard    of

examination, evaluation and research activity will not come within

the purview of the state legislature on account of a specific entry

on co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for

higher   education     or   research    and    scientific   and   technical

education being in the Union List for which Parliament alone is

competent.
Mr. Dhar, the learned senior counsel for the appellants in

MAT 1239 of 2019, submitted that they were added as respondents

to the writ petition before the learned single judge on an

application filed by them. They represented a large section of the

sponsored in-service doctors who are aggrieved by the impugned

judgment and order for which they have filed the appeal.
Mr. Dhar submitted that the writ petitioners were well aware

of the separate channels of entry into the Post-Graduate medical

courses and had participated in the counselling with a stipulation

that it could not be changed subsequently. Many of them were

even admitted to the Post-Graduate courses in different disciplines

which they have not disclosed in their writ petition. He has also
27
taken the point of delay in approaching the court which was done

after the first counselling had been completed. He relied on

Chandigarah Administration and Another vs.- Jasmine Kaur and

others, reported in (2014) 10 SCC 521 where the requirement for a

prompt challenge to an action has been emphasised by the

Supreme Court. It has been observed that no relief can be granted

in favour of a party who being aware of the criteria of the

prospectus does not make any challenge promptly. Relying on this

principle Mr. Dhar submitted that the conduct of the writ

petitioners disentitles them to an equitable relief which is

prejudicial to the interest of others.
On this point Mr. Dhar relied on three more judgments.
In

Om prakash
Sukla Vs. Akhilesh Kumar Sukla and Others.
, reported

in (1986) (Supp) SCC 285 the Supreme Court observed that where

the petitioner appeared at the examination without protest and

then he found that he would not succeed in the examination he

filed a writ petition challenging the said examination the High

Court should not have granted any relief to such a petitioner. In

Madan Lal and Others. Vs. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and

Others., reported in    (1995) 3 SCC 486 it has been held by the

Supreme Court that if a candidate takes a calculated chance and
28
appears at the interview only because the result of the interview

has not been palatable to him he cannot turn around and

subsequently contend that the process of interview was unfair or

the selection committee was not properly constituted. To the same

effect is the ratio in the case of Ranjan Kumar and Others. Vs.-

State of Bihar and Others. , reported in (2014) 16 SCC 187. Mr.

Dhar further relied on Union of India and Others. Vs. C. Girija and

Others, reported in (2019) SCC Online 187 where also the Supreme

Court observed that the applicant having participated in the

selection for promotion after being aware of a certain quota it was

not open for her to challenge the same after taking a chance to get

selected.
Mr. Dhar also alleged deliberate suppression of the fact of

admission of many of the writ petitioners to various post-graduate

degree courses in the writ petition. The submission is that since

they have not come in clean hands they cannot ask for an

equitable relief.
The next point of attack is the non-joinder of the in-service

sponsored candidates to the writ petition. Mr. Dhar has made a

grievance that when an application for addition to a party was
29
made the learned single judge did not allow it nor a copy of the writ

petition was served upon them. Hearing continued and no

opportunity to file an affidavit was granted to them. It was only

when the judgment was delivered that these appellants came to

know that they were made parties by an order, dated June 19,

2019. Mr. Dhar relied on the case of
Sadananda Halo and Ors. Vs.

Mamtaz Ali Sk.
, reported in (2008) 4 SCC 619 where a few selected

candidates approached the High court, but they were not even

supplied with pleadings or the copies of the petitions in time. The

Supreme Court observed that this amounted to denial of

appropriate opportunity to the selected candidates.
In the case of
Poonam Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others.
, reported in (2016) 2

SCC 779 the Supreme court emphasised the requirement of

impleading the successful candidates as parties to the proceeding.
Mr. Dhar criticised the observations of the learned Single

Judge that the writ petitioners had approached the court

immediately after participating in the first counselling as factually

incorrect. He has submitted that from the course of events and

from the conduct of the writ petitioners it can never be said that

they had immediately after detection of reservation for the in-

service candidates had approached the court. The writ petitioners
30
knew that they were eligible to participate in the process of

selection in 414 seats as against 699 open category seats which

was in addition to the entire all India pool of 12,000 seats. The

petitioners want to improve their disciplines than where they have

been admitted. In case the order impugned is not interfered with,

the appellants in MAT 1239 of 2019 would lose their entire

admission which is an academic year.
The Regulations, 2000 contain specific stipulations in
Regulation 9(10)
and
9(11)
fixing the cut off date for admission to

the post-graduate courses on May 31 and provides for penal

consequences for admitting students in contravention of the

criteria or procedure of the Regulations or in violation of the

judgements passed by the Supreme Court in respect of the

admissions. Mr. Dhar submits that the time schedule so fixed

must be strictly adhered to. In this connection he has relied on

Education Promotion Society for
India and Another vs. Union of India

and Others.
, reported in (2019) 7 SCC 38 where the Supreme Court

observed that there are three rounds of counselling the last of

which is to be completed by May 31, 2019 and if some seats

remained vacant even after the mop-up round it could not be
31
helped. Extension could not be granted just because some seats

were lying vacant without there being any other justification.
Mr. Dhar justified the concept of reservation with reference to

the judgment in the case of Union of India and Others. Vs. Satya

Prakash and Others., reported in (2006) 4 SCC 550. According to

him even if the word "reservation" has been used in this case, what

the state has really done is to earmark certain seats or opening a

separate channel for the in-service doctors at the cost of not being

able to participate either in the all India pool or the open category

seats of the state quota. In spite of there being two separate

channels it is not a reservation in the sense the word is understood

in case of reservation for SC, ST and OBC candidates.
The learned Advocate General appearing for the state

appellants in MAT 1245 of 2019 has also assailed the impugned

judgment and order on various grounds. He submitted that the

schedule for admission to medical courses fixed by the Supreme

Court cannot be extended by the High Court. The learned single

Judge, therefore, has given liberty to the parties to seek extension

of time for getting admission including counselling directly from

the Supreme Court, if so advised. From this, the learned Advocate
32
General submitted, it is clear that the learned single judge was

conscious that she had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ

petition. Relying on the case of Hiralal Patni Vs. Sri Kalinath,

reported in AIR 1962 SC 199, he submitted that the competence of

a court to try a case goes to the very root of the jurisdiction and

where it is lacking it is a case of lack of inherent jurisdiction.
The learned Advocate General further relied on the case of

Official Trustee, West Bengal and Others Vs. Sachindranath

Chatterjee and Others, reported in AIR 1963 SC 883 for

ascertaining the true meaning of the word 'jurisdiction'. The

Supreme Court approvingly quoted a full-bench judgment of the

Calcutta High Court where it has been observed that jurisdiction

means: a) the power to hear, determine and pronounce judgment

on the issues before the court, b) the authority which is conferred

upon a court by the legislature to hear and determine causes

between the parties and to carry the judgments into effect, and c)

the power to enquire into the facts to apply the law to pronounce

the judgment and to carry it into execution. The judgment further

recorded that a judgment pronounced by a court without

jurisdiction is void, subject to the well-known exception that when

the jurisdiction of a court is challenged the court is competent to
33
determine the question of jurisdiction though the result of the

enquiry may be that it has no jurisdiction to deal with the matter

brought before it.
Based on these two judgments, the learned Advocate General

submitted that unless the court has power to execute its order it

lacks jurisdiction in entertaining and deciding a lis and in the

absence of jurisdiction, judgments passed are rendered void.
As taken in the affidavit-in-opposition filed by the state

respondents to the writ petition, the learned Advocate General also

submitted that the case of the petitioners is based on a Memo,

dated April 18, 2013 which has not been challenged in the writ

petition. Relying on the judgment in the case of
Uma Sankar Das

Vs. State of West Bengal
, reported in 1974 Lab.I.C. 514, he

submitted that a document, even if a nullity, has to be challenged

in a proceeding.
The action taken by the state in preparing two merit lists is

the consequence of the memo, dated April 18, 2013. The writ

petitioners have challenged the consequential orders but not the

basic order from which the consequences follow. This is not
34
permissible as this is a corollary to
Section 34
of the Specific Relief

Act. The judgment in the case of
Amarjeet Singh and Others Vs.

Debi Ratan and Others
, reported in (2010) 1 SCC 417 was relied on

before the learned single Judge for a proposition that challenging

the consequential order without challenging the basic order is not

permissible. The learned Advocate General made a grievance the

learned single Judge did not decide the issue while allowing the

writ petition.
The learned Advocate General has emphasized that the

Memo, dated April 18, 2013 has recorded that reservation has

remained in place.
Regulation 9(4)
categorically provides for

reservation for respective categories which shall be as per the

applicable laws prevailing in the state or union territories.

Therefore, it recognizes and saves reservations which were in force

on the date of coming into effect of the Regulations. Reservation for

the in-service candidates falls in the category of horizontal

reservation which has been recognized by
Regulation 9(4)
.

According to the learned Advocate General the contention that

reservation for in-service candidates would result in compromising

on the merits is negated by
Regulation 9(7)
itself. That apart, the
35
select list of the candidates sponsored by the state is based on the

merits of the reserved category candidates also.
The learned Advocate General has also criticized the

impugned judgment as not one within the meaning of
Section 2(9)
read with Order 20 Rule 4(2)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
. He

alleges that the judgment does not contain any reason in support

of the conclusions reached by the learned single Judge.
The learned Advocate General also relied on the case of

Education Promotion Society for
India and Another Vs. Union of

India and Others
, reported in (2019) 7 SCC 38, to which reference

has already been made while recording the submissions of Mr.

Dhar. In that case the Supreme Court observed that if extension is

granted the same would lead to opening a Pandora's Box and the

whole purpose for fixing a time schedule would be defeated.
The learned Advocate General also relied on the case of
Prof.

Yashpal Vs. Chhattisgarh
, reported in (2005) 5 SCC 420, where the

words "subject to" as occurring in entry 25 of List III has been

interpreted to mean the excluded matters. The persistent stand of
36
the state is that neither the Act nor the Regulations debars it from

making any reservation for the in-service candidates.
Mr. Roy, the learned Advocate appearing for the Medical

Council of India, submitted that
Regulation 9
of the Regulations is

a complete code by itself and has to be read as a whole. Relying on
Sudhir N. Vs. State of Kerala
, reported in (2015) 6 SCC 685, he

submitted that the admission process must strictly adhere to the

norms stipulated therein. The state has no authority in the matter

of determining the method of admission where the central

legislation and Regulations must prevail. Reservation mentioned in
Regulation 9(4)
should be as per the Constitutional scheme for the

SC/ST and OBC candidates and not for the in-service candidates.

Responding to the submission of Mr. Mukherjee he has submitted

that the word "from the merit list" occurring in
Regulation 9(4)
should be interpreted as "as per the merit list". However, his

specific stand is that all admissions must be completed by May 31

of the concerned year and, therefore, no admission may be made

beyond that date.
A further limb of Mr. Roy's submission is that except the writ

petitioners no other open category candidates are before the court.
37
Interference with the state action may have the effect of setting

aside admission of the open category candidates also. Mr. Roy was

willing to admit that the hospitals run by the state are covered by

Entry 6 of List II of the 7th Schedule, but medical education is not.

There is no provision in the Act regarding reservation of seats for

the members of the State Health Service to post-graduate medical

courses. He has gone that far to submit that the Trainee Reserve

Rules in so far as they relate to reservation is ultra vires the Act.
Regulation 9
does not put any embargo upon the service

doctors to compete for all India quota. The restriction has been put

by the state government in the service condition of the in-service

doctors. However, Mr. Roy submits that in case any fresh

admission is to be ordered by the court, the students may not be

able to maintain their requirement of mandatory attendance as

classes have long started.
The University has also filed an appeal being MAT No. 1267

of 2019. The stand and submission of Mr. Roy, the learned

Advocate for the University, is almost the same as that of the state

appellants. He has also mentioned that the reservation policy

which has been continuing since the inception of the University,
38
has not been challenged by the writ petitioners. However, he

submits that about 140 seats are still lying vacant which the

University could not fill up within the cut-off date i.e. May 31,

2019. He, however, would like to absolve the University of any fault

as the state's specific reservation policy for the in-service doctors

has been followed by it for allotment of state quota seats.
With reference to the impugned judgment and order, Mr. Roy

has disclosed the real reasons for filing the appeal by the

University. He submits that it is impossible for them to prepare

and publish a common merit list without the assistance of the

state authorities as the University does not have any access to the

service record of the in-service candidates nor does it have the list

of rural and difficult areas. The Registrar-in-Charge of the

University by a communication, dated August 27, 2019 requested

the Director of Health Service to supply the incentive marks to be

provided to the in-service candidates, but it has not been replied

to. In the absence of the particulars of the incentive marks to be

provided, it became practically impossible for the University to

carry out or comply with the court's order. He relied on a judgment

in the case of
Rajan Purohit and Others Vs. Rajasthan University of

Health Science and Others
, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 770 and
39
submitted that the students cannot be blamed for the irregular

admissions made by the colleges. In that case, the Supreme Court

allowed the admitted students to continue the MBBS course in

exercise of the power under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India.
Mr. Roy's further submission is that in case the impugned

judgment is not set aside, the candidates who have already taken

admission during counselling, should not be disturbed or affected.

Since the classes have already started, the requisite attendance in

terms of the MCI norms cannot be maintained. Any direction for

fresh counselling would amount to travelling beyond the schedule

provided for counselling in the Regulations since the schedule for

the next year's examination has already been issued. If the

counselling is conducted afresh and the classes commence, it

would be very difficult for the colleges to conduct the classes for

two parallel sessions.
Being aggrieved by the direction of the learned single Judge

upon the parties to seek extension of time from the Supreme

Court, if so advised, the writ petitioners have also filed an appeal

being MAT 1333 of 2019. But for this direction, they have defended
40
the judgment of the learned single Judge in all the appeals filed by

various authorities and persons.
We have extensively heard the learned Advocates for the

respective parties in all these appeals. The bone of contention in all

of them appears to be whether the state can pass an order

reserving seats for the in-service doctors in derogation of the

Regulations. The writ petitioners claimed that the procedure for

selection of candidates for the post-graduate courses have been

contained in
Regulation 9
of the Regulations. A very detailed

procedure step by step and stage by stage has been provided in
Regulation 9
. According to them, an order of reservation flouts
Regulation 9(4)
which inter alia provides for reservation of seats in

medical colleges/institutions for respective categories as per the

applicable laws prevailing in states/union territories. An all India

merit list as well as a state-wise merit list of the eligible candidates

shall have to be prepared on the basis of the marks obtained in the

NEET and the candidates shall be admitted to the post-graduate

courses from the said merit lists only.
Regulation 9(4)
has a proviso which says that in determining

the   merit    of   the   candidates      who   are   in   service    of
41
government/public authority weightage in the marks will be given

by the government/competent authority as an incentive upto 10%

of the marks obtained for each year of service in remote and/or

difficult areas or rural areas upto maximum of 30% of the marks

obtained in the NEET. The remote and/or difficult areas or rural

areas shall be as notified by the state government/competent

authority from time to time.
Based on this provision the writ petitioners have argued that

admission to post-graduate courses shall be only from the all India

merit list or the state-wise merit list. There is no scope for

admitting any candidate to the post-graduate degree course

through any method or any channel other than that mentioned in
Regulation 9(4)
and the state government by reserving 40% of the

seats of the state quota from the in-service candidates has not only

violated the mandatory requirement of
Regulation 9(4)
but also

acted arbitrarily and in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution of

India.
We have already noted how Mr. Mukherjee sought to justify

the impugned state decision of reservation for the in-service
42
candidates. He finds a laudable purpose behind the decision, i.e.

uplifting the standard of the post-graduate medical qualification.
Such submission in all fitness of things could have been

made by the state appellants who were in the best situation to

apprise the court why the order for reservation had been issued by

them. A group of sponsored candidates who have been admitted to

the post graduate courses availing themselves of the reservation,

were not supposed to be in the know of the reasons and purpose

behind the policy of reservation.
We had directed the state to produce the records in

connection with the Memo, dated April 18, 2013 reserving 40% of

the state quota seats for the in-service doctors. It appears from the

records, as produced before us, that the Controller of the

Examinations of the University had asked the Joint Secretary,

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to pass an order of

reservation so that the booklet for the ensuing examination for that

year could contain the relevant provision for reservation. In

response to the same, some officials of the state in a note

expressed the requirement of a reservation for the in-service

candidates for admission to the post-graduate courses. The reason
43
mentioned in the said note was the dearth of qualified post-

graduate doctors in the state hospitals. Thus, upliftment of

standards as the raison d'etre for issuing an order of reservation

does neither appear from the order itself nor from the records

leading to the order providing for reservation.
That apart, Mr. Mukherjee himself having admitted that but

for this reservation most of the in-service doctors might not have

found a berth in the post-graduate courses as they had secured

lower ranks in the merit list, it cannot be argued that by making

provisions for admission for those candidates the state was really

trying to upgrade the standard of post-graduate medical education.

It is not understood how by taking candidates securing lower

marks the standard of education could either be maintained or

uplifted. If merit is the first criteria for judging the suitability of a

candidate for a higher medical degree, by admitting students of

lower ranks standard could not be expected to ungraded. In fact, it

is bound to lead to just the reserve end.
Mr. Mukherjee tried to justify the authority of the state to

make provision for the in-service doctors with reference to Entry

25 of List III and Entry 6 of List II of the 7th Schedule of the
44
Constitution of India. Entry 25 of List III deals with the subjects of

education, including technical education, medical education and

universities subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66

of List I, vocational and technical training of labour. What is to be

noted is that Entry 25 does not mention "co-ordination and

determination    of   standards"    which    have   been   specifically

mentioned in Entry 66 of List I and the laws to be made under

Entry 25 are subject to the provisions of Entry 66 of that List. It is

a settled principle of law, as mentioned in
Osmania University

Teachers' Association Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Another
,

reported in AIR 1987 SC 2034 that any Act made by the state

legislature under Entry 25 of List III shall be invalid if parliament

has passed a law on the same subject in exercise of the powers

conferred by the Entry 63 to 66 of List I.



     There cannot be any doubt that the
MCI Act
was passed in

exercise of the powers conferred under Entry 66 of List I. For

laying down the standard of education in institutions mentioned in

Entry 66 of List I parliament has the exclusive authority to make

laws. State does not have any authority to decide or determine the

standard of education in such institutions, particularly, once

parliament has made a legislation in the specific field.
In
Gujarat
45
University and Another Vs. Shri Krishna Ranganath Mudholkar and

Others
, reported in AIR 1963 SC 703, the Supreme Court observed

that items 63 to 66 of List I are carved out of the subject of

education and in respect of these items the powers to legislate is

vested exclusively in parliament.
Use of the expression "subject to"
clearly indicates that legislation in respect of excluded matters

cannot be undertaken by the state legislatures. If a subject of

legislation is covered by items 63 to 66 even if it falls within the

larger field of education including Universities, power to legislate

on that subject must lie with parliament.
In
Ajay Kumar Vs. State

of Bihar
, reported in (1994) 4 SCC 401, it has been reiterated by

Supreme Court that by virtue of entry 66 of the List I which

overrides entry 25 of List III the states are denuded of all and every

power to determine and co-ordinate the standards of higher

education which must necessarily take in regulating admission to

these courses.
Thus, the repeated emphasis that the state action of

reservation is aimed at improving the standard of medical

education, apart from being not borne by the records, is clearly

beyond the competence of the state legislature. Again in
Preeti

Srivastava Vs. State of M.P
, reported in (1999) 7 SCC 120, the
46
Supreme Court observed that the state cannot make rules of

regulations under this entry in conflict with the rules and

regulations made under entry 66 of List I.



     Since entry 6 of List II inter alia mentions hospitals and

public health, Mr. Mukherjee made elaborate submission that that

entry confers right upon the state to take appropriate measures for

uplifting the standard of medical education. One thing, however,

cannot but be noted that Entry 6 of List II does not deal with the

medical education, far less standard of such education. The fields

of making laws covered by this entry are public health and

sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.
The field of legislation covered under Entry 6 of List II has

nothing to do with and is completely different from medical

education.   Hospitals   and   public     health   are   very   different

conceptually and factually from medical education or maintenance

of its standards. By the exercise of the power to make laws for

hospitals or public health or sanitation or dispensaries a state is

plainly not competent to make laws for "co-ordination and

determination of standards" of medical education. Running

hospitals and setting standard for medical education are two
47
different exercises. Equally it is difficult to accept that public

health is equal to the health of the public. Public health has a very

definite connotation signifying something very different from what

the word 'health' conjures up. In any case, none of the items

mentioned in Entry 6 of List II covers medical education in any

way.
It appears and such is the grievance of all appellants, except

the writ petitioners, that the learned single Judge has passed the

order impugned largely relying on the judgment in the case of
State

of Uttar Pradesh and Others Vs. Dinesh Singh Chouhan (Supra
). In

that case a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court has inter alia

held that
Regulation 9
recognizes the principle of giving weightage

to in-service candidates while determining their merits. That is a

rational    legitimate    basis   to    encourage     the    medical

graduates/doctors to offer their service and expertise in remote or

difficult areas of the state for some time. However, the Supreme

Court specifically observed that
Regulation 9
of the Regulations

does not permit preparation of two merit lists. It prescribes the

basis for determining the eligibilities of the candidates including

the method to be adopted for determining the inter se merit on the

basis of one merit list of the candidate appearing in the same
48
NEET including by giving commensurate weightage of marks to the

in-service candidates. Proviso to
Regulation 9(4)
prescribes the

measure for giving incentive marks to in-service candidates who

have worked in notified remote and difficult areas in that state.

The Supreme Court described this as a qualitative factor for

determining their merits.
The Supreme Court observed that it is well-settled that
Regulation 9
is a self-contained code regarding the procedure to be

followed for admission to the medical courses. It is also well-

established that the state has no authority to enact any law, much

less by executive instructions, that may undermine the procedure

for admission to post graduate medical courses enunciated by the

central legislation and Regulations framed thereunder being a

subject falling within Entry 66 of List 1 of the 7th Schedule of the

Constitution of India. The procedure for selection of candidates for

the post graduate degree courses is one such area on which the

Central Legislation and Regulation must prevail. It has been

observed that
Regulation 9
is a composite provision prescribing

procedure for selection of candidates for both the post-graduate

degree and diploma courses. Interpreting
Regulation 9(4)
the

Supreme Court observed that it is a provision mandating
49
admission of candidates strictly as per the merit list of eligible

candidates for the respective medical courses in the state. The

proviso to
Regulation 9(4)
provides for an incentive at the rate of

10% of marks for each year of service in specified remote or

difficult area of the state upto the maximum of 30% of the marks

obtained in NEET. It is amply clear that it does not envisage

reservation for in-service candidates in respect of the post-

graduate degree courses.
It has been specifically held in the abovementioned case that

the central enactment and the Regulations framed thereunder do

not provide for reservation for in-service candidates in respect of

post-graduate degree courses. Negating the contention that as

there was no express provision prohibiting reservation to in-service

candidates in respect of admission to post-graduate degree courses

such reservation by the state government is not impermissible in

law the Supreme Court held that the argument did not commend

to Their Lordships. There is nothing in these Regulations to even

remotely indicate that a separate channel for admission to in-

service candidates must be provided at least in respect of post

graduate degree courses. The Supreme Court draws the distinction

between the degree and diploma courses. For diploma courses 50%
50
of the seats are earmarked for in-service candidates. If the

Regulation intended a similar separate channel for in-service

candidates even for the post-graduate degree courses that position

would have been made clear in
Regulation 9
itself. In the absence

thereof it must be presumed that a separate channel for in-service

candidates is not permissible for admission to post-graduate

degree courses. The state government has no authority to issue a

government order to the contrary.
There has been a persistent effort by the learned advocates

for all the appellants, except Mr. Mitra, the learned Senior counsel

for   the   writ   petitioners/   appellants,   to   establish   that   the

observations and findings in
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(supra) cannot be said to have reached any finality as this

judgment has been referred to the larger bench for not considering

the earlier larger bench judgments. Since this reference is pending,

it has been submitted, this court may not treat the observations

made in
the said judgment
as binding.
Mr. Mukherjee heavily relied on the judgment in the case of

Kumari Chitra Ghosh and Anr. -vs.- Union of India and Ors.,

reported in (1969) 2 SCC 228. The Supreme Court observed that in
51
order to pass the test of permissible classification two conditions

must be fulfilled; viz. classification is founded on intelligible

differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped

together from others left out of the group; and that the differentia

must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.

The Supreme Court further observed that the government cannot

be denied the right to decide from what sources the admission will

be made. That essentially is a question of policy and depends inter

alia on and overall assessment and survey of the requirements of

residence of particular territories and other category of persons for

whom it is essential to provide facilities for medical education. If

the sources are properly classified it is not for the courts to

interfere with the matter and the method of making the

classification. The main purpose of admission to a medical collage

is to impart education in the theory and practice of medicine. The

sources from which students have to be drawn are primarily

determined by the authorities who maintain and run the

institution. Since the whole object of the selection for admission is

to secure the best possible material it can be achieved by making

proper rules relating to the matter of selection. With reference to

the facts of that particular case, the Supreme Court has further
52
held that the appellants did not have any right to challenge the

nominations made by the central government. They did not

compete for the reserved seats and had no locus standi in the

matter of nomination of such seats.
Mr. Mukherjee further relied on the judgment in the case of

Modern Dental college and Research centre and Ors. -vs.- State of

Madhya Pradesh and Ors., reported in (2016) 7 SCC 353.               The

Supreme Court has held that Entry 66 in List I is a specific Entry

having a very specific and limited scope. It deals with the co-

ordination and determination of standards in institutions of higher

education   or   research   as   well   as   scientific   and   technical

Institutions. Thus, when it comes to prescribing the standards for

such institutions for higher learning exclusive domain is given to

the Union. However, that did not include the conduct of

examination, or prescribing fee etc. In fact, such co-ordination and

determination of standards, so far as the medical education is

concerned, is achieved by Parliament by legislating in the form of
Medical Council of India Act
and by creating the statutory body

like Medical Council of India. The functions that are assigned to

Council include within its sweep determination of standard in a

medical institution as well as co-ordination of standards and that
53
of the educational institutions. When it comes to regulating

"education" which includes even medical education as well as

universities that is prescribed in List-III Entry 25 which gives

concurrent powers to both Union of India as well as the states.

When two entries relating to education co-exist they have to be

read harmoniously. It would become manifest that when it comes

to co-ordination and laying down of standards of higher education

or research and scientific and technical Institution power rests

with the Union of India to the exclusion of the state legislatures. In

respect of other facets of education the state legislatures are given

power by virtue of entry 25 of List III. The field covered by List-III,

entry 25 is wide enough and is circumscribed to the limited extent

of its being subject to entries 63,64,65 and 66 of List-I.



     The Supreme Court in that judgment specifically mentioned

why adoption and setting up of minimum standard of education

was left to Parliament. The objective of prescribing minimum

standards is to provide a bench mark of the calibre and quality of

education as being imparted by various educational institutions in

the whole country. Relating the vast diversity of the nation where

levels of education fluctuated from lack of even basic primary

education to institutions of high excellence it was thought
54
desirable to determine and prescribe the basic minimum standard

of education at various levels particularly at the level of research

institutions, higher education and technical education institutions.

As such while balancing the needs of the state to impart education

as per the needs and requirements of local and regional levels it

was essential to lay down a uniform minimum standard for the

nation. That is why the Constitution-makers provided for List-I

entry 66 with the objective of maintaining uniform standards of

education in fields of research, higher education and technical

education.
Relying on this judgment Mr. Mukherjee argued that no

doubt List-III Entry 25 is subject to List I Entry 66 but it is not

possible to exclude the entire gamut of admissions from List III

entry 25 which, however, is subject to the central law referable to

Entry 25.
Mr. Mukherjee particularly relied on the portion of the

judgment delivered by Hon'ble Justice R. Bhanumati. It has been

observed by the Hon'ble Judge that entries 65 and 66 of List-I,

giving the Union of India the power to ensure that standards of

research etc. are not lowered at the hands of the particular state or
55
states to the extent of national progress, the power of the state

legislature must be so exercised as not to directly encroach upon

the power of the Union of India under entry 66 of List-I.



     The Hon'ble Judge has further given the legislative history of

entry 66 of List I. A part of the constituent assembly debate in this

connection has been referred to in the judgment. The Hon'ble

Judge observed that while introducing List-I entry 66 Dr. B.R.

Ambedkar proposed nothing more than empowering the Union of

India to set mere standard for higher education and to co-ordinate

between the institutions. He clarified the limited scope of entry 66

of List-I (as in the present form) with reference to the disparities in

standard in certain clases of institutions in the matter of imparting

higher   education.     Since    various   universities   fixed   different

yardsticks for passing an examination it would be quite a chaotic

condition   and    in     such     circumstances     prescribing     mere

qualification with varied standards would be meaningless.
After recording the concern of the constitution-makers while

introducing entry 66 of List-I, the Hon'ble Judge observed that in

the federal structure of India it is for the Union to co-ordinate

between the states to cause them to work in the field of higher
56
education in their respective states. Entry 25 of List III is available

both to the centre and states. But the power of the state is subject

to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List-I. While the

state is competent to legislate on the education including medical

education it would be as per the standards set by the Union of

India.
The Hon'ble Judge specifically observed that the scope of

Entry 66 of List I must be construed as limited to the actual sense

of "determining the standards of higher education" and not laying

down the admission process. The state is not denuded of its power

to legislate in respect of a matter pertaining to the admission

process in universities imparting higher education.
Reliance by the learned single Judge in the impugned

judgment on
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) has been

criticized by the learned Advocate General, Mr. Mukherjee and Mr.

Dhar. According to the learned Advocate General
,
the said

judgment
is inapplicable to the facts of the present case as in
the

said decision
there has been no adjudication as to the rights of the

open category candidates vis-à-vis in-service candidates arising out

of reservation for in-service candidates. He also wants to
57
distinguish that decision from the facts of the present one with

reference to the date of the government order. In the case of the

reported decision, the government orders under challenge were

issued after the Regulation came into effect whereas reservation in

the   present   case     was   before   the   Regulations   had   been

promulgated. That apart, the specific government orders were

challenged in the reported decision but here the writ petitioners

have not thrown any challenge to the order, dated April 18, 2013.
The learned Advocate General further submitted that in
State

of Uttar Pradesh and Others
, (Supra) an interim order was passed

on May 12, 2016 directing the State Government to revise and

redraw the merit list and grant admission to the suitable

candidates. At the final hearing the State of Uttar Pradesh wanted

to come out of the concession which the Supreme Court did not

approve and in view of that factual position the Supreme Court

rendered its decision.
Mr. Dutta wants to distinguish the case of
State of Uttar

Pradesh and Others
(Supra) on the ground that the question before

the Supreme Court was very different from the one involved in the

present one. The question to be decided by the Supreme Court was
58
whether the in-service candidates without rural service could be

equated with in-service candidates having rendered rural service.

But in the present case, there is no issue of comparison of the two

categories of in-service candidates.
It is true that the decision in the case of
State of Uttar

Pradesh and Others
(Supra) has been referred to a larger bench.

This, however, does not mean that the judgment has lost all its

force or the ratio decided therein is no longer binding by reason of

its being referred to larger bench. It has not lost its force as a

precedent. A judgment remains valid and binding till it is reversed

or superseded by a larger bench judgment. Mr. Mukherjee

submitted that the judgment now binds the parties only and not

others. Reference to a larger bench does not rob a judgment of its

precedential value.
That apart, while considering the interlocutory application

after the reference a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court in
Tamil Nadu Medical Officers' Association and Others Vs. Union of

India and Others
, reported in 2018 SCC OnLine SC 432, after

considering the various judgments including Modern Dental College

and Research Centre (Supra) observed that
State of Uttar Pradesh
59
and Others
(Supra) has construed the amended provisions of
Regulation 9
which has been held to be a self-contained code

regarding the procedure to be followed for admissions to medical

courses.
The full-bench of the Supreme Court recorded the finding

in the case of
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) that the

state has no authority to enact any law, much less any executive

instruction, that may undermine the procedure for admission to

post     graduate   medical   courses   enunciated   by   the   central

legislation and Regulations framed thereunder being a subject

falling within Schedule 7, List I Entry 66 of the Constitution of

India.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed that the view

taken in
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) is consistent

with the principles reaffirmed by the Constitution Bench in Modern

Dental College and Research Centre (Supra). The fundamental basis

of the decision is in accord with the principles laid down by the

Constitution Bench.
About the interpretation put upon
Regulation 9(4)
the State

of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) held that the reservations

referred to in the opening sentence are obviously constitutional
60
reservations for the Scheduled Casts and Scheduled Tribes and the

socially and educationally backward classes of citizens and not

those for in-service candidates. Proviso to
Regulation 9(4)
does not

contemplate a reservation for them in post-graduate courses; but

provides for grant of incentive marks.
After elaborately quoting

from the judgment in the case of
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) and after noting that in arriving at the conclusion the court

had taken due note of the decisions of the Constitution Bench in

various cases, the full bench of the Supreme Court observed:
".....the decision in Denish Singh Chouhan

             holds the field. It is based on a construction of
Regulation 9(iv)
which, at least at the present stage,

             cannot be brushed aside. The principle which has

             been adopted in that decision is consistent with the

             primacy which is attributed by the Constitution to

             Entry 66 of List I........... The grant of any interim

             relief at this stage would amount to a mandatory final

             order which cannot be countenanced. MCI has, as an

             expert body, proceeded on a principled basis. Any

             attempt at this stage to read into
Regulation 9(iv)
, a

             separate source of entry or a reservation for in-service
61
candidates in degree courses would impinge upon

              Entry 66 of List I and the exercise of regulatory

              powers under the central statutes."
Mr. Dhar tried to avoid the effect of that order by reason of its

being an interim in nature and not a final decision. He relied on a

judgment in the case of
State of Assam Vs. Barak Upatyaka DU

Karmachari Sanstha
, reported in (2009) 5 SCC 694, for a

proposition that an interim order which does not finally and

conclusively decide an issue cannot be a precedent. Any reasons

assigned in support of such non-final interim order containing

prima facie findings are only tentative. The judgment further

observes that any interim directions issued on the basis of such

prima facie findings are temporary arrangements to preserve the

status quo till the matter is finally decided, to ensure that the

matter does not become either infructuous or a fait accompli before

the final hearing.
This judgment hardly applies to the order of the full bench in
Tamil Nadu Medical Officers' Association and Others
(Supra).
While
62
considering the nature of interim order the Supreme Court in the
State of Assam
(Supra) observed that the interim directions

involved an extraordinary situation of human rights violation

resulting in starvation deaths and suicide by reason of non-

payment of salaries to the employees of a large number of public

sector undertakings for special years.
The interim orders were passed in
State of Assam
(Supra) to

make an interim arrangement to save the matter from being

infructuous. In the present case it cannot be said that the purpose

of the order passed by the full bench on interlocutory application

was to make a temporary arrangement. It is not a case that the

court had allowed in-service doctors to be admitted to post

graduate medical courses purely on a temporary basis by way of

an interim arrangement. On the contrary, a separate source of

entry or reservation for the in-service candidates had been

specifically denied by the Supreme Court even by way of an interim

relief    or   an    interim   arrangement.
After   such   elaborate

observations,       even   though   passed    in    connection    with   an

interlocutory application, the reasoning given by the full bench of

the Supreme Court for not granting any interim relief cannot only

be not ignored but has to be taken to be the view expressed by the
63
full bench of the Supreme Court till the reference is a finally

disposed of.
A persistent point has been taken by the appellants, except

the writ petitioners/appellants in MAT 1333 of 2019, that the writ

petition should not have been entertained by the learned single

Judge on the ground of delay, acquiescence and suppression of

material facts. The first counselling had taken place at end-March

2019 and the petitioners had filed the writ petition on April 23,

2019. Thus, there has been some delay in seeking the relief after

the first counselling had taken place.
We have considered the submission and do not find much

merit in it. Mr. Mitra has drawn our attention to the representation

made by the writ petitioners to the Director of Medical Education

as early as on March 5, 2019 raising their protest to the policy of

reservation for the in-service candidates. The petitioners drew his

attention to
Regulation 9(4)
which specifically mentions that

reservation of seats in medical colleges/institutions for respective

categories shall be as per the applicable laws prevailing in the

states and the union territories. Requirement of complying with the
Regulation 9(4)
was variously emphasized in the representation.
64
The petitioners categorically mentioned that apart from awarding

incentive marks to eligible in-service candidates no other source of

entry by way of an en bloc reservation was permissible which had

the effect of violating the Regulations 2000. Even the judgment in

the case of
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) and
Tamil

Nadu Medical Officers' Association and Others
(Supra) were referred

to. The writ petitioners requested the Director of Medical Education

to conduct the counselling process strictly in compliance with the

legal standards set forth in the Regulations and interpreted by the

Supreme Court so as to benefit all sections of candidates in an

objective and impartial way.
Since this letter was not replied, the writ petitioners

addressed another letter to the Director of Medical Education on

April 16, 2019 ventilating their grievances and requested him to

take appropriate action.
Thus, when the petitioners approached the authorities long

before the first counselling it was only expected that the Director of

Medical   Education   being    the     highest   authority   in   medical

education in the state would look into the matter or at least inform

the petitioners of the stand of the government. Despite being made
65
aware of the various judgments of the Supreme Court laying down

impermissibility of introducing a separate source of entry into the

post graduate degree courses the state respondents remained

unmoved and proceeded steadfast. If they had taken any positive

action perhaps the entire exercise might not be necessary. The

letter, dated March 5, 2019 was specific and unambiguous about

what the petitioners were asking the respondents to do. After this,

the respondents cannot really come and allege of any delayed

action on the part of the writ petitioners in espousing their right.
It is true that the petitioners had appeared at the first round

of counselling. That, however, does not operate as an estoppel

against them or disentitles them from challenging the reservation

for the in-service candidates and its consequences.
As a matter of fact, the petitioners had hardly any option left

than to participate in the first counselling as the first letter, written

sufficiently ahead of the first counselling, went un-responded. If

they had not participated in the first counselling their entire career

might have been jeopardized. Silence from the Director of Medical

Education or the state respondents left them without any

alternative and compelled them to participate in the counselling
66
process. But the participation was not a meek acceptance of the

reservation made by the state respondents. Their participation was

definitely with and under protest. The stand of the writ petitioners

was made loud and clear to the respondents as early as on March

5, 2019. If a candidate in an examination process appears either

without prejudice or under protest relief to him cannot be denied

either on the ground of acquiescence or estoppel. That apart, we

are of the considered view that when the constitutionality of a

provision or an order is under challenge the respondents should

not raise the issue of delay unless it affects the merits of the case.
Mr. Mitra made a grievance that far from sleeping over their

rights the writ petitioners observed that the state had suddenly

started expediting the process. On the very next date after the

second counselling two separate lists were published and such

publication was the immediate cause of action for approaching the

Court.
Mr. Mitra submitted, and we find sufficient substance in it,

that
Regulation 9(4)
does not permit a separate channel of entry

into post graduate medical degree courses. A plain reading of it

makes it clear that candidates to post graduate degree courses are
67
to be admitted from either of the two merit lists viz. an all India

merit list or the state-wise merit list. There is no provision for

publishing a third merit list based on reservation for the in-service

candidates. That being so, the order making provision for

reservation of 40% of the seats for in-service candidates is contrary

to the Regulation. This has been amply clarified by the Supreme

Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) that the state

has no authority to enact any law that may undermine the

procedure for admission enunciated by the central legislation and

the Regulations framed thereunder. Analyzing various sub-

Regulations of
Regulation 9
, the Supreme Court observed that the

reservation referred to in the opening part of
Regulation 9(4)
is

obviously with reference to reservation as per the Constitutional

scheme for the SC/ST and OBC candidates and not for the in-

service candidates or medical officers in service.
This completely answers the issue sought to be raised by the

learned Advocate General that the first sentence of
Regulation 9(4)
enables the state to provide for reservation for the in-service

doctors. The effort to distinguish
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra) from the facts of the present one on the ground that the

reservation
in that case
was post-Regulations 2000 and in the
68
present case it has been continuing from before has hardly any

material bearing. It is practically a distinction without a difference.

Even if any reservation has been continuing from before the same

had no force of law to continue after promulgation of
Regulation 9
.

Any reservation or devising a method of admission or channel of

entry contrary to
Regulation 9
, irrespective of whether it was

continuing from before or introduced after the Regulations, is bad

in law to the extent it violates the mandatory and non-relaxable

provision of
Regulation 9
. The fact that the reservation was first

introduced in the year 1999, as submitted both by Mr. Mukherjee

and learned Advocate General, did not confer on it either any

elevated status or made it outside the purview of the Regulations

2000. As a matter of fact, if the stands of the respondents to the

writ petition are correct that the practice of reservation has been

continuing from before the promulgation of the Regulations, the

same was required to be considered to have been impliedly set

aside by the Regulations 2000.
That takes us to the consideration of why at all the state

continued with the reservation for in-service candidates even after

the
Regulation 9
was promulgated. A far more pertinent query in

this connection is why at all the state did not strike down on its
69
own the provision for reservation after the pronouncement of
State

of Uttar Pradesh and Others
(Supra).
The answer given by the

learned Advocate General that the state continued with it as
Regulation 9(4)
contained provision for making reservation is

hardly   a   satisfactory   reply,   particularly,   after   the   specific

clarification made by the Supreme Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh

and Others
(Supra) that the reservation stipulated in
Regulation

9(4)
is restricted only two constitutional reservations and is not

meant for the in-service doctors.
Mr. Mukherjee relied on the Note after Rule 3 of the Rules of

2015 referred to earlier. The Note says that the number of seats

available for the different courses run by the University and other

Universities within the state for the officers of the West Bengal

Health Service, West Bengal Medical Education Service and the

West Bengal Public Health-cum-Administrative Service shall be

specified from time to time by the Department of Health and

Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal. Based on this Mr.

Mukherjee submitted that there is a legislative recognition in

favour of making reservation for the in-service candidates for post

graduate courses. Mr. Mukherjee further argued that such

legislation by the state cannot be nullified by a Regulation made
70
under the Act. In other words, the Regulations notwithstanding the

state still continues to have the power to reserve seats for the in-

service candidates.
Mr. Mukherjee relied on Tara Singh and Ors. Vs.- State of

Rajasthan and Ors., reported in (1975) 4 SCC 86 for a proposition

that a 'Note' is provided in the Rules in exercise of legislative power

of the rule making authority. The real purpose of the note is that

when rules are silent the Note will fill up the gaps. With the

reference to the facts of that case the Supreme Court observed that

the Note to Rule 244 of the Rajasthan State service Rules is a part

of the Rules because they are for guidance of the authorities. They

are not inconsistent with the Rules but are intended to fill up the

gaps where the Rules are silent.
Relying on this judgment Mr. Mukherjee sought to build up

his submissions that therefore the notes under Rule 3 of the

Trainee Reserve Rules should be treated as the part of the Rules

and consequently have a statutory effect



     In this connection Mr. Mukherjee further relied on a

judgment and order dated September 29, 2011 in Medical Council
71
of India -vs.- The State of West Bengal and Ors. reported in (MAT

613 of 2010) where a Division Bench of this Court relied on

Government of AP and Ors. Vs.- P. Lakxmi Devi (Smt.), reported in

(2008) 4 SCC 720. Where the Supreme Court referred to Kelsen's

theory of hierarchy of legal norms. In every country there is a

hierarchy   of   legal   norms,   headed   by   what   he   called   as

"grundnorm", i.e. basic norm. If a legal norm in a higher layer of

this hierarchy conflicts with a legal norm in the lower layer the

former will prevail. The Supreme Court observed that the

Constitution of India is the "grundnorm" for our country. Below it

are the statutory laws made by Parliament or the legislatures of the

state and still below them are delegated legislations which may be

in the form of rules made under the statute, regulations made

under the statute etc. Based on that the Division bench of this

court observed that Regulation belongs to the lowest layer of the

central field of legislation and, therefore, the jurisdiction of the

state government under the
Bengal Medical Act, 1914
cannot be

declared to have been overridden by the MCI Regulations.

Therefore, the plea of repugnancy does not arise.
This argument of the appellants does not appear to be

entirely in conformity with the principle of law
laid down by
72
Supreme Court.
In
Medical Council of India vs. State of Karnataka

and Ors.
, reported in (1998) 6 SCC 131 the legal validity of the

Medical Council Regulations came up for consideration. The

Supreme Court observed that the Act is relatable to Entry 66 of

List I. It prevails over any State enactment to the extent the state

enactment is repugnant to the provision of the Act even though the

state Act may be relatable to Entries 25 or 26 of the List-III. The

Regulations framed under
Section 33
of the Medical Council of

India Act, with the previous sanction of the Central Government

are statutory in nature. These Regulations are framed to carry out

the various purposes mentioned in
Section 33
. If a Regulation

follows the purposes referred to under
Section 33
of the Act it will

have a mandatory force.
Again in the case of
Dr. Preeeti Srivastava and Anr. Vs. State

of M.P and Ors.
, reported in (1999) 7 SCC 120, the Supreme Court

observed that under the
Indian Medical Council Act
the Medical

Council of India is empowered to prescribe standards of post-

graduate medical education. In exercise of its powers under
Section 20
read with
Section 33
of the Act the Medical Council has

framed Regulations which govern post-graduate Medical education.

These Regulations, therefore, are binding and states cannot in
73
exercise of power under Entry 25 of List III make rules and

regulations which are in conflict with or adversely impinge upon

the regulations framed by the Medical Council of India for Post-

graduate medical Education. Since, the standard
laid down in
exercise of the power conferred under Entry 66 of List-I the

exercise of that power is exclusively within the domain of the

Union government any power exercised by the State in the area of

education under Entry 25, of List-III will be subject to any existing

relevant provisions made in that connection by the Union

government, subject to
Article 254
of the Constitution of India.
In view of the very specific observations of the Supreme Court

the view of the High Court with regard to the nature and status of

the Regulations framed under the Act court be treated to be

binding. There is hardly any scope for entertaining any reasonable

doubt that the regulations not being statutory rules do not have

any force of law. From this it also cannot be argued that the

Regulaions, 2000 cannot take away the state's power to make

reservation for the in-service doctors.
Moreover, in its proper connotation and in view for the

purpose for which they are framed there is no scope to consider
74
the Regulations framed under Act as occupying an inferior position

than that of a statutory rule. Even in the case of
Government of

Andhra Pradesh and Ors. Vs. P. Laxmi Devi (Smt.
) (supra) the High

Court placed both the statutory rules and statutory regulations in

the same category in the hierarchy of the laws applicable to India.

The importance of Regulations framed under an Act cannot be

overstated.
In the case of Chief Inspector of Mines vs. K.C.Thapper,

reported in AIR 1961 SC 838, the Supreme Court observed that

without proper regulation is statute may often be worse than

useless.   The   importance     attached   to   Regulations   can   be

appreciated from an observation made in Wicks vs. Director of

Public Instructions, reported in [1947] 1 All. ER 205 where the

Court of Appeal observed that when an Act confers an authority to

make regulations a regulation which is validly made under the Act

and which is intra vires the regulation making power, should be

regarded as though it were itself an enactment.
Any misgiving about the relative status of a regulation has

been set at rest more than a century ago by the King's Bench

division in the case of Willingale vs. Norris, reported in [1909] 1 KB

57 where it was observed that to break the regulations made under

the authority of a statute is to break the statute itself.
75
Mr. Mukherjee also tried to justify the act of reservation from

a social stand point and in terms of the urgent need of the society.

It has been repeatedly emphasised by Mr. Mukherjee that the state

is in urgent need of doctors and unless there are qualified doctors

in the state-run-hospitals the purpose of reaching medical service

to the public in general will never be achieved. The State has an

obligation and the citizen has a corresponding right to make sure

that the benefits of health service reaches to the largest section of

the population which is the basic purpose behind running a state

hospital. In this connection he relied on Association of Medical

Super Speciality Aspirants and Residence & ors. Vs. Union of India

& Ors. (Writ petition (Civil) No. 376 of 2018). The Supreme Court

observed that
Article 21
of the Constitution of India emphasises an

obligation on the state to safeguard the right to life of every person.

The government hospitals run by the State and the medical officers

employed therein are duty bound to extend medical assistance for

preserving human life. In a welfare state it is the obligation of the

state to ensure the creation and sustaining of condition congenial

to good health. The Supreme Court referred to
Article 47
of the

Constitution of India which imposes on the State an obligation to

improve public health.
76
In the said judgment the Supreme Court further observed

that it is for the state to secure health to its citizen as its primary

duty. The government is discharging this obligation by opening

government hospitals, but in order to make it meaningful it has to

be within the reach of its people. Government has a constitutional

obligation to provide health facilities to the people. The right to life

which is the most precious human right and which forms the ark

of all other rights must therefore be interpreted in a broad and

expansive spirit so as to invest with sanction and validity which

may endure for years to come. In that judgment the Supreme

Court reiterated the well known principle that right to life includes

the right to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it.

With reference to the subject matter of dispute in that case, i.e.,

the validity of the compulsory bonds to be executed for admission

to post-graduate medical courses and super specialist courses, the

Supreme Court approved the stand of the state of West Bengal in

view of the positive obligation of the state to uphold the dignity of

the larger section of the society to protect the rights conferred on

them by
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. The immediate

need of the deprived sections of the society to have proper health

care was the reason behind the policy decision of the Government.
77
This judgment has hardly any application to the facts of the

present case or even to the case of the appellants that reservation

for in-service candidates would ameliorate the dearth of doctors in

the health service. The judgment in the case of Association of

Medical Super Speciality Aspirants and Residence & ors.
Vs. Union

of India & Ors.
(supra) was delivered in the context of a notification

issued by the government of West Bengal by which every post-

graduate trainee was directed to execute an indemnity bond to

serve the state government for a period of three years after

successful completion of their respective degree courses and for a

period of two years after their successful completion of diploma

courses. This was done obviously to ensure that the successful

specialists after completion of their courses serve the state for a

certain length of period during which their service may be utilised

by the state in further fulfilment of state's primary obligation of

taking meaningful steps in the health care system.
But, by making provisions for reservation for the in-service

doctors in the state quota the same social objective is not likely to

be achieved. In the reported judgment the government tried to

devise the method so that the qualified doctors are compelled to

serve the state-run-hospitals for a certain number of years. But in
78
the making of reservation the state is trying to ensure admission of

such doctors in their employment. But for the reservation most of

these doctors might not have come within the zone of consideration

for admission to a post-graduate degree course.
The issue has to be examined from a far more cardinal point

of view about the permissibility or validity of the system of

reservation. We have already noted that the Supreme Court has

held the reservation in favour of in-service doctors to be

unconstitutional and
the said judgment
, the large Bench of the

Supreme Court has observed, still holds the field.
Even that apart the constitutional validity of making a

reservation for admission to a course of a higher medical degree

has repeatedly come under the judicial scanner. Reference may be

made to AIIMS Students' Union v. AIIMS & Ors., (2002) 1 SCC

428 where the Supreme Court, apart from laying down the

impermissibility of reservation in general, except where it is

mandated by the Constitution of India, drew a distinction between

the reservation at primary or lowest level and at the higher level.

The Supreme Court observed that reservation is guided by

Constitution for ensuring allotment of a privilege or quota to or
79
confederral of state largesse on, a defined class or category of

limited persons dispensing with the need of competition with

another defined class of persons or remaining persons. Beneficiary

of reservation is necessarily a minor or similar group of persons

which deservedly stands in need of protection because of various

factors. Persons consisting in reserved category are found to be an

underprivileged class who cannot be treated on a par with a large

and more preiviladged class of persons and shall be denied social

justice equality unless protected and encouraged. Reservation is

protective discrimination, observed the Supreme Court.
In the above judgment it has been further held that when

protective discrimination for promotion of equalisation is pleaded

the burden is on the party who seeks to justify the ex facie

deviation of equality. The basic rule is equality of opportunity for

every person in the country. Candidates who get more marks than

others are entitled to preference for admission. Merit must be the

test when choosing the best. The Supreme Court further observed

that this proposition has greater importance for the higher levels of

education   like   post-graduate        courses.   Reservation,   as   an

exception, may be justified subject to discharging the requirement
80
of proving justification in favour of the class which must be

educationally handicapped.
The Supreme Court while striking down the reservation of

seats for their own candidates for the post-graduate courses came

down very heavily upon the concept of such reservation It

observed:
"reservation unless protected by the Constitution itself, as given to

us by the founding fathers and as adopted by the people of India, is

sub-version of fraternity, unity and integrity and the dignity of the

individual secured by the Preamble to the Constitution. While

dealing with the directive principles of state policy,
Article 46
is

taken note of often by overlooking
Articles 41
and
47.
Article 41
obliges the State inter alia to make effective provision for securing

the right to work and right to education. Any reservation in favour of

one, to the extent of reservation is an inroad on the right of others to

work and to learn......"
Public health can be ensured by having the best doctors,

specialists and super specialists. Under graduate level is a primary

or basic level of education in medical sciences wherein reservation
81
can be understood as the fulfilment of societal obligation of the

state towards the work segments of the society. Beyond this, a

reservation is a refrain or diversion from the performance of

primary duty of the state. Pushing the protection of reservation

beyond the primary level betrays the big wigs' desire to keep the

crippled drippled forever.
Mr. Mukherjee laid great emphasis on the judgment in

Kumari Chitra Ghosh (supra) where the appellant challenged the

power of the central government to make nominations in respect of

the seats which has been reserved for certain categories of persons

belonged to different classes and territories. The Supreme Court

found that the classification had been based on intelligible

differentia which distinguished them from the group to which the

appellants belonging and consequently the appeal was dismissed.
But this judgment in Kumari Chitra Ghosh (supra) has been

distinguished by the Supreme Court in the case of AIIMS students'

Union (supra). The Supreme Court observed that in Kumari Chitra

Ghosh (supra) the test laid down for determining the validity of

sources of admission is that the sources were properly classified

where on territorial, geographical or other reasonable basis and
82
must have rational nexus with the object of imparting a particular

education and effective selection for the purpose. In laying down

the sources of entry there is no question of any preferential

treatment being accorded to any particular category or class of

persons desirous of receiving medical education over the other.
But in this case the basis of reservation is very different. It

has not been done on geographical or territorial basis, but just to

confer benefits to the in-service doctors. Again, the reservation

made by the state government cannot also be said to be

constitutionally protected as the in-service doctors as a class do

not belong to the weaker section of the society, though some of

them may belong to reserved categories who are otherwise entitled

to reservation in terms of the Constitutional scheme.
Even otherwise a bare reading of
Regulation 9
as a whole

makes it clear that it was never the intention of the framers of the

Regulation to reserve any seat for the in-service doctors. This will

be clear from a comparative reading of
Regulation 9(4)
and
Regulation 9(8)
.
Regulation 9(8)
says that 50% of the seats in post

graduate diploma courses shall be reserved for medical officers in

the government service who have served for at least three years in
83
remote and/or difficult areas and/or rural areas.
Regulation 9(4)
on   the   other   hand    entitles    an   in-service   candidate   of

government/public authorities to weightage in the marks as an

incentive upto 10% of the marks obtained for each year of service

in remote and/or difficult areas or rural areas upto maximum of

30% of the marks obtained in NEET.
Thus, for those in-service doctors intending to prosecute post

graduate diploma courses the Regulation has kept a provision for

reservation of 50% seats. A well-settled principle of law has been

expressed in a legal maxim, i.e. Expressio Unius Est Exclusio

Alterius which means that express mentions of one thing implies

the exclusion of another. This maxim is based on absolute logic

which has been recognized as one of the fundamental principle for

construction of an Act of the legislature. To the facts of the present

case the maxim may be profitably applied as
Regulation 9(8)
makes

an express provision for reservation of seats for the in-service

doctors for post graduate diploma courses without making any

similar provision for those intending to pursue a post graduate

degree course. It clearly suggest that the framers of the

Regulations did not want the reservation for in-service doctors to
84
be extended to the post graduate degree courses for whom only

incentive marks have been provided.
There cannot be any doubt that while admitting students to

post graduate degree courses the primary criteria is merit, subject

to constitutionally permissible reservations. Many years ago the

inherent problems of making complete reservation to the post

graduate medical courses was pointed out by the Supreme Court

in the case of
Jagadish Saran (Dr.) Vs. Union of India
, reported in

(1980) 2 SCC 768. The Supreme Court observed that entirely

excluding     meritorious   candidates   will   promote   sub-standard

candidates and bring about a fall in a medical competence,

injurious in the long run to the very region.
The Supreme Court

has already recognized in
Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India
,

reported in 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217 that the very idea of

reservation implies selection of a less meritorious person. But even

then, reservation has been recognized to achieve the constitutional

promise of social justice.
An alarm was sounded in
Mohan Bir

Singh Chawla Vs. Punjab University
, reported in (1997) 2 SCC 171,

where the Supreme Court observed that at higher levels of

education, it would be dangerous to depreciate merit and

excellence.
85
In the case of
Dr. Pradeep Jain and Others Vs. Union of India

and Others
, reported in (1984) 3 SCC 654, the Supreme Court was

considering the issue relating to reservation of seats for admission

to medical colleges. The Supreme Court specifically observed that

the primary consideration in selection of candidates for admission

to the medical colleges must be merit. The object of any valid

scheme of admission must be to select the best candidate for being

admitted to the medical colleges and if any departure is to be made

from the principle of selection on the basis of merit it must be

justified on the touchstone of
Article 14
of the Constitution of

India. The Supreme Court further observed that merit consists of a

high degree of intelligence coupled with a keen and incisive mind,

sound knowledge of the basic subjects and infinite capacity for

hard work. It also calls for a sense of social commitment and

dedication to the cause of the poor.
The Supreme Court quoted the

observation made in the case of
Jagadish Saran (Dr.
) (Supra) that if

equality of opportunity for every person is the constitutional

guarantee, a candidate who gets more marks than another is

entitled to preference for admission. The Supreme Court observed,

"Merit must be the test when choosing the best, according to this

rule of equal chance for equal works. This proposition has greater
86
importance when we reach the higher level of education like post

graduate courses. After all, top technological expertise in any vital

field like medicine is a nation's human assets without which its

advance and development will be stunted".
We have already seen that in the case of AIMS Student's

Union (Supra) the Supreme Court has frowned upon the system of

reservation to a higher course of study which is bound to

compromise with the comparative merits between the candidates.
If that be so, we cannot really attach any special meaning to

the expression 'from the list' appearing in
Regulation 9
as distinct

from 'as per list'. If the authorities have the power to admit

students irrespective of their ranks and if the sole criteria is to get

the bare minimum marks of 50% there might not have been any

necessity for publishing a merit list. The task could have been far

easier for an examining a body to declare the names of the

candidates who have secured 50% and above in the NEET.
Mr. Mukherjee argued that an amendment was brought into

the
Regulation 9(1)
in the year 2009 which provided that students

for post graduate medical courses shall be selected strictly on the
87
basis of their inter se academic merit. This provision has been

substituted by a notification which has come into effect on April 5,

2018.
Regulation 9(1)
now says that there shall be a uniform

entrance examination to the all medical educational institutions at

the post graduate level viz., NEET, for admission to post graduate

courses in each year and shall be conducted under the overall

supervision of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

Government of India. From this, he submits that inter se merit is

no longer the criteria for admission to a post graduate medical

course. In this connection, Mr. Mukherjee has relied on Renuka

Pachal Vs. Chapa Guha Neogi and Others, reported in AIR 1978 Cal
457. There this Court had held with reference to the amendment in
Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887
that when the state

legislature amended the said Act raising the District Judge's

jurisdiction, it must be presumed to have known how Section 4 of

West Bengal Act XVI of 1957 was interpreted by the Division Bench

of this Court in two cases. In spite of it, savings clause was

introduced which was interpreted as a conscious adoption or

approval by the legislature of the court's decisions. Relying on this,

Mr. Mukherjee sought to argue that in view of several judgments

like Kumari Chitra Ghosh (Supra) the framers of the Regulation
88
consciously decided to do away with the provision of inter se merit

of the candidates for the purpose of admission to post graduate

medical courses.
This argument, if accepted, would mean defeating the

purpose of the
Regulation 9
itself. As a matter of fact, there is

practically not much difference between the two forms of
Regulation 9(1)
and between the expression "inter se academic

merit" and "from the list". The difference is more academic than

real. In whichever language it may be expressed when the

provision of law says that candidate should be selected from the

merit list or according to their academic merit or on the basis of

inter se academic merit it practically means the same thing. If any

rule says that candidates will be selected from the merit list it for

all practical purposes must be taken to mean that the respective

ranks   and     relative   positions    of   the   candidates   should   be

maintained. Any interpretation other than this is bound to lead to

arbitrariness    and   conferring      disproportionate   power    on    the

authority to pick up any student from the list without maintaining

the respective ranks of the selected candidates. That will be a clear

case of violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. A

candidate occupying lower position in the list should not be
89
preferred to more meritorious candidates above him taking

advantage of the use of expression "from the list". We have already

found that it has been judicially interpreted that a facet of equality

of opportunity in matters of admission to an educational

institution is preference according to the merit of an individual

candidate.
Mr. Mukherjee tried to justify the state action for reservation

with reference to
Section 33(l)
of the Act which provides for

conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners

and conditions of admission to such examinations. It has been

sought to be argued that since the condition of admission to such

examination has been provided in
Section 33(l)
of the Act, the state

action cannot be said to have been vitiated.
This is hardly any justification for a reservation de hors
Regulation 9
.
Section 33
of the Act empowers the Medical Council

to make Regulations on certain subjects which includes Clause (l).

In other words, it means that 33(l) empowers the Medical Council

to make Regulation in respect of the matters provided in Clause (l)

of
Section 33
of the Act. And the Medical Council has done exactly

the same by framing the Regulations, 2000.
90
Mr. Dhar and the learned Advocate General have alleged that

the petitioners are guilty of suppression of fact inasmuch as they

never disclosed in the writ petition that they had appeared at the

counselling. It is true that the petitioners should have disclosed

this fact in their writ petition, but every omission to mention a fact

does not amount to suppression. Suppression in order to invite a

fatal consequence for the petitioners either must be of a material

fact of such a nature which, but for the disclosure, would not have

been known to the respondents. That the writ petitioners had

appeared at the examination is a matter of record and is very

much known to the state respondents. Therefore, omission to

disclose participation in the counselling process cannot be said to

be a fatal lapse on their part entitling the respondents to have the

writ petition dismissed.
The further objection taken by Mr. Dhar as well as the

learned Advocate General about the maintainability of the writ

petition for not challenging the memo, dated April 18, 2013, does

not appear to be a valid one. In other words, the objection is not

weighty enough disentitling the petitioners to any relief in an

otherwise meritorious writ petition. The petitioners have challenged

the policy of reservation for the in-service doctors. When the policy
91
itself is under challenge, a further challenge to the specific

document creating the policy should not be absolutely insisted

upon as a non-relaxable pre-condition for the grant of an

appropriate relief. The writ petitioners have challenged the

constitutionality of the policy of reservation. It is possible that they

had no knowledge about the document in which the policy of

reservation was enunciated. But that makes no difference. If the

policy is found to be constitutionally invalid or cannot be justified

on the touchstone of the Constitutional provisions, the memo,

dated April 18, 2013 does not survive.
The issue relating to non-joinder of necessary parties might

have had some relevance before us had not the appellants in MAT

1239 of 2019, been added as parties on their applications. Court

should not insist on at whose instance a party has been impleaded

once he is present in the court. Mr. Dhar's submission was heard

and considered by the learned single Judge. His further grievance

that no opportunity to file an affidavit-in-opposition was given to

the added respondents must have to be considered in the backdrop

of the order of the Supreme Court dated June 10, 2019. The

Supreme Court had specifically directed the learned single Judge

to hear out the matter on a day to day basis without granting any
92
adjournment to the interveners. In such view of it, the learned

single Judge could not adjourn the hearing of the matter by giving

an opportunity to the added parties to file their affidavit-in-

opposition and the writ petitioners to file their affidavit-in-reply.

That would have caused a breach of the directive of the Supreme

Court.
The submission of the learned Advocate General that the

learned single Judge had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter

as no admission to the post-graduate course can be allowed

beyond May 31, 2019, does not appear to be a convincing one. The

question of carrying a judgment into effect arises only after the

judgment is delivered. Whether in a given case the petitioners will

get the relief as prayed for is a consideration very different from the

one which weighs with the court at the stage of entertaining the

writ petition. It is nobody's case the court had no jurisdiction to

entertain the writ petition or to adjudicate the dispute raised in it.

The allegation that the writ petition was not maintainable after

expiry of May 31, 2019, is a very different consideration.

Entitlement to the relief, as prayed for and admission of the writ

petition are two different exercises. In a given case, it may so

happen that after the declaration of the law a court may hold that
93
for any reason whatsoever the petitioners are not entitled to the

relief. The ultimate finding is with reference to the facts of that

case but it does not really fetter the hands of the court in declaring

the legal position or answering a challenge posed by the

petitioners.
The state also cannot justify reservation of seats for the in-

service doctors with reference to the use of the word 'reservation' in
Regulation 9(4)
. The Supreme Court in the case of
State of Uttar

Pradesh and Others
(Supra), had already held that the word

'reservation' appearing in
Regulation 9(4)
is with reference to the

reservation as per the constitutional scheme for the Scheduled

Casts, Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes candidates

and not for the in-service candidates or medical officers in service.

The   judgment    has   unequivocally   observed   that   Proviso   to
Regulation 9(4)
does not envisage reservation for in-service

candidates in respect of the post graduate degree courses.
We have also heard the submission of Mr. Roy for the

University and Mr. Roy for the MCI. The difficulties expressed by

Mr. Roy appearing for the University in making a fresh merit list

does not appear to be a very convincing one. The University got
94
sufficient time to prepare a fresh merit list in terms of judgment

and order of the learned single Judge but they did not do it. There

was no stay of operation of the impugned judgment and order. The

University also did not press their application for stay. In such

view of it, the University should have prepared the merit list as per

the direction of the learned single Judge long before. They having

not done so cannot project paucity of time as an excuse for not

preparing the fresh merit list.
One of the reasons for not preparing the merit list in terms of

the direction of the learned single Judge is that the University had

approached the Department of Health, Government of West Bengal

requesting them to furnish the details of the candidates who have

been awarded incentive marks. Mr. Roy submitted that since they

had not received any reply from the state government they could

not comply with the directive.
This, on the face of it, appears to be a redundant exercise. It

is an admitted position that for want of proper notification no

incentive mark has been awarded to any in-service candidate. This

is an information which should have been with the University also.

If not, it seems a little surprising that a body conducting the
95
examination would not be aware that no additional marks has

been awarded by the state government.
Here we make an observation. We have already mentioned

that the Controller of Examinations of the University by a letter,

dated April 2, 2013 requested the Joint Secretary, Health and

Family Welfare Department to issue government order effecting

reservation of seats for in-service doctors in the post graduate

degree, diploma and post-doctoral courses. If the state had made a

policy to that effect, the University was required to follow it. But it

remains unexplained why the University on its own asked for a

government order for effecting reservation of seats for the in-

service doctors. The University as a statutory autonomous body

undoubtedly overstepped its area of operation.
The submission of the Medical Council of India is partly in

favour of the writ petitioners and partly in favour of the other

appellants. Mr. Roy agreed that
Regulation 9(4)
or any other

provision in the Act or Regulation does not permit or provide for

any reservation for the in-service doctors for admission to post-

graduate degree courses. He has also supported the writ

petitioners that the word 'reservation' mentioned in
Regulation 9(4)
96
cannot be interpreted as available for the in-service doctors. He

also is not in one with the submission of Mr. Mukherjee that the

expression 'from the merit list' empowers the authority to select

candidates from the merit list not according to the respective

merits of the candidates.
From the foregoing discussions, we are of the considered view

that the reservation of seats for the in-service doctors is against

the provisions of Regulations, 2000. There is not only no provision

for the same in the Regulation, in view of the judgments of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court such an exercise must be held to be

unconstitutional and violative of
Articles 14
, 16
and
21
of the

Constitution of India. The reservation of seats for the in-service

doctors also suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and has the

potential of sacrificing merit in the matter of admission.
We, therefore, set aside the memo, dated April 18, 2013 by

moulding the relief in the writ petition. It is a settled position of law

that a writ court has sufficient powers in appropriate cases to

mould the relief in order to do complete justice in between the

parties in the given factual situation. We further declare the order

of reservation as de hors the Regulations, 2000 and beyond the
97
power of the state to issue. The order of reservation is declared as

null and void. To that extent, the impugned judgment and order of

the learned single Judge is affirmed.
That, however, takes us to the consideration of the reliefs the

writ petitioners are entitled to after declaring the order of

reservation as null and void.
Mr. Roy, the learned Advocate for the MCI, however,

submitted that the admissions of the in-service candidates in this

year may not be disturbed which may have the effect of setting

aside the admission of the open category candidates also. His

specific stand is that since all admissions are to be completed by

May 31 is no scope for admission of any candidate at this stage.
This is also the persistent stand of all the appellants except

the writ petitioners. For Mr. Mukherjee, the writ petition could not

be heard beyond May 31, 2019 as that was the cut-off date within

which all admissions should be completed. Mr. Dhar and the

learned Advocate General also submitted that the time schedule

fixed by the Regulations must be strictly ad hered to. The High

Court exercising of its powers under
Article 226
of the Constitution
98
of India cannot extend the time beyond that fixed by the

Regulation. He, however, submitted that instead of disturbing the

admission   which    has       already    taken    place   this    year,   the

Regulations may be operationalised from the next year.
We have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and

have given our very anxious consideration to the issue of extending

the time of admission to post graduate degree.
We are of the view that the direction of the learned single

Judge with regard to the relief granted requires some modification.

The consequence of declaring reservation to be constitutionally

invalid will be that after such declaration we cannot direct the

seats to continue to be occupied by the reserved category doctors

any more. The admission by way of reservation must have to fall

through. The argument that the classes have already started and

these admitted candidates are not at fault is no justification for

continuing with the admission through a channel found to be

unconstitutional.   If   the    method     of     admission   is   bad,    the

consequence must have to follow. Following the principle
laid down

in
Ashok Kumar Sonkar Vs. Union of India and Others
, reported in

(2007) 4 SCC 54, we hold that this is a case where the principle of
99
natural justice need not be invoked, even if there be some in-

service sponsored doctors not before us. Misplaced sympathy has

no place in law.
The consequence would be that the seats to which the in-

service candidates had been admitted will become vacant. These

seats are to be filled up by the candidates from the state quota

irrespective of whether they are in service or not. There are a large

number of open category candidates who have secured better

marks and ranks in the NEET than those of the in-service

candidates by whom the reserved seats were filled up.
Should we allow a fresh counselling in respect of those 285

seats only? Or set aside the admission of all the students admitted

to various disciplines? In an idyllic situation perhaps the second

alternative would have been a better course of action. After all, the

choice of discipline of many meritorious candidates was restricted

to and conditioned by the reservation of 40% of the state quota

seats. But in many cases the ideal course of action may not be the

most realistic solution. The effect of directing the respondents to

prepare and publish one common merit list so far as the state

quota is concerned will have the effect of unsettling a settled
100
position so far as the students admitted against the 60% of the

state quota seats are concerned. Again, to ask the respondents to

prepare a once common merit list will be directing them to achieve

a Sisyphean task which may lead to unnecessary complications, a

time-consuming exercise and ultimately the prosecution of studies

for the majority of the candidates not before us may be disturbed.

We have, therefore, decided to restrict ourselves to 285 seats

representing 40% of the state quota who have been admitted

pursuant to the order of reservation.
We, however, agree with Mr. Mitra that the appellants, except

the writ petitioners, are very particular in adhering to the time

schedule mentioned in
Regulation 9(10)
when
Regulation 9(4)
has

been flouted in the teeth of the Supreme Court judgment and as

well as the Regulations. Between the requirement of adhering to

the standard of merit and the time schedule, maintenance of merit

was far more important.
We are not in the least unmindful of the requirement of

adhering to the timeframe fixed by
Regulation 9(10)
. But this is a

very different and extraordinary situation when consequent upon

our declaring the act of reservation for in-service candidates as
101
null and void an unusual situation has emerged. Mr. Mitra has

given us a list of cases where the court had directed admission to

post graduate classes beyond the cut-off dates in presence of the

Medical Council of India which did not file any appeal against

them. For circumstances arising out of an extraordinary situation

no straightjacket formula or precedent may be available.
It has been sought to be argued before us that extension of

time for admission to post graduate classes may be made only by

the Supreme Court in exercise of its powers under
Article 142
of

the Constitution of India.
Mr. Mitra referred to several cases where time for admission

had been extended by the Supreme Court beyond the stipulated

date. He refers to the order dated June 4, 2019 passed in
Sagar

Damodar Sarda and Others Vs. State of Maharashtra and Others
,

[writ petition (civil) no. 733 of 2019] and the order, dated May 31,

2019 passed in
Janhit Abhiyan Vs. Union of India
, [writ petition

(civil) No. 55 of 2019].
In
Dr. Vishal Goyal and Others Vs. State of

Karnataka and Others
, reported in (2014) 11 SCC 456, the

Supreme Court after declaring a certain clauses in the Information

Bulletins for post-graduate medical and dental courses as ultra
102
vires
Article 14
of the Constitution of India directed the

respondents to publish fresh Information Bulletins and make

admissions to the post graduate medical and dental courses in the

government colleges as well as the state quota of private colleges

by June 2014.
In
Asha Vs. Pt. B. D. Sharma University of Health Sciences

and Others
, reported in (2012) 7 SCC 389, the Supreme Court

observed that as September 30 was the cut-off date the authorities

could not grant admission beyond date which is specifically

postulated. But the appellant pursued her rights and remedies as

expeditiously as possible. The cut-off date cannot be used as a

technical instrument or tool to deny admission to meritorious

students. The Supreme Court observed that it is not only

unfortunate but apparently unfair that the appellant having much

higher merit was denied admission to MBBS.
It has been submitted that the directions such as the one

mentioned above can be passed only by the Supreme. The High

Court while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India does not have the power similar to the one
103
which   the   Supreme     Court   has   under
Article   142
of   the

Constitution of India.
The learned Advocates for the appellants, except the writ

petitioners have relied on Education Promotion Society for
India and

Another
(Supra) in order to establish that the Supreme Court in

recent times also did not extend the time for filling up the vacant

seats in post graduate medical courses. But the order of the

Supreme Court has to be read in the facts in which it was passed.

Every case has a factual context. Before the Supreme Court the

petitioner no. 1 Society claiming to represent a large number of

educational institutions prayed for extension of time to carry out

counselling as a large number of seats in the medical colleges were

lying vacant. Their contention was that colleges had spent huge

amount of money. The Supreme Court observed that the

petitioners wanted a general extension of time and not on account

of any particular difficulty faced by any individual college or

University but on the ground that large number of seats were going

vacant. It is in this context that the Supreme Court declined to

interfere with an observation that extension cannot be granted just

because some seats are lying vacant without there being any other

justification. We consider that there is sufficient justification in the
104
present case for passing a necessary order to do justice between

the parties.
It is true that a High Court does not have powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India. But in a given

extraordinary situation, the hands of the court may not be fettered.
Asha
(Supra) also mentions that not only the Supreme Court but

the High Courts also may have to face this problem or problems of

this nature.
The Supreme Court observed that the question

involved in
Asha
(Supra) were bound to arise repeatedly not before

the Supreme Court but the High Courts as well. In that case the

Supreme Court observed that where no fault is attributable to a

candidate and she is denied admission for arbitrary reasons the

cut-off date should not to be permitted as a bar to admission of

such students when it would result in complete ruining of the

professional career of a meritorious candidate.
In the present case the number of such candidates who may

have a similar fate because of the reservation policy of the state are

far more numerous and much larger than those who had filed the

writ petition. The Supreme Court further observed that there can

be rarest of the rare cases or exceptional circumstances where the
105
courts may have to mould the relief and make exception to the cut-

off date. But in those cases the court must first return a finding

that no fault is attributable to the candidate and he has pursued

his rights and remedies expeditiously without any delay and there

is fault on the part of the authorities and apparent breach of some

Rules, the Regulations and principles in the process of selection

and grant of admission.
We are of the view that the criteria mentioned
in that case
for

treating a situation as an exceptional one are all present in the

case in hand. The Regulations have been flouted. The petitioners

are not at fault. They raised a protest long before the first

counselling. Still their grievances have not been redressed and they

filed the writ petition long before the expiry of the cut-off date.
Since the judgment in
Asha
(Supra) permits the courts to make

exception to the cut-off date, we take it that the right of a High

Court exercising writ jurisdiction is not necessary ousted to meet

the exigencies of the situation. The word 'court' has been used in

the plural.
If such power is restricted to Supreme Court alone there was

no necessity to use the plural form of the word 'court'. We take the
106
order of the Supreme Court,             dated   June   10,   1999,   into

consideration when there was a direction upon the learned single

Judge to hear the writ petition on a day to day basis. When the

Supreme Court had passed the direction after the expiry of the cut-

off date it must be taken that the order had a purpose behind it. It

cannot be that Their Lordships were not aware of the scope of the

writ petition when the said order was passed. The submission that

the issue before the Supreme Court was different is not very

material as the Supreme Court had directed the High Court to hear

the writ petition.
Admissions of the in-service doctors the post-graduate degree

courses pursuant to the reservation of 40% of the state quota seats

stand cancelled. Consequently a fresh merit list for 285 seats is

required to be prepared. We, therefore, direct the University to

publish a fresh merit list in terms of this order for those seats only,

within a week after the reopening of the office of the University

after the Puja vacation. In such view of it and treating the situation

arising out of the present case as the rarest of the rare one, we

direct the respondents to undertake all steps for reorientation of

the hitherto reserved seats in the state quota by way of a fresh

counselling within 10 days from the date of publication of the merit
107
list. The University is directed to start classes as early as possible.

The students will be required to attend extra classes to make up

the delayed admission and to cover the syllabus as well as to

maintain their attendance. The state is directed to take all

necessary steps to ensure the compliance of the direction of the

court and if necessary to arrange for extra classes for the

candidates to be admitted after fresh counselling.
Mr. Bhattacharya, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for

interveners in CAN 8548 of 2019 prayed for awarding incentive

marks to the in-service doctors in terms of
Regulation 9(4)
. Since,

the state government has not issued any notification about the

rural and difficult areas which is a pre-condition for incentive

marks in terms of the Regulations, the prayer cannot be acceded

to.
Thus, all the appeals filed by all sets of appellants, except the

one filed by the writ petitioners, fail and are dismissed. However,

the directions given by the learned single judge are modified to the

extent indicated above. The appeal of the writ petitioners is

disposed of.
108
With this all the connected applications are disposed of.



      There shall be no order as to costs.
Urgent Photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be

supplied to the parties on priority basis upon compliance of all

requisite formalities. I agree



                                        (Sambuddha Chakrabarti, J.)


                                        I agree




                                        (Hiranmay Bhattacharyya, J.)


      S. Banerjee
