Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 1 and K.K.Mishra Vs. State of
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/16997381/

[Cites
26
, Cited by
7
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Dr. Anand Rai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 April, 2022
Author:
Vishal Mishra
Bench:
Vishal Mishra
1




        IN THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                        AT JABALPUR
                           BEFORE
            HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE VISHAL MISHRA
                  ON THE 4th OF APRIL, 2022
                WRIT PETITION No. 7744 of 2022
Between:-
DR. ANAND RAI S/O SHRI A.N. RAI , AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS,
OCCUPATION: DOCTOR R/o 85 SAMPAT HILLS, BICHOLI
MARDANA, DISTRICT INDORE (MADHYA PRADESH)

                                              .....PETITIONER

(BY SHRI VIVEK TANKHA, SENIOR COUNSEL WITH SHRI
VARUN TANKHA, ADVOCATE )

AND
1. THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH THROUGH STATION
HOUSE OFFICER POLICE STATION AJK BHOPAL (MADHYA
PRADESH)

2. LAXMAN SINGH MARKAM S/O SHRI RAJENDRA SINGH
MARKAM R/O D 3/17, NEAR FOOTBALL GROUND, CHAR
IMLI, HABIBGANJ, BHOPAL, M.P. (MADHYA PRADESH)

                                            .....RESPONDENTS


(BY SHRI TUSHAR MEHTA, SOLICITOR GENERAL WITH SHRI
PRASHANT SINGH, ADVOCATE GENERAL, SHRI HARPREET
RUPRAH, ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL, SHRI BHARAT
SINGH, ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL AND SHRI
PIYUSH JAIN, GOVT. ADVOCATE)

(BY SHRI ANIL KHARE, SENIOR COUNSEL WITH SHRI UMA
SHANKAR TIWARI, FOR RESPONDENT NO.2)
**********************************************************
      This petition coming on for admission this day, the court
                                 2




passed the following:
                            ORDER
With the consent of the parties, the matter is being taken up
for consideration on the question of admission.
Challenge is being made to FIR dated 27.03.2022 registered
at Crime No.2/2022 for offences under
Sections 419
,
469
,
470
,
500
,
504
,
120-B
of Indian Penal Code and
Section 3 (1)(q)
,
3 (1)
(Da)
and
Section 3 (2) (va)
and
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
at Police Station
A.J.K., District Bhopal.
2.    It is argued that the petitioner is a whistleblower who was
instrumental in exposing the Vyapam Scam. It is pointed out that
due to persistence of the petitioner, the whole Vyapam Scam was
unearthed and later on, it was investigated by the Central Bureau
of Investigation. In the present case, the FIR has been registered
against the petitioner by the respondent No.2, alleging that he is a
public servant and employed in Indian Naval Armament Services
(INAS) and currently holding the post of Under Secretary with the
State of Madhya Pradesh. It is alleged that the petitioner has
defamed the complainant by posting wrong information on the
social media and in furtherance to the same, some contents were
posted on the Facebook on 26.03.2022, after manipulating the
original contents and using abusive language making a statement
in terms of caste of the complainant. Pursuant to which, the FIR
was registered against him. The petitioner is trying to defame the
complainant by preparing forged screenshot and by further
implying that the complainant is leaking the papers with regard to
3
examination of Varg-III. It is argued that the allegation which has
made against the petitioner is posting the content of the Facebook
which reads as under :-
"oxZ 3 dk isij] yDl eu eRdke ds eksckby rd
             dSls igq¡pk bldh tk¡p gksuh pkfg, #O;kiea
                    dbZ vH;fFkZ;ksa us OgkV~l,Ii ij ;g QksVks miyC/k
             djk, gSa] bl ?kksVkys dh CBI tk¡p gksuh pkfg,] foxr fnuksa
             jktLFkku esa Hkh blh rjg REET ?kksVkyk gqvk FkkA"
3.    It is argued that from the perusal of the aforesaid content it
cannot be said that any offence is made out against the present
petitioner, therefore, the present petition has been filed. It is
submitted that even if the Facebook contents are taken into
consideration as a toto, then no offence is made out against the
petitioner. The petitioner submits that he has been falsely
prosecuted and no offence of alleged Sections are made out against
him. There is not even a whisper with respect to any intention of
the petitioner to do such an act knowing fully well that
complainant is a member of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe
or with an intention to insult or intimate or give a false and
frivolous information knowing fully well that the complainant is a
member of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe. The petitioner
being a whistleblower is required to place the correct contents
before the public, so that the actual facts may be brought to notice
of the general public at large. It is submitted that it was the
petitioner who was active in unearthing the Vyapam Scam and
similar case was exposed in Rajasthan REET scam by the
petitioner, therefore, the investigation should be done in the matter.
4
The offences which have been registered against the petitioner are
under
Sections 419
,
469
,
470
,
500
,
504
,
120-B
of Indian Penal
Code and
Section 3 (1)(q)
,
3 (1)(Da)
and Section 3 (2) (va) of
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act. The petitioner is not the maker of the messages which have
been floated on the Whatsapp or Facebook, rather he has only
forwarded the messages which was received to him, therefore, no
such offence is made out against him. He is unnecessarily being
harassed and put to prosecution by the State Agencies owing to
some political pressure. Placing reliance upon the aforesaid
sections, it is argued that no case is made out against the petitioner.
Therefore, he has prayed for quashment of FIR registered against
the petitioner. Placing reliance upon the judgment passed by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Shreya Singhal Vs. Union
of India
reported in (2015) 5 SCC 1 and K.K.Mishra Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh and another reported in (2018) 6 SCC 676, it
is argued that from the perusal of the FIR when no offence is made
out then the interference under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. or
Article
226
of the Constitution of India should have been made in the
matter. The matter deals with personal life and liberty of a person
which has to be taken care of by the Courts. It is argued that the
action taken by the respondents in registering an FIR against the
petitioner is clearly hitting the
Article 19(1)(a)
and
19(2)
of the
Constitution of India as the law restricting freedom of speech and
expression cannot pass muster merely if it is in the interest of
general public. The grounds for testing the reasonableness of
restrictions on freedom of speech and expression cannot be dehors
5
the
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution of India. Freedom of speech
and expression of an opinion is a paramount importance under a
democratic Constitution which envisages changes in composition
of legislation and Government and must be preserved, it lies in the
foundation of all the democratic organisations. Public criticism is
essential for working of an institution. This right requires the free
flow and opinions and ideas essential to sustain the collective live
of citizenry while an informed citizenry is a precondition for
meaningful governance, the culture of open dialogue is generally
of great importance.
The aforesaid aspect was held by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of
Shreya Singhal
(supra) and the FIR
was quashed in the aforesaid matter. In such circumstances, no
case is made out against the petitioner who being a whistleblower
is trying to take the correct facts before the public at large.
4.    Per contra, learned Solicitor General along with learned
Advocate General of the State have vehemently opposed the
contentions and submits that the petition itself is not maintainable
under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. It is pointed out that
the conduct of the petitioner is required to be seen in the present
matter. It is pointed out that the petitioner has posted certain
contents on the Facebook page on 26.03.2022 and in pursuance to
the same an FIR has been registered against the present petitioner
on 27.03.2022; and the present petition has been filed on
30.03.2022. It is pointed out that within a short period of three
days the present petition was preferred without even waiting for
the inquiry to be conducted into the matter. The counsel for the
petitioner has not even supplied copy of the petition along with
6
annexures to the Advocate General office and the matter was listed
for hearing on 01.04.2022. An objection was taken by the State
counsel and has prayed for listing of the matter on 04.04.2022, but
on the prayer made by the counsel appearing for the petitioner, the
order has been passed granting interim relief to the petitioner that
no coercive action to be taken against the petitioner, till the next
date of hearing. It is argued that such kind of practice is not
permissible and is being turned down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court on several occasions and by making certain observations.
5.    Placing reliance upon the judgment passed by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
Vs. State of Maharashtra and others
reported in 2021 SCC
Online SC 315, wherein after detailed analysis the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has framed certain guidelines and conclusions for
consideration of the matters by all the High Courts in the country
that what steps are to be taken while considering the applications
for quashment of FIR under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. and
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. It is argued that the powers under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. or under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India to quash the First Information Report is to be exercised in a
very sparing manner and is not to be used to choke or smother the
prosecution that is legitimate.
Placing reliance upon the judgment
in the case of
State of Telangana Vs. Habib Abdullah Jeelani
reported in (2017) 2 SCC 779, it is submitted that the counsel
appearing for the State was not even supplied with the copy of the
petition then also an order not to take any coercive steps against
the petitioner was passed by this Court. It is argued that within
7
three days of registration of an FIR, the writ petition was filed.
Notices under
Section 91
of Cr.P.C. dated 28.03.2022 and
30.03.2022 were issued to the petitioner for appearance along with
all the relevant documents with respect to the aforesaid complaint
for carrying out the proper investigation, but the petitioner has not
complied with aforesaid notices and has chosen to file a present
petition before this Court. He has not appeared before the
authorities at any point of time. Thus, on one hand the petitioner is
not cooperating with the investigation and on the other hand, he
has filed a petition directly before this Court under
Article 226
of
the Constitution of India praying for quashment of FIR being not
maintainable.
6.    It is submitted that various High Courts have gone to the
extent that the proceedings for quashment of the FIR should be
exercised sparingly and in the rare cases. The investigation which
is to be carried out by the Authority generally should not be
interfered.
In the case of
State of Tamilnadu Vs. S. Martin
reported in (2018) 5 SCC 718, it was held that during investigation
the High Court ought not to have interfered in investigation and
investigating agency ought to have been permitted to continue the
investigation and come to a logical conclusion. It is argued that the
investigation is yet to be carried out and it cannot be said at this
stage whether the State Authorities are filing a charge sheet against
the petitioner or filing a closure report looking to the contents of
the complaint made by the respondent No.2 in the FIR.
He has
further
placed reliance upon
the judgment passed by the Supreme
Court in
Nivedita Sharma Vs. Cellular Operators Association
8
of India
reported in (2011) 14 SCC 337, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed that the party must exhaust statutory
remedy available under the law before resorting to writ jurisdiction
for a relief. The petitioner is having statutory remedy available
under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. seeking an anticipatory bail, but
instead of the same he has directly filed a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The provision of
Section
482
of Cr.P.C. being inherent in nature are available to the
petitioner seeking quashment of an FIR, but bypassing the legal
statutory provisions which are available to the petitioner, the
petitioner has directly filed a writ petition before this Court which
is itself is not maintainable.
It is further submitted that the case of
the petitioner does not fall under the category of guidelines framed
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
State of Haryana Vs.
Bhajan Lal
reported in 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has categorically held that power of
quashing criminal proceedings should be exercised sparingly and
with circumspection that too in rare of the rarest cases. In such
circumstances no case for interference is made out in the present
writ petition.
7.    It is pointed out that recently the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure
(supra) has laid down the
guidelines for consideration of the Court exercising inherent
powers under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. or
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India for quashment of the criminal proceedings.
The aforesaid guideline are required to be followed.
He has
heavily placed reliance on para 80, sub para xvi, xvii and xviii of
9
the judgment in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure
(supra) and
has argued that no such order for taking coercive action against the
petitioner can be passed in a casual manner. It is argued that
looking to the contents of the complaint as well as the FIR which
has been registered against the petitioner clearly a case of
cognizable offence is made out for which investigation is required
in the matter. In such circumstances, no case for interference in the
present petition is made out. They have prayed for dismissal of the
petition. It is argued that as the investigation is yet to be carried out
in the matter, therefore, no case for interference is made out
placing reliance upon the aforesaid judgments. It is further argued
that by directing that no coercive action should be taken against
the petitioner virtually the provisions of
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. is
acted upon by this Court without there being any application for
grant of anticipatory bail. The aforesaid aspect was taken into
consideration by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and was highly
condemned and it was directed that normally the High Court
should not pass such orders for taking no coercive action in a
casual manner. It is further observed that the recourse to the
statutory provisions should be adopted by the applicants or the
petitioners. He has prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
8.    Learned Advocate General appearing for the State of
Madhya Pradesh has drawn attention of this Court to the fact that
the petitioner is habitual of making such derogatory statements and
of uploading such contents on social platform for which on earlier
occasion an FIR was also registered against the petitioner, which is
filed along with the copy of the short return for taking documents
10
on record. Learned Solicitor General has contended that looking to
the offences which have been registered against the petitioner
prima facie cognizable offences is made out for which action is
required to be taken and investigation is required to be done into
the matter.
9.    Learned Advocate General has drawn attention of this Court
to the document that a defamatory note which has been uploaded
by the petitioner which is a part of charge sheet and which reads as
under :-
"oxZ 3 dk isij] yDl eu eRdke ds eksckby rd
              dSls igq¡pk bldh tk¡p gksuh pkfg, #O;kiea
                     dbZ vH;fFkZ;ksa us OgkV~l,Ii ij ;g QksVks miyC/k
              djk, gSa] bl ?kksVkys dh CBI tk¡p gksuh pkfg,] foxr
              fnuksa jktLFkku esa Hkh blh rjg REET ?kksVkyk gqvk FkkA"
10.   It is argued that the words which have been used clearly
attracts the provision of SC/ST Act as there are very defamatory
and derogatory language in the State of Madhya Pradesh. It is
argued that the name of respondent No.2 is Laxman Singh
Markam but the word which has been used is 'Matkam' which is a
defamatory and derogatory language in the State of Madhya
Pradesh. Therefore, prima facie case of SC/ST Act is clearly made
out against the petitioner. The notices under
Section 91
of Cr.P.C.
were issued to the petitioner on 28.03.2022 and 30.03.2022 and he
was asked to come to the police authorities along with all the
relevant documents but he has not complied with the aforesaid and
has directly filed the petition before this Court, on which an order
was passed on 01.04.2022 for not taking coercive action against
11
the petitioner. He has relied upon the judgment passed by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) and
argued that no such orders should be passed.
11.   Counsel appearing for the respondent No.2 has opposed the
prayer of the petition and has supported the arguments of the
Solicitor General as well as the Advocate General of the State and
has submitted that investigation is yet to be carried out in the
matter. At this stage, it cannot be ascertain that whether the
authorities are filing a charge sheet against the petitioner or closure
report is being submitted. Issuance of direction for taking no
coercive action is also not permissible in view of the law
laid
down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Neeharika
(supra) as well as
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has highly condemned the issuance of
directions by the High Courts in a casual manner. It is submitted
that the statutory provisions are available and the petitioner should
adhere to the statutory provisions available to him under law and
should have atleast filed an application for grant of anticipatory
bail under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. without even approaching the
competent Courts for availing the anticipatory bail, he has directly
filed this petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
There are statutory provisions under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. for
seeking for quashment of an FIR, bypassing the statutory
provisions this petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India has been filed seeking quashment of the proceedings along
with an FIR which is not permissible, he has prayed for dismissal
of the writ petition.
12
12.   Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record.
13.   From the perusal of the record, it is not disputed that in
pursuance to Facebook post on 26.03.2022 an FIR was registered
against the petitioner at Crime No.2/2022 for offences under
Section
Sections 419
,
469
,
470
,
500
,
504
,
120-B
of Indian Penal
Code and
Section 3 (1)(q)
,
3 (1)(Da)
and
Section 3 (2) (va)
and
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989
at Police Station A.J.K., District Bhopal. It is seen that
this petition was filed within three days for seeking quashment of
an FIR and for grant of interim relief. The matter was listed for
hearing on 01.04.2022 and the coordinate Bench of this Court has
passed an order "That till the next date of hearing, no coercive
action be taken against the petitioner."
14.   The Cause list shows that there was a default in not
supplying the copy to the learned Advocate General office.
Therefore, the matter was placed for hearing on 04.04.2022. It is
submitted by the counsel that now the copy is being supplied,
therefore, the matter was taken up hearing on the question of
admission. This is a petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution
of India seeking quashment of an FIR registered at Crime
No.2/2022 for the offence
Sections 419
,
469
,
470
,
500
,
504
,
120-B
of Indian Penal Code and
Section 3 (1)(q)
,
3 (1)(Da)
and
Section 3
(2) (va)
and
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989
at Police Station A.J.K., District Bhopal.
Facebook contents which have been uploaded by the petitioner
reflects that certain defamatory words are being used as pointed
13
out by the learned Advocate General.
15.   From the perusal of the aforesaid dictum by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court it is apparently clear that no such orders for not
arresting or not taking any coercive action can be passed in the
pending investigation into the matter. The petitioner is having a
remedy to approach the concerning Courts by filing an anticipatory
bail application under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. and thereafter can
take a recourse under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C. wherein the High
Court is having an inherent power for quashment of FIR but in the
present case within three days from the date of registration of FIR
this petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India has been
filed seeking quashment of FIR, pointing out the fact that the
petitioner is unnecessarily being harassed but the fact remains that
bare perusal of the complaint as well as FIR which has been
registered against the petitioner prima facie makes out a
cognizable case for which investigation is required in the matter.
16.   The issuance of such orders by High Court was taken into
consideration by the Supreme Court in the case of
Habib
Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) and was again taken note of by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Neeharika
(supra) which
reads as under :-
"67. This Court in the case of
Habib Abdullah
         Jeelani
(supra), as such, deprecated such practice/orders
         passed by the High Courts, directing police not to arrest,
         even while declining to interfere with the quashing petition
         in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. In the
         aforesaid case before this Court, the High Court dismissed
         the petition filed under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. for quashing the
         FIR. However, while dismissing the quashing petition, the
         High Court directed the police not to arrest the petitioners
         during the pendency of the investigation. While setting aside
14
such order, it is observed by this Court that such direction
amounts to an order under
Section 438
Cr.P.C., albeit
without satisfaction of the conditions of the said provision
and the same is legally unacceptable. In the aforesaid
decision, it is specifically observed and held by this Court
that "it is absolutely inconceivable and unthinkable to pass
an order directing the police not to arrest till the
investigation is completed while declining to interfere or
expressing opinion that it is not appropriate to stay the
investigation". It is further observed that this kind of order is
really inappropriate and unseemly and it has no sanction in
law. It is further observed that the courts should oust and
obstruct unscrupulous litigants from invoking the inherent
jurisdiction of the Court on the drop of a hat to file an
application for quashing of launching an FIR or
investigation and then seek relief by an interim order. It is
further observed that it is the obligation of the court to keep
such unprincipled and unethical litigants at bay.
68. In the aforesaid decision, this Court has further
deprecated the orders passed by the High Courts, while
dismissing the applications under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. to the
effect that if the petitioner-accused surrenders before the trial
Magistrate, he shall be admitted to bail on such terms and
conditions as deemed fit and appropriate to be imposed by
the Magistrate concerned. It is observed that such orders are
de hors the powers conferred under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. That
thereafter, this Court in paragraph 25 has observed as under:
"25. Having reminded the same, presently we can
     only say that the types of orders like the present one,
     are totally unsustainable, for it is contrary to the
     aforesaid settled principles and judicial precedents. It is
     intellectual truancy to avoid the precedents and issue
     directions which are not in consonance with law. It is
     the duty of a Judge to sustain the judicial balance and
     not to think of an order which can cause trauma to the
     process of adjudication. It should be borne in mid that
     the culture of adjudication is stabilised when
     intellectual discipline is maintained and further when
     such discipline constantly keeps guard on the mind."
69. We are at pains to note that despite the law
laid
down by
this Court in the case of
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra), deprecating such orders passed by the High Courts
of not to arrest during the pendency of the investigation,
even when the quashing petitions under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.
or
Article 226
of the Constitution of India are dismissed,
even thereafter also, many High Courts are passing such
15
orders. The law declared/laid down by this Court is binding
on all the High Courts and not following the law
laid down
by
this Court would have a very serious implications in the
administration of justice.
70. In the recent decision of this Court in the case of
Ravuri Krishna Murthy (supra), this bench set aside the
similar order passed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court of
granting a blanket order of protection from arrest, even after
coming to the conclusion that no case for quashing was
established. The High Court while disposing of the quashing
petition and while refusing to quash the criminal proceedings
in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. directed to
complete the investigation into the crime without arresting
the second petitioner - A2 and file a final report, if any, in
accordance with law. The High Court also further passed an
order that the second petitioner - A2 to appear before the
investigating agency as and when required and cooperate
with the investigating agency.
After considering the decision
of this Court in the case of
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra),
this Court set aside the order passed by the High Court
restraining the investigating officer from arresting the second
accused.
71. Thus, it has been found that despite absolute
proposition of law
laid down by
this Court in the case of
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) that such a blanket order of
not to arrest till the investigation is completed and the final
report is filed, passed while declining to quash the criminal
proceedings in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C,
as observed hereinabove, the High Courts have continued to
pass such orders.
Therefore, we again reiterate the law
laid
down by
this Court in the case of
Habib Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) and we direct all the High Courts to scrupulously
follow the law
laid down by
this Court in the case of
Habib
Abdullah Jeelani
(supra) and the law
laid down by
this Court
in the present case, which otherwise the High Courts are
bound to follow. We caution the High Courts again against
passing such orders of not to arrest or "no coercive steps to
be taken" till the investigation is completed and the final
report is filed, while not entertaining quashing petitions
under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. and/or
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India.
72. Now so far as the legality of the impugned interim
order passed by the High Court directing the investigating
agency/police "not to adopt any coercive steps" against the
accused is concerned, for the reasons stated hereinbelow, the
same is unsustainable:
16
i) that such a blanket interim order passed by the High
           Court affects the powers of the investigating agency to
           investigate into the cognizable offences, which otherwise is a
           statutory right/duty of the police under the relevant
           provisions of the
Cr.P.C
.;
ii) that the interim order is a cryptic order;
iii) that no reasons whatsoever have been assigned by
           the High Court, while passing such a blanket order of "no
           coercive steps to be adopted" by the police;
iv) that it is not clear what the High Court meant by
           passing the order of "not to adopt any coercive steps", as it is
           clear from the impugned interim order that it was brought to
           the notice of the High Court that so far as the accused are
           concerned, they are already protected by the interim
           protection granted by the learned Sessions Court, and
           therefore there was no further reason and/or justification for
           the High Court to pass such an interim order of "no coercive
           steps to be adopted". If the High Court meant by passing
           such an interim order of "no coercive steps" directing the
           investigating agency/police not to further investigate
,
in that
           case
, such a blanket order without assigning any reasons
           whatsoever and without even permitting the investigating
           agency to further investigate into the allegations of the
           cognizable offence is otherwise unsustainable. It has affected
           the right of the investigating agency to investigate into the
           cognizable offences. While passing such a blanket order, the
           High Court has not indicated any reasons."
17.   The aforesaid aspect was considered by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure
(supra)
wherein after a detailed analysis of various provisions of criminal
law and various judgments passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
has drawn conclusion in para 80 of the judgment which reads as
under :-
"80. In view of the above and for the reasons stated
           above, our final conclusions on the principal/core issue,
           whether the High Court would be justified in passing an
           interim order of stay of investigation and/or "no coercive
           steps to be adopted", during the pendency of the quashing
           petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C and/or under
Article 226
of
           the Constitution of India and in what circumstances and
17
whether the High Court would be justified in passing the
order of not to arrest the accused or "no coercive steps to be
adopted" during the investigation or till the final
report/chargesheet is filed under
Section 173
Cr.P.C., while
dismissing/disposing of/not entertaining/not quashing the
criminal proceedings/complaint/FIR in exercise of powers
under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. and/or under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India, our final conclusions are as under:
i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the
relevant provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
contained in Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into
a cognizable offence;
ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the
cognizable offences;
iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or
offence of any kind is disclosed in the first information
report that the Court will not permit an investigation to go
on;
iv) The power of quashing should be exercised
sparingly with circumspection, as it has been observed, in
the 'rarest of rare cases (not to be confused with the
formation in the context of death penalty).
v) While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of
which is sought, the court cannot embark upon an enquiry
as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint;
vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the
initial stage;
vii) Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an
exception rather than an ordinary rule;
viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping
the jurisdiction of the police, since the two organs of the
State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one
ought not to tread over the other sphere;
ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are
complementary, not overlapping;
x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference
would result in miscarriage of justice, the Court and the
judicial process should not interfere at the stage of
investigation of offences;
18
xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do
not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act
according to its whims or caprice;
xii) The first information report is not an
encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts and details
relating to the offence reported. Therefore, when the
investigation by the police is in progress, the court should
not go into the merits of the allegations in the FIR. Police
must be permitted to complete the investigation. It would
be premature to pronounce the conclusion based on hazy
facts that the complaint/FIR does not deserve to be
investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law.
After investigation, if the investigating officer finds that
there is no substance in the application made by the
complainant, the investigating officer may file an
appropriate report/summary before the learned Magistrate
which may be considered by the learned Magistrate in
accordance with the known procedure;
xiii) The power under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. is very wide,
but conferment of wide power requires the court to be
more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty
on the court;
xiv) However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit,
regard being had to the parameters of quashing and the
self-restraint imposed by law, more particularly the
parameters
laid down by
this Court in the cases of R.P.
Kapur (supra) and
Bhajan Lal
(supra), has the jurisdiction to
quash the FIR/complaint;
xv) When a prayer for quashing the FIR is made by the
alleged accused and the court when it exercises the power
under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., only has to consider whether the
allegations in the FIR disclose commission of a cognizable
offence or not. The court is not required to consider on
merits whether or not the merits of the allegations make out
a cognizable offence and the court has to permit the
investigating agency/police to investigate the allegations in
the FIR;
xvi) The aforesaid parameters would be applicable
and/or the aforesaid aspects are required to be considered by
the High Court while passing an interim order in a quashing
petition in exercise of powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.
and/or under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
19
However, an interim order of stay of investigation during the
         pendency of the quashing petition can be passed with
         circumspection. Such an interim order should not require to
         be passed routinely, casually and/or mechanically. Normally,
         when the investigation is in progress and the facts are hazy
         and the entire evidence/material is not before the High
         Court, the High Court should restrain itself from passing the
         interim order of not to arrest or "no coercive steps to be
         adopted" and the accused should be relegated to apply for
         anticipatory bail under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. before the
         competent court. The High Court shall not and as such is not
         justified in passing the order of not to arrest and/or "no
         coercive steps" either during the investigation or till the
         investigation is completed and/or till the final
         report/chargesheet is filed under
Section 173
Cr.P.C., while
         dismissing/disposing of the quashing petition under
Section
         482
Cr.P.C. and/or under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
         India.
xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie
         of the opinion that an exceptional case is made out for grant
         of interim stay of further investigation, after considering the
         broad parameters while exercising the powers under
Section
         482
Cr.P.C. and/or under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
         India referred to hereinabove, the High Court has to give
         brief reasons why such an interim order is warranted and/or
         is required to be passed so that it can demonstrate the
         application of mind by the Court and the higher forum can
         consider what was weighed with the High Court while
         passing such an interim order.
xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High
         Court of "no coercive steps to be adopted" within the
         aforesaid parameters, the High Court must clarify what does
         it mean by "no coercive steps to be adopted" as the term "no
         coercive steps to be adopted" can be said to be too vague
         and/or broad which can be misunderstood and/or
         misapplied."
18.   It is seen that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid
case has gone to an extent that no such orders not to arrest or no
coercive steps either during the investigation or till the
investigation is completed or till the final report or charge sheet is
being filed under
Section 173(3)
of Cr.P.C. while dismissing or
20
disposing of the quashing of petition shall be passed under
Section
482
of Cr.P.C. or under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has further observed that even in a
case where the High Court is prima face of the opinion that an
exceptional case is made out for grant of interim stay of further
investigation after considering the broad para meters then also the
reasons are required to be recorded while passing an interim order
so that it can demonstrate the application of mind by the learned
Court. It is seen from the order dated 01.04.2022 that an order has
been passed not to take any coercive action against the petitioner
but no reasons have been assigned in the impugned order. Even in
the contention of the learned Solicitor General and learned
Advocate General of the State of Madhya Pradesh, it is pointed out
that copy of the petition along with annexrues are not even
supplied to them to argue on the issue and they have only prayed
for an adjournment on that date but the Court has passed an
interim order in the matter. In such circumstances, when clearly a
case of cognizable offence is made out no such blanket orders can
be passed. The authorities are required to complete an
investigation into the matter and person showing himself to be an
innocent person can take a recourse under the relevant provisions
of criminal law that is under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. for seeking an
anticipatory bail in the matter.
19.   There are specific allegations against the petitioner that he
has manipulated the Facebook contents and has re-posted the
same. It is even apparent that some words derogatory in nature to
the SC/ST community is being used by the petitioner and is being
21
posted in a public platform which clear attracts the provisions of
SC/ST Act as is reflected from the complaint as well as from the
FIR.
20.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Nivedita Sharma
(supra) has held that "where hierarchy of appeals was provided by
the statute, a party must exhaust the statutory remedies before
resorting to writ jurisdiction for relief, but inspite of having
alternative remedy the writ petition has been preferred seeking
multiple reliefs, therefore, the petition was not entertained being
devoid of merits is not maintainable and is dismissed." In the
present case, without exhausting the remedy of seeking
anticipatory bail under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. or approaching this
Court by way of filing a petition under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C.
petition seeking quashment of an FIR or a criminal proceedings, he
has taken a recourse to file a writ petition under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India.
21.    Looking to the contents of the FIR, a prima facie case is
made out against the petitioner, which requires a detailed
investigation to be carried out by the Authorities. In such
circumstances, the case does not fall under the category of rarest of
the rare cases, therefore, the relief praying for quashment of FIR
and for interim relief not to take any coercive action, without
adhering to the statutory provisions of criminal jurisprudence, this
relief cannot be extended to the petitioner.
22.
In the case of
S. Martin
(supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court
has held that during investigation High Court ought not to have
interfered in the investigation and the Investigating Agency should
22
be allowed to complete the investigation and come out with a
                                    logical conclusion. In the present case, the authorities are yet to
                                    arrived at a logical conclusion whether they will file a charge sheet
                                    against the petitioner or they will file a closure report against the
                                    petitioner. The petitioner has not complied with the notices which
                                    have been issued to him under
Section 91
of Cr.P.C. and has not
                                    cooperated with the investigation and on the other hand he has
                                    approached this Court by filing a petition under
Article 226
of the
                                    Constitution of India seeking quashment without availing the
                                    remedy of seeking an anticipatory bail under
Section 438
of
                                    Cr.P.C. and in such circumstances, this Court refrains from
                                    entertaining the writ petition.
23.   The petition being meritless, devoid of substance is hereby
                                    dismissed. Interim relief granted to the petitioner is hereby
                                    vacated.
24.   However, the petitioner is at liberty to file appropriate
                                    application under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. seeking anticipatory bail
                                    and thereafter may file an application under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C.
                                    seeking quashment of FIR.
25.   With aforesaid observations, the petition stands dismissed.
(Vishal Mishra)
                                                                                        Judge

            AM.
Digitally signed by ANINDYA
SUNDAR MUKHOPADHYAY
Date: 2022.04.06 18:43:57 +05'30'
