Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 42 of 2020
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2020 MPR 90
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/170563875/

[Cites
33
, Cited by
8
]
Manipur High Court
Okram Ibobi Singh vs The Directorate Of Enforcement With Its on 16 December, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 MPR 90
Author:
M.V. Muralidaran
Bench:
M.V. Muralidaran
P age |1



                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
                            AT IMPHAL

                           A.B. No. 42 of 2020

      Okram Ibobi Singh, aged about 72 years old, S/o
      late O. Angoubi Singh, a resident of Thoubal
      Athokpam Makha Leikai, P.O. & P.S. Thoubal,
      Thoubal District, Manipur- 795130.

                                         ........ Petitioner

                           -Versus-

        The Directorate of Enforcement with its
        Headquarter at New Delhi through the Director of
        Enforcement, 1st and 2nd Floor, MTNL Building,
        Jawaharlal Nehru Marg, New Delhi-110002.

                                         ... Respondent
BEFORE
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN
For the Petitioner    ::      Mr. Salman Khurshid, Sr. Advocate
                              Mr. N. Ibotombi, Sr. Advocate,
                              Mr. A. Rommel, Advocate.
For the Respondents::         Mr. S. Suresh, Asst.SG
                              Mr. S.V. Raju, Addl. SG
                              Mr. Zoheb Hossain, Special Counsel ED
                              Mr. Guntur Pramod Kumar, Adv
                              Mr. A. Venkatesh, Adv
                              Mr. Sairica Raju, Adv
                              Mr. Shaurya Ranjan Rai, Adv
                              Mr. Agni Sen, Adv for Directorate of
                              Enforcement.
Date of Hearing &
Reserving Judgment
& Order                       ::      02.12.2020

Date of Judgment &
Order                         ::      16.12.2020
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |2




                       JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                             (CAV)
1.       This petition has been filed by the petitioner under
Section

438
of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking to grant pre-

arrest bail in connection with a case to be registered against him

under the provisions of the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act,

2002
(in short, "
PML Act
") by the respondent.
2.      The facts in a nutshell are as follows:
(i)           The petitioner is the opposition leader of the

                      Manipur Legislative Assembly and was Ex-Chief

                      Minister of Manipur. It is alleged that one

                      Dr.Th.Munindro Sing, Joint Secretary (Planning),

                      Government of Manipur made a complaint before

                      the Imphal Police Station on 1.19.2016 for

                      registering FIR against the petitioner and others

                      and accordingly, the Officer-in-Charge of Imphal

                      Police   Station   registered   a   case   in   FIR

                      No.244(9)2017 under
Sections 420
,
406
,
120B
IPC and
Section 13(2)
of the Prevention of

                      Corruption Act, 1988.       Later the case was
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |3



                      transferred to the CBI, New Delhi and re-
numbered as RC-DST-2019-A/011.
(ii)          The    petitioner   filed    pre-arrest   bail    being

                      Anticipatory Bail No.21 of 2017 before the High

                      Court and during the pendency of the anticipatory

                      bail petition, on 22.11.2019, a team of CBI seized

                      a sum of Rs.6 lakhs from the official quarters of the

                      petitioner situate at Babupura, Imphal West. The

                      CBI also found demonetized currency (old) notes

                      for a sum of Rs.61,100/-, however, the same were

                      not seized by the CBI. On the same day, another

                      sum    of   Rs.4,92,000/-    and    Rs.10,160/-     and

                      demonized     currency      notes   for   a   sum    of

                      Rs.49,000/- were seized from the house of the

                      petitioner situate at Thoubal Athokpam.             On

                      27.2.2020, this Court granted pre-arrest bail in

                      favour of the petitioner.
(iii)         It is also alleged that on 12.11.2020, a news item

                      under the caption "Trouble mounts for former

                      Manipur CM Okram Ibobi Singh, ED all set to file

                      PMLA case" was published in the online news

                      websites https:/www/timesnownews.com.            In the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |4



                      said news, it is stated that the respondent will soon

                      register case under the
PML Act
against the

                      petitioner   and     other    serving     and     retired

                      Government officials. It is also stated in the said

                      news that a sum of Rs.15.47 lakhs in cash and the

                      demonetized currency notes worth Rs.36.49 lakhs

                      were recovered from the official quarters and

                      house of the petitioner.          Hence, the petitioner

                      apprehends arrest under the
PML Act
and filed the

                      petition for anticipatory bail.
3.      It is the submission of Mr. Salman Khurshid, learned senior

counsel for the petitioner that the sole intention of the present

Government in arraying the petitioner as an accused in the case to

be registered by the respondent is nothing but to gain political

mileage, as if the petitioner, who is Ex-Chief Minister of Manipur, is

arrested, then the preset Government would make believe to the

people of Manipur that the previous Government was corrupt and

the present Government is making all efforts to correct the misdeed

done by the previous Government. He would submit that in the

online news report, there is no material against the petitioner to
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |5



array him as an accused and the allegations in the report are on

mere assumption without any cogent material.
4.      The learned senior counsel further submitted that the

petitioner had not committed any offences as alleged in the report

and there is no material to support the report so as to make him as

an accused.           The report had made a false and fabricated case

against the petitioner to wreak political vengeance.
5.      The learned senior counsel then submitted that the present

allegation/complaint has been made with vested interest by the

present Government to crush the political opposition by making a

false and fabricated case against the petitioner. Thus, there is an

apprehension that as per the report, a criminal case is likely to be

registered against the petitioner and that the petitioner might be

arrested by the respondent Directorate of Enforcement anytime.

He would submit that there is also apprehension that in the

prevailing law and order situation of the State, there might be a

danger to the life of the petitioner.
6.      The learned senior counsel next submitted that in case the

petitioner is arrested for no fault of him in connection with the

alleged false allegation/complaint, there will be a political vacuum
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |6



in the State of Manipur and an irreparable loss and injury will be

caused to the opposition political parties and to the people of

Manipur and also to the petitioner in person as his reputation will

be maligned all over the country. In support of his submissions, the

learned counsel relied upon the following decisions:
1) Barun Chandra Thakur v. Central Bureau of
              Investigation and others
, (2018) 2 SCC 119.
2) Sushila Agarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi
),
              (2020) 5 SCC 1.
3) Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India
,
              (2018) 11 SCC 1.
7.      Per contra, Mr. S. Suresh, the learned A.S.G. for the

respondent submitted that the respondent Enforcement of

Directorate      recorded   ECIR   No.1/GWZO/2019       for   initiating

investigation under the
PML Act
for the offence of money

laundering committed in relation to the scheduled offences under
Sections 420
and
120B
of IPC and
Section 13(2)
of Prevention of

Corruption Act, 1988. He would submit that the Government of

Manipur, vide notification dated 6.5.2019, accorded sanction to the

extension of powers and jurisdiction of the members of the Delhi

Special Police Establishment in the whole State of Manipur for

carrying out investigation into FIR No.244(9)2017 in connection

with the financial irregularities in the MDS, thereby transferring the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |7



case to CBI for investigation.    On 22.11.2019, a team of CBI

conducted searches in the house, including the official quarters of

the petitioner and recovered money and also demonetized

currency notes.
8.      The learned A.S.G., then submitted that the present

application was filed by the petitioner apprehending arrest in

connection with the investigation under the
PML Act
pursuant to

the news item published on 12.11.2020.        The learned counsel

submitted that there is no real apprehension of arrest at this stage

in the present case.
9.      The learned counsel further submitted that the provision

pertaining to anticipatory bail is not applicable to offences under

the
PML Act
and that the petitioner has not approached the Special

Court seeking anticipatory bail and filing petition for anticipatory

bail before the High Court without approaching the Special Court is

liable to be rejected.
10.     The further contention of the learned counsel for the

respondent is that the economic offences need to be viewed

seriously and considered as a class apart and the power to grant

anticipatory bail under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. being an extraordinary
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |8



remedy has to be exercised sparingly more so in cases of

economic offences.
11.     Mr. S. Suresh, the learned A.S.G., then submitted that the

twin conditions for grant of bail under
Section 45
of the PML Act

have been revived vide 2018 Amendment and that the contention

of the petitioner that the twin conditions for the grant of bail

specified under
Section 45
of the PML Act are struck down is

completely untenable. Stating that the present petition is wholly

misplaced and premature, the learned counsel prayed for rejection

of the petition.      In support, the learned A.S.G.
,
placed reliance

upon
the following judgments:
(1)     Sh. Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v.
State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565.
(
2)     Vinod Kumar v. State of U.P. and another
,
                  2019 SCC OnLine All 4821.
(
3)     Y.S.Jagan Mohan Reddy v. CBI
, (2013) 7
                  SCC 439.
(
4)     Rohit     Tandon     v.   Directorate    of
                  Enforcement
, (2018) 11 SCC 46.
(
5)     P.Chidambaram       v.    Directorate    of
                  Enforcement
, (2019) 9 SCC 24.
(
6)     Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India
                  and others
, (2018) 11 SCC 1.
(
7)     Mohd. Arif v. Government of India
, 2020
                  SCC OnLine Ori 544.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P age |9
12.     In reply, Mr. Salman Khurshid, the learned senior counsel for

the petitioner submitted that the relief of anticipatory bail sought by

the petitioner is not premature and that the petitioner's reliance on

a news article of a reputed news agency for apprehension of arrest

by the respondent cannot tantamount to being speculative.
13.     As far as filing of the anticipatory bail before the High Court,

the learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the established

principles of concurrent jurisdiction in the matter of anticipatory bail

and submitted that it is only a rule of prudence and judicial

discipline that High Courts point to exhaust remedy before the

Sessions Court. In this regard, by referring to the order passed in

A.B.No.21 of 2017, dated 27.2.2020, the learned counsel for the

petitioner submitted that this Court on an earlier occasion granted

anticipatory bail in respect of the CBI FIR referred and that the

present petition is in relation to the same matter and thus, there is

sufficient cause for the petitioner in approaching the High Court for

anticipatory bail.
14.     This Court considered the submissions made by the learned

counsel appearing on either side and also perused the materials

available on record.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 10
15.     Before dealing with the apprehension of the petitioner that

the respondent is trying to arrest him on the basis of the news item

under the provisions of
PML Act
, firstly, let us consider the question

raised by the respondent whether the petition filed under
Section

438
of the Cr.P.C. before the High Court without exhausting

remedy before the Court of Sessions Court is maintainable or not.
16.     The learned counsel for the respondent vehemently

contended that an application seeking anticipatory bail must be

preferred before the lower Court and filing anticipatory bail before

the High Court straightaway is not maintainable. Reliance in this

regard is placed on the judgment of the Gauhati High Court passed

in
Vinod Kumar
(supra) and BA.No.3024/2014 (
Sri Kwmta Swra

Brahma v. State of Assam
), decided on 10.4.2015.
17.
In
Vinod Kumar
(supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held

as under:
"54. In light of what has been held above, the Court
        records its conclusions on the questions formulated
        as under:--
A.
Section 438
Cr.P.C. on its plain terms does
              not mandate or require a party to first approach
              the Sessions Court before applying to the High
              Court for grant of anticipatory bail. The provision
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 11



              as it stands does not require an individual first
              being relegated to the Court of Sessions before
              being granted the right of audience before this
              Court.
B. Notwithstanding concurrent jurisdiction being
              conferred on the High Court and the Court of
              Session for grant of anticipatory bail under
Section 438
Cr.P.C., strong, cogent, compelling
              and special circumstances must necessarily be
              found to exist in justification of the High Court
              being approached first without the avenue as
              available before the Court of Sessions being
              exhausted.     Whether      those   factors     are
              established or found to exist in the facts of a
              particular case must necessarily be left for the
              Court to consider in each individual matter.
C. The words "exceptional" or "extraordinary" are
              understood to mean atypical, rare, out of the
              ordinary,    unusual   or   uncommon.      If   the
              jurisdiction of the Court as conferred by
Section
              438
Cr.P.C. be circumscribed or be recognised
              to be moved only in exceptional situations it
              would again amount to fettering and constricting
              the discretion otherwise conferred by
Section
              438
Cr.P.C. Such a construction would be in
              clear conflict of the statutory mandate. The ratio
              of Harendra Singh must be recognised to be the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 12



              requirement of establishing the existence of
              special, weighty and compelling reasons and
              circumstances justifying the invocation of the
              jurisdiction     of   this   Court   even   though       a
              wholesome avenue of redress was available
              before the Court of Sessions."
18.
In
Kwmta Swra
(supra), the Gauhati High Court held as

under:
"17. It is therefore necessary that normally a
           person/accused should file an anticipatory bail
           application
u/s 438
of the CrPC or a bail
           application
u/s 439
of the CrPC before the
           Sessions Court and thereafter he can approach
           the High Court. However, this is not an inviolable
           rule.      In      exceptional      circumstances       a
           person/accused can directly approach the High
           Court..."
19.      On a plain reading of the provision, it is crystal clear that it

confers concurrent jurisdiction on the High Court as well as the

Court of Sessions.           Wide discretion has been entrusted on the

Court of Sessions as well as on the High Court to enlarge such

person who comes to the Court, seeking anticipatory bail. Both the

Courts have got jurisdiction to enlarge the applicant on anticipatory

bail, considering the relevant guidelines in the said provision. By
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 13



looking into the above said discussions, it is clear that the party has

to approach the Sessions Court first and then he has to approach

the High Court which is the normal course. But the Courts have

also observed that in an extraordinary circumstances with special

reasons, the party can also approach the High Court.
20.      The intention of bringing out
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. is

enabling each and every person in the country if under

extraordinary circumstances under exigencies either to approach

the Court of Sessions or the High Court which can be concurrently

exercised by both the Courts. Though such remedy, cannot be

riddled down by imposing any extraordinary condition, but still the

Court can refuse to entertain the bail petition and direct the party to

approach the Court of Sessions first because
Section 438
Cr.P.C.

shall not be exercised as a matter of right by the party, though it

can be invoked either before the Sessions Court or before the High

Court.
21.      It is purely the discretionary power of the Court to exercise

power depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.

Therefore, the High Court can direct the party to go first before the

Court of Sessions and then come to the High Court though there is
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 14



no embargo under the statute itself, but the Court can do so on the

basis of various factors.
22.     It is worth to note here that whenever the concurrent

jurisdiction is vested under the statute simultaneously in two Courts

of which one is superior to the other, then it is appropriate that the

party should apply to the subordinate Court first, because the

higher Court would have the advantage of considering the opinion

of the Sessions Court. Moreover, the party will get two

opportunities to get the remedy either before the Sessions Court or

before the High Court, but if once he approaches the High Court,

he would run the risk that the other remedy is not available to him if

he failed to get the order in the High Court, he cannot go before the

Sessions Court for the same remedy.         However, vice versa is

possible.
23.     It is also worth to note here that the Sessions Court and the

High Court are concurrently empowered to grant bail under
Section

438
of Cr.P.C. The object is that the party who is residing in the

remote area can directly approach the Sessions Court which is

easily accessible. In order to obviate the very object and purpose,

the party has to explain why he did not go to that Court. Otherwise,

it amounts to making that provision redundant, so far as the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 15



Sessions Courts are concerned. Even once again re-looking into

structure of
Section 438
of Cr.P.C., it is purely the discretionary

power given to the Court to entertain the petition. It is the discretion

given to the Courts to exercise that power. When discretion vests

with Court, the party has to explain why he has come to the High

Court directly, for the discretionary relief under the said provision.
24.     In the instant case, it is stated on behalf of the petitioner that

since this Court granted anticipatory bail in A.B.No.21 of 2017,

which is a related matter and keeping in view the observations

made in the order dated 27.2.2020, the petitioner has filed the

present petition for anticipatory bail before the High Court. Since

this Court granted anticipatory bail in A.B.No.21 of 2017 on

27.2.2020, which is also a basis giving rise to the instant allegation

levelled against the petitioner and also being investigated by the

respondent, which was admitted by the respondent Directorate of

Enforcement, this Court is of the view that petitioner has explained

the special reason for approaching this Court for anticipatory bail.

That apart, the news item had received wide coverage in the media

and therefore, when the petitioner has directly approached the

High Court for grant of anticipatory bail under
Section 438
Cr.P.C.,

that too when the High Court has concurrent jurisdiction, this Court

cannot find fault with the action of the petitioner directly
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 16



approaching this Court. Thus, the petitioner has made out a valid

ground for apprehending arrest by the respondent Directorate

Enforcement and also the exceptional circumstances justifying his

approaching this Court.       In view of the above facts and

circumstances, this Court is of the view that the petitioner has

explained the reason for rushing to this Court directly for seeking

the discretionary relief of anticipatory bail under the provisions of
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. and thus, the instant anticipatory bail filed

before the High Court is very well maintainable.
25.     The background for the allegation of the money laundering

alleged by the respondent against the petitioner is admittedly in

relation to the
CBI
case earlier registered against the petitioner and

others.
Now coming to the CBI FIR bearing RC-DST-2019-A/0011

dated 20.11.2019 (FIR Case No.244(9)2017), Dr.Th.Munindro

Singh, Joint Secretary (Planning), Government of Manipur lodged a

complaint before the Officer-in-Charge, Imphal Police Station on

01.9.2017 to register a case against (1) Y.Ningthem Singh, former

Project Director MDS; (2) D.S.Poonia, IAS, then Chairman MDS;

(3) O.Ibobi Singh, the then Chairman of MDS; (v) P.C.Lawmkunga,

IAS, the then Chairman of MDS and (5) O.Nabakishore Singh, IAS,

the then Chairman of MDS along with one S.Ranjit Singh,
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 17



Administrative Officer, MDS alleging cheating, criminal conspiracy

and breach of trust, thereby causing loss to the public exchequer.

The specific complaint against the petitioner as could be seen from

the order in A.B.No.21 of 2017 is as follows:
"Being the Chairman of MDS from 1.7.2013 to
          31.8.2014, Shri Ob.Ibobi Singh is required to be
          examined and also record his statement. The
          projects taken up during his Chairmanship and the
          transaction done by MDS for various project
          works of line departments during his tenure needs
          to be verified and study that no procedural lapses
          are found and that the prescribed procedures,
          established     norms   and   extant   Rules   for
          implementation of various projects by MDS and
          other line department are scrupulously observed
          in public interest.
The Chairman of MDS by virtue of his post is the
          Joint account holder and Joint signatory. The
          Project Director, MDS alone is not competent to
          make any transaction, without the knowledge and
          consent of the Chairman, therefore it is assumed
          that the Chairman is bound to have knowledge of
          all transactions of MDS during his tenure of
          Chairmanship."
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 18
26.     It is stated that during the pendency of the said A.B.No.21 of

2017, on 22.11.2019, the personnel of Central Bureau of

Investigation conducted searches in the house and the official

quarters of the petitioner and seized money, including the

demonetized currency notes.
27.     According to the petitioner, on 12.11.2020, a news item

appeared              in     the       online       news           website

https:///www.timesnownews.com that the respondent will soon

register a case under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
against the petitioner and other serving and retired Government

officials.     The petitioner has also produced the said news item

along with the typed set of papers. For better appreciation, the

said news item is extracted here under:
"Trouble mounts for former Manipur CM
             Okram Ibobi Singh, ED all set to file PMLA case


                 The ED will also look into the fact that during
             searches by the CBI last year there was a huge
             recovery of huge cash including demonetized
             currency, details of properties and luxury cars
             purchased.
New Delhi: The Enforcement Directorate will
             soon register a case under the Prevention of
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 19
Money Laundering Act
against the former chief
          minister of Manipur, O Ibobi Singh, serving and
          retired government officials. The ED had sought
          documents      from     the    Central   Bureau     of
          Investigation, which     in    last November, had
          registered a case against Singh.
The ED would take cognizance of the CBI
          FIR and file a case of money laundering against
          Singh, Y.Ningthem Singh, former project director
          Manipur Development Society, DS Poonia retired
          Indian Administrative Services official and also the
          former chairman of MDS, PC Lawmuknga, retired
          IAS     and   then    chairman    of   MDS   and    O
          Nabakishore Singh, retired IAS and ex-chairman
          MDS."
(emphasis supplied)
28.     Highlighting the above said news item dated 12.11.2020 that

appeared in the OnLine news captioned "Trouble mounts for

former Manipur CM Okram Ibobi Singh, ED all set to file PMLA

case", the petitioner has filed the instant petition seeking

anticipatory bail apprehending arrest in connection with the

investigation under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
initiated by the respondent.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 20
29.     According to the respondent, there is no valid ground for

apprehension of arrest at this stage and the same is premature. It

is also the contention of the respondent that no prosecution

complaint under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
has been

filed by the respondent as on date and that the newspaper reports

are merely hearsay and cannot be relied upon by the Courts and

therefore, newspaper reports cannot be a basis for a genuine

apprehension of arrest for a person seeking anticipatory bail.
In

support, the learned counsel for the respondent placed reliance

upon the decisions in the case of Laxmi Raj Shetty and another

v. State of Tamil Nadu, (
1998) 3 SCC 319 and Quamarul Islam

v. S.K.Kanta and others
, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 5.
30.     It is argued by the learned counsel for the respondent that

the fear of the petitioner that he will be arrested by the respondent

based merely on news article is absolutely baseless and a vague

apprehension at best and deserves to be rejected. He submits that

since the petition for anticipatory bail fails to make out any

reasonable belief that the petitioner is likely to be arrested, the

same is liable to be dismissed.     To fortify his submissions, the

learned counsel
placed reliance upon
the decision in the case of
Sh. Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab
,

(1980) 2 SCC 565.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 21
31.      The learned counsel for the respondent further submitted

that the provision pertaining to anticipatory bail is not applicable to

offences under the
PML Act
and that there is absolutely no warrant

in law to interfere with the statutory powers of arrest of the

Directorate of Enforcement under
Section 19
of the Act at this

stage.     As and when the Directorate of Enforcement forms a

reason to believe on the basis of material in its possession that any

person has been guilty of an offence punishable under the Act, it

may arrest such person.
32.      The learned counsel further submitted that a blanket

anticipatory bail ought not to be passed during investigation

especially under special statutes like
Prevention of Money

Laundering Act
, wherein arrest can take place under
Section 19
of

the PML Act after formation of a reason to belief on the basis of

material in his possession that a person has committed the offence

of money laundering.
33.
Section 19
of the PML Act deals with the power of the

specified officer to arrest. Under sub-section (1) of
Section 19
of

PML Act, the specified officer viz. the Director, the Deputy Director,

Assistant Director or any other officer authorised in this behalf by
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 22



the Central Government by general or special order, on the basis

of the material in possession, having reason to believe and

reasons for such belief be recorded in writing that the person has

been guilty of offence punishable under the PMLA, has power to

arrest such person. The authorised officer is required to inform the

accused the grounds for such arrest at the earliest and in terms of

sub- section (3) of
Section 19
of the Act, the arrested person is

required to be produced to the jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate or

Metropolitan Magistrate within 24 hours excluding the journey time

from the place of arrest to the Magistrates Court. In order to ensure

the safeguards, in exercise of power under
Section 73
of the Act,

the Central Government has framed "The Prevention of Money-

Laundering (The Forms and the Manner of Forwarding a Copy of

Order of Arrest of a Person along with the Material to the

Adjudicating Authority and its Period of Retention) Rules, 2005".

Rule 3 of the said Rules requires the arresting officer to forward a

copy of the order of arrest and the material to the Adjudicating

Authority in a sealed cover marked confidential and Rule 3

provides for the manner in maintaining the confidentiality of the

contents.
34.     There is no dispute that the procedure under
PML Act
for

arrest ensures sufficient safeguards viz.,    (i) only the specified
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 23



officers are authorised to arrest; (ii) based on reasons to believe

that an offence punishable under the Act has been committed; (iii)

the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing; (iv) evidence

and the material submitted to the Adjudicating Authority in sealed

envelope in the manner as may be prescribed ensuring the

safeguards in maintaining the confidentiality; and (v) every person

arrested under PMLA to be produced before the Judicial Magistrate

or Metropolitan Magistrate within 24 hours.
35.
Section 19
of PML Act provides for the power to arrest to the

specified officer on the basis of material in his possession and has

reason to believe and the reasons for such belief to be recorded in

writing that any person has been guilty of an offence punishable

under
PML Act
. The statutory power has been vested upon the

specified officers of higher rank to arrest the person whom the

officer has reason to believe that such person has been guilty of an

offence punishable under
PML Act
. In cases of
PML Act
, in

exercising the power to grant anticipatory bail would be to scuttle

the statutory power of the specified officers to arrest which is

enshrined in the statute with sufficient safeguards.
36.     Insofar as the issue of grant of bail is concerned,
Section 45
of PML Act starts with non-obstante clause.
Section 45
imposes
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 24



two conditions for grant of bail to any person accused of any

offence punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three

years under
Part-A of the Schedule of the PML Act
viz., (i) that the

prosecutor must be given an opportunity to oppose the application

for such bail; (ii) that the court must be satisfied that there are

reasonable grounds for believing that the accused persons is not

guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any

offence while on bail.
37.
In
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra), the Hon'ble Supreme

Court has declared Clause (ii) of sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of

PML Act ultra vires
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India.
38.
Section 45(1)
of the Act, as the same stood, when it was

declared ultra vires, read thus:-
"45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974),-
(a) every offence punishable under this Act
          shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence
          punishable for a term of imprisonment of more
          than three years under Part A of the Schedule
          shall be released on bail or on his own bond
          unless-
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 25
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an
          opportunity to oppose the application for such
          release; and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes
          the application, the court is satisfied that there are
          reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
          guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
          commit any offence while on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the
          age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or
          infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special
          Court so directs:
Provided further that the Special Court shall
          not take cognizance of any offence punishable
          under section 4 except upon a complaint in writing
          made by-
(i)    the Director; or
(ii)   any officer of the Central Government
                       or State Government authorised in
                       writing in this behalf by the Central
                       Government by a general or special
                       order made in this behalf by that
                       Government.
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in
          clause (b) of sub-section (1) is in addition to the
          limitations under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
          1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time
          being in force on granting of bail."
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 26
39.     Subsequent to the Hon'ble Supreme Court's decision, in
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra), certain amendments were made

in various provisions of the
PML Act
, including
Section 45(1)
. The

amending provision, which is relevant for the issue which has

arisen in the present matter, reads thus:-
"For the words 'punishable for a term of
          imprisonment of more than three years under Part
          A of the Schedule', the words 'under this Act' shall
          be substituted."
40.     Evidently, consequent upon the aforesaid amendment

through
Finance Act, 2018
,
Section 45
of the PML Act, as it now

stands, reads thus:-
"
Section 45
.- Offences to be cognizable and non-
          bailable.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), no
          person accused of an offence under this Act shall
          be released on bail or on his own bond unless-
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an
          opportunity to oppose the application for such
          release; and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes
          the application, the Court is satisfied that there are
          reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 27



          guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
          commit any offence while on bail;
Provided that a person, who, is under the
          age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or in
          infirm, or is accused either on his own or along
          with other co-accused of money laundering a sum
          of less than one crore rupees may be released on
          bail, if the Special Court so directs:
Provided further that the Special Court shall
          not take cognizance of any offence punishable
          under section 4 except upon a complaint in writing
          made by-
(i) the Director; or
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or
          State Government authorised in writing in this
          behalf by the Central Government by a general or
          special order made in this behalf by that
          Government.       [(1A)     Notwithstanding     anything
          contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
          1973 (2 of 1974), or any other provision of this
          Act, no police officer shall investigate into an
          offence     under    this      Act   unless   specifically
          authorised, by the Central Government by a
          general or special order, and, subject to such
          conditions as may be prescribed.]
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 28



          (2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in
          clause (b) of sub-section (1) is in addition to the
          limitations under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
          1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time
          being in force on granting of bail."
41.     It can be easily deciphered, on comparative reading of
Section 45(1)
of the PML Act, pre-amendment and post-

amendment, that Clause (ii) of sub- Section (1) remained as it

stood before amendment.
42.
In the aforesaid background, the issue which has arisen in

the present matter is as to whether the Hon'ble Supreme Court's

decision in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) can be said to

have lost its significance because of the aforesaid amendment in
Section 45(1)
of the PML Act.
43.     It is eminent that clause (ii) of sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of the PML Act places two conditions for release of a person

accused of an offence under the Act, on bail, if a Public Prosecutor

opposes the bail application, namely; the Court is satisfied (i) that

there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not

guilty of such offence and (ii) that he is not likely to commit any

offence while on bail. Whether substitution of the words 'under this
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 29



Act' in place of the words 'punishable for a term of imprisonment of

more than three years under Part A of the Schedule' in
Section

45(1)
of the Act, has the impact of meeting with the reasonings and

logic incorporated and discussed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) for declaring the Clause
(ii) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 45
of the Act ultra vires and,

therefore, Clause (ii) of sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of the PML

Act is in present form should be treated to be valid, despite Hon'ble

Supreme Court's decision in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) is the question to be gone into.
44.     This petition has been filed under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. for

grant of anticipatory bail in connection with ECIR No.1/GWZO/2019

initiated by the respondent which was arising out of RC-DST-2019-

A/0011 registered by the CBI, New Delhi for the offences under
Sections 420
,
406
,
120B
IPC and
Section 13(2)
of the Prevention

of Corruption Act.
45.     As stated supra, the CBI is investigating the case being RC-

DST-2019-A/0011, wherein the petitioner was granted anticipatory

bail on 27.2.2020 in A.B.No.21 of 2017. While so, on 12.11.2020,

a news item published to the effect that the respondent Directorate

of Enforcement will soon register a case under the Prevention of
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 30
Money Laundering Act
against the petitioner.        The cause for

registering the case under the
PML Act
against the petitioner is

pursuant to the alleged searches conducted by the CBI in the

house and the official quarters of the petitioner and seizure of

money.
46.     The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that once

the provisions have been declared violative of
Article 21
of the

Constitution of India, the same cannot be said to have revived by

introducing amendment of the nature as noted above. He has

submitted that the amendment introduced in 2018 in sub- Section

(1) of
Section 45
of the Act does not amount to reenactment of the

provision to the extent it related to imposition of conditions for

release on bail, which has been declared ultra vires
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India.
47.     Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent has

placed reliance on Hon'ble Supreme Court's decision in case of
P.Chidambaram
(supra), which is a judgment subsequent to the

aforesaid amendment in
Section 45(1)
of the PML Act and has

submitted that applying the provision under
Section 45(1)
of the

PML Act, the petition for grant of anticipatory bail was rejected
in

that case
.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 31
48.     Placing reliance upon the decisions in the cases of
Y.S.Jagan Mohan Reddy and Rohit Tandon
(supra), the learned

counsel for the respondent submitted that in economic offences, an

accused is not entitled for anticipatory bail as gravity of economic

offences affects the entire society, and, therefore, constitute a

class apart and need to be visited with a different approach in the

matter of grant of bail.
49.     According to the learned counsel for the respondent, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) declared clause (ii) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 45
of the

Act ultra vires because of the first part of the provision which

controlled the twin conditions, which has been subsequently

amended.         He has submitted that the prescription of twin-

conditions for grant of bail in clause (ii) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 45
of the Act has not been held to be ultra vires
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India per se.        According to the

learned counsel, the amended provision of the Act has completely

altered the situation.
50.     The learned counsel for the respondent argued that with the

substitution of the words 'such offences under the Act', now the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 32



conditions for bail apply with respect to an offence of money

laundering, which is a heinous economic offence as
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various cases, including the recent

decision in the case of
P. Chidambaram
(supra).
The learned

counsel contended that the twin conditions, mentioned in
Section

45(1)
of the PML Act, imperative for grant of bail have been

declared ultra vires by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) not because of any inherent

defect in these two conditions in itself, but because of its

dependence on the applicability, relatable only to the offences in

Part A of the Schedule; for the reason that the offences under Part

A of the Schedule are not offences of money laundering rather

different predicate offences.
51.     The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the

amendment has been introduced with effect from 19.04.2018 after

taking note of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) and the defects, which were

pointed out in the judgment, have thus been rectified i.e., in place

of the term "punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than

three years of Part A of the Schedule", "under this Act" has been

substituted. He thus submits that the twin-conditions have now

become referable and relatable to the offence under the
PML Act
.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 33
52.     To appreciate rival submissions made on behalf of the

parties on the question of purpose and effect of the amendment in

question in sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of the Act, it would be apt

to take note of the purpose of the amendment and the Hon'ble

Supreme Court's observation in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) while dealing with various provisions of the Act and

considering the challenge to the validity of
Section 45(1)
of the Act.
53.
In
Y.S.Jagan Mohan Reddy
(supra), the Hon'ble Supreme

Court held:
"34. Economic offences constitute a class apart
          and need to be visited with a different approach in
          the matter of bail. The economic offences having
          deep-rooted conspiracies and involving huge loss
          of public funds need to be viewed seriously and
          considered as grave offences affecting the
          economy of the country as a whole and thereby
          posing serious threat to the financial health of the
          country."
In
Rohit Tandon
(supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
"21. The consistent view taken by this Court is
          that    economic   offences   having   deep-rooted
          conspiracies and involving huge loss of public
          funds need to be viewed seriously and considered
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 34



          as grave offences affecting the economy of the
          country as a whole and thereby posing serious
          threat to the financial health of the country.
          Further, when attempt is made to project the
          proceeds of crime as untainted money and also
          that the allegations may not ultimately be
          established, but having been made, the burden of
          proof that the monies were not the proceeds of
          crime and were not, therefore, tainted shifts on the
          accused persons under Section 24 of the 2002
          Act."
54.     The statutory history of
Section 45
of the PML Act has been

elaborately discussed in
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) by the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 26 to 30. In fact, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has explained, with illustrations, the effect of the

twin conditions imposed for grant of bail, if a person was accused

of offence punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than

three years under Part A of the Schedule. The Hon'ble Supreme

Court observed in paragraph 31 as under:-
"31. ..... The statutory scheme, as originally
          enacted, with
Section 45
in its present avatar,
          would, therefore, lead to the same offenders in
          different cases having different results qua bail
          depending on whether
Section 45
does or does
          not apply. The first would be cases where the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 35



          charge would only be of money laundering and
          nothing else, as would be the case where the
          scheduled offence in Part A has already been
          tried, and persons charged under the scheduled
          offence have or have not been enlarged on bail
          under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
and
          thereafter convicted or acquitted. The proceeds of
          crime from such scheduled offence may well be
          discovered much later in the hands of Mr. X, who
          now becomes charged with the crime of money
          laundering under the 2002 Act. The predicate or
          scheduled offence has already been tried and the
          accused     persons   convicted/acquitted   in   this
          illustration, and Mr. X now applies for bail to the
          Special Court/High Court. The Special Court/High
          Court, in this illustration, would grant him bail
          under
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure the Special Court is deemed to be a
          Sessions Court and can, thus, enlarge Mr. X on
          bail, with or without conditions, under Section 439.
          It is important to note that Mr. X would not have to
          satisfy the twin conditions mentioned in
Section
          45
of the 2002 Act in order to be enlarged on bail,
          pending trial for an offence under the 2002 Act."
55.     The second illustration finds place in paragraph 32 of the

judgment in the case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra), in a

situation, when a person being charged with an offence in Part A of
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 36



the Schedule together with a predicate offence in Part B of the

Schedule. The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed in paragraph 32

as under:-
"The second illustration would be of Mr. X being
          charged with an offence under the 2002 Act
          together with a predicate offence contained in Part
          B of the Schedule. Both these offences would be
          tried together. In this case, again, the Special
          Court/High Court can enlarge Mr. X on bail, with
          or without conditions, under
Section 439
of the
          Code of Criminal Procedure, as
Section 45
of the
          2002 Act would not apply."S
56.     Third illustration finds place in paragraph 32 in following

terms:-
"In a third illustration, Mr. X can be charged under
          the 2002 Act together with a predicate offence
          contained in Part A of the Schedule in which the
          term for imprisonment would be 3 years or less
          than 3 years (this would apply only post the
          Amendment Act of 2012 when predicate offences
          of 3 years and less than 3 years contained in Part
          B were all lifted into Part A). In this illustration,
          again, Mr. X would be liable to be enlarged on bail
          under
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure by the Special Court/High Court, with
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 37



          or without conditions, as
Section 45
of the 2002
          Act would have no application."
57.     By way of fourth illustration, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

considered a situation where a persons is prosecuted for an

offence under the Act and an offence punishable for a term of

imprisonment of more than three years under Part A of the

Schedule and then discussed the consequences thereof. The

Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"In this illustration, the Special Court/High
          Court would enlarge Mr. X on bail only if the
          conditions specified in
Section 45(1)
are satisfied
          and not otherwise. In the fourth illustration,
Section 45
would apply in a joint trial of offences
          under the Act and under Part A of the Schedule
          because the only thing that is to be seen for the
          purpose of granting bail, under this Section, is the
          alleged occurrence of a Part A scheduled offence,
          which has imprisonment for over three years. The
          likelihood of Mr. X being enlarged on bail in the
          first three illustrations is far greater than in the
          fourth illustration, dependant only upon the
          circumstance that Mr. X is being prosecuted for a
          Schedule A offence which has imprisonment for
          over 3 years, a circumstance which has no nexus
          with the grant of bail for the offence of money
          laundering. The mere circumstance that the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 38



          offence of money laundering is being tried with the
          Schedule A offence without more cannot naturally
          lead to the grant or denial of bail (by applying
Section 45(1)
) for the offence of money laundering
          and the predicate offence."
58.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court thus noticed anomalies in

prescribing conditions for entertaining petition for grant of bail

under
Section 45(1)
of the Act with reference to the Scheduled

offences. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in paragraph 46 of the

judgment in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra), has held

that
Section 45
of the PML Act is a drastic provision which makes

drastic inroads into the fundamental right of personal liberty

guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. It was

observed that before application of such provision, one must be

doubly sure that it furthers a compelling State interest in tackling

serious crimes. Absent any such compelling State's interest,

indiscriminate application of the provisions of
Section 45
will

certainly violate
Article 21
of the Constitution. The Hon'ble

Supreme Court noted that the provisions akin to
Section 45
have

been upheld on the ground that there was compelling State interest

in tackling crimes of an extremely heinous nature.
For better

appreciation, paragraph 46 in the case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) is extracted herein under:
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 39



          "46. We must not forget that
Section 45
is a
          drastic provision which turns on its head the
          presumption of innocence which is fundamental to
          a    person     accused   of     any offence.        Before
          application of a section which makes drastic
          inroads into the fundamental right of personal
          liberty guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution
          of India, we must be doubly sure that such
          provision furthers a compelling State interest for
          tackling      serious   crime.      Absent     any    such
          compelling      State   interest,    the     indiscriminate
          application of the provisions of
Section 45
will
          certainly violate
Article 21
of the Constitution.
Provisions akin to
Section 45
have only been
          upheld on the ground that there is a compelling
          State interest in tackling crimes of an extremely
          heinous nature."
59.     At this juncture, it is to be noted that the Hon'ble Supreme

Court clearly held that indiscriminate application of the provision of
Section 45
of the PML Act will certainly violate
Article 21
of the

Constitution of India.
60.     In the aforesaid background, it is to be seen as to whether

the amendment introduced in
Section 45
of the Act, as noted

above, by Act No. 13 of 2018, shall amount to re-framing the entire
Section 45
and thereby reviving and resurrecting the requirement
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 40



of twin-conditions under sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of the PML

Act for grant of bail.
In view of clear language used in paragraph

46 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court's decision in case of
Nikesh

Tarachand Shah
(supra), this Court has no hesitation in reaching

a definite conclusion that the amendment in sub-Section (1) of
Section 45
of the PML Act introduced after the Hon'ble Supreme

Court's decision in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) does

not have the effect of reviving the twin-conditions for grant of bail,

which have been declared ultra vires
Articles 14
and
21
of the

Constitution of India.
61.     This Court finds no force in the submission made by the

learned counsel for the respondent that a different view has been

taken in case of
P.Chidambaram
(supra) by the Hon'ble Supreme

Court than the view taken in case of
Nikesh Tarachand Shah
(supra) on the question of constitutional validity of sub-Section (1)

of
Section 45
of the PML Act.
There is no discussion in this regard

in
P.Chidambaram
(supra).
The application for anticipatory bail in

the case of
P.Chidambaram
(supra) was rejected on merits of the

allegation and other materials.
Keeping in view the aforesaid

decision and the ratio laid down and also on going through the

decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case                   of
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 41
P.Chidambaram
(supra), this Court is of the opinion that this

Court is not having any difference of opinion with regard to the
ratio
laid down in
the said decision
.
62.     It is trite law that in case of economic offences, which is

having an impact on the society, the Court must be very slow in

exercising the discretion under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. But on

perusal of the factual matrix of the case on hand, prima facie, there

is no material to come to the conclusion that the act of the

petitioner is having impact on the financial status of the country as

a whole and in that light the
ratio
laid down in
P.Chidambaram
(supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
63.     Coming to the merits of the case, this Court in the earlier

paragraph outlined the allegation leveled against the petitioner

through web news/news article. The news item appeared in the

online news is captioned as "Trouble mounts for former Manipur

CM Okram Ibobi Singh, ED all set to file PMLA case". In the said

news, it is stated that the respondent will soon register case under

the
PML Act
against the petitioner and other serving and retired

Government officials. It is also stated in the said news that a sum

of Rs.15.47 lakhs in cash and the demonetized currency notes
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 42



worth Rs.36.49 lakhs were recovered from the official quarters and

house of the petitioner.
64.     The power under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. is an extraordinary

power which was incorporated before other provisions for granting

of bail under
Section 437
and
439
of Cr.P.C. and judicial discretion

is a matter regard and required to be exercised with due care and

caution. Grant or refusal of bail is entirely discretionary and

discretion should depend upon the facts and circumstances of

each case. Certain parameters have to be kept in mind while

considering or dealing with the application for anticipatory bail.

Those guidelines have been laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in the case of
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of

Maharashtra and others
, (2011) 1 SCC 694. In paragraph 112,

the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:-
"112. The following factors and parameters can be
          taken into consideration while dealing with the
          anticipatory bail:
(i)     The nature and gravity of the accusation
                  and the exact role of the accused must be
                  properly comprehended before arrest is
                  made;
(ii)    The antecedents of the applicant including
                  the fact as to whether the accused has
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 43



                  previously      undergone     imprisonment      on
                  conviction by a court in respect of any
                  cognizable offence;
(iii)   The possibility of the applicant to flee from
                  justice;
(iv)    The possibility of the accused's likelihood to
                  repeat similar or other offences;
(v)     Where the accusations have been made
                  only with the object of injuring or humiliating
                  the applicant by arresting him or her;
(vi)    Impact     of    grant   of   anticipatory     bail
                  particularly in cases of large magnitude
                  affecting a very large number of people;
(vii)   The    courts    must    evaluate   the      entire
                  available material against the accused very
                  carefully. The court must also clearly
                  comprehend the exact role of the accused
                  in the case. The cases in which the accused
                  is implicated with the help of
Sections 34
and 149 of the Penal Code, 1860 the court
                  should consider with even greater care and
                  caution because over implication in the
                  cases is a matter of common knowledge
                  and concern;
(viii) While considering the prayer for grant of
                  anticipatory bail, a balance has to be struck
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 44



                  between two factors, namely, no prejudice
                  should be caused to the free, fair and full
                  investigation    and     there     should    be
                  prevention of harassment, humiliation and
                  unjustified detention of the accused;
(ix)    The     court    to     consider    reasonable
                  apprehension of tampering of the witness or
                  apprehension of threat to the complainant;
(x)     Frivolity in prosecution should always be
                  considered and it is only the element of
                  genuineness      that   shall    have   to   be
considered in the matter of grant of bail and
                  in the event of there being some doubt as to
                  the genuineness of the prosecution, in the
                  normal course of events, the accused is
                  entitled to an order of bail."
65.     While considering the bail application, the parameters which

have to be considered has been stated in the case of
Siddharam

Satlingappa Mhetre
(supra) have to be kept in view. Keeping in

view the said ratio laid down, on perusal of the factual matrix on

hand, the allegation leveled against the petitioner has to be

considered and appreciated during the course of trial. The only

consideration which has to be looked into for the purpose of

granting or refusing bail is whether the accused would be readily
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 45



available for trial and whether he is likely to abuse the discretion

granted in his favour by tampering with evidence. If there is no

prima facie case, there is no question of considering other

circumstances. Even where a prima facie case is established, the

approach of the Court in the matter of bail is not that the accused

should be detained by way of punishment, but whether the

presence of the accused would be readily available for trial or that

he is likely to abuse the discretion granted in his favour.
66.     In Bhagirathsinh Judeja v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1984 SC

372, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"It is now well-settled by a catena of
          decision of the Supreme Court that the power to
          grant bail is not to be exercised as if the
          punishment before trial is being imposed. The
          only material considerations in such a situation
          are whether the accused would be readily
          available for his trial and whether he is likely to
          abuse the discretion granted in his favour by
          tampering with evidence. If there is no prima facie
          there       is   no   question   of   considering   other
          circumstances. But even where a prima facie case
          is established, the approach of the Court in the
          matter of bail is not that the accused should be
          detained by way of punishment but whether the
          presence of the accused would be readily
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 46



          available for trial or that he is likely to abuse the
          discretion granted in his favour by tampering with
          evidence."
67.     In catena of decisions, the law relating to grant of

anticipatory bail has been discussed and emphasized that the

provisions of anticipatory bail enshrined in
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. is

conceptualized under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India which

relates to personal liberty and it shall be given a liberal

interpretation. This aspect has also been upheld by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in the case of
Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth v. State

of Gujarat and another
, (2016) 1 SCC 152, wherein it has been

observed as under:-
"21. Before we proceed further, we would like to
          discuss the law relating to grant of anticipatory
          bail as has been developed through judicial
          interpretative process. A judgment which needs to
          be pointed out is a Constitution Bench judgment
          of this Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbiav. State of
          Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465].
          The Constitution Bench in this case emphasised
          that provision of anticipatory bail enshrined in
          Section 438 of the Code is conceptualised under
Article 21
of the Constitution which relates to
          personal liberty. Therefore, such a provision calls
          for liberal interpretation of Section 438 of the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 47



          Code in light of
Article 21
of the Constitution.
The
          Code explains that an anticipatory bail is a pre-
          arrest legal process which directs that if the
          person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter
          arrested on the accusation in respect of which the
          direction is issued, he shall be released on bail.
          The distinction between an ordinary order of bail
          and an order of anticipatory bail is that whereas
          the former is granted after arrest and therefore
          means release from the custody of the police, the
          latter is granted in anticipation of arrest and is
          therefore, effective at the very moment of arrest. A
          direction under Section 438 is therefore intended
          to confer conditional immunity from the "touch" or
          confinement contemplated by
Section 46
of the
          Code. The essence of this provision is brought out
          in the following manner: (
Gurbaksh Singh
case
          [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , SCC p.
          586, para 26)

                      "26. We find a great deal of substance
                in Mr Tarkunde's submission that since
                denial of bail amounts to deprivation of
                personal liberty, the court should lean against
                the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on
                the scope of Section 438, especially when no
                such restrictions have been imposed by the
                legislature in the terms of that section.
                Section 438 is a procedural provision which
                is concerned with the personal liberty of the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 48



                individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the
                presumption of innocence since he is not, on
                the date of his application for anticipatory
                bail, convicted of the offence in respect of
                which he seeks bail. An overgenerous
                infusion of constraints and conditions which
                are not to be found in Section 438 can make
                its provisions constitutionally vulnerable since
                the right to personal freedom cannot be
                made    to   depend     on   compliance     with
                unreasonable restrictions. The beneficent
                provision contained in Section 438 must be
                saved, not jettisoned.
No doubt can linger
                after the decision in
Maneka Gandhi v. Union
                of India
[(1978) 1 SCC 248],, that in order to
                meet the challenge of
Article 21
of the
                Constitution, the procedure established by
                law for depriving a person of his liberty must
                be fair, just and reasonable. Section 438, in
                the form in which it is conceived by the
                legislature, is open to no exception on the
                ground that it prescribes a procedure which
                is unjust or unfair. We ought, at all costs, to
                avoid throwing it open to a Constitutional
                challenge by reading words in it which are
                not to be found therein."
68.     Keeping in view the
ratio
laid down in
the aforesaid decision

and on perusal of the submissions made on behalf of the parties,
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 49



the allegations in the form of news levelled against the petitioner

are all the matters which have to be considered and appreciated

during the course of trial and it is in the form of document and

evidence. If any further information is required, one of the

conditions will be that the petitioner has to co-operate with the

investigation and the Investigating Officer can investigate by

questioning the petitioner in this behalf to extract whatever material

which is required for the purpose of investigation.
69.
Section 438
Cr.P.C. clearly stipulates in the beginning

statement      itself   that   when   a   person   has   a   reasonable

apprehension to believe that they can be arrested on an

accusation for commitment of a non-bailable offence, they can

move the High Court or the Court of Sessions for grant of an

anticipatory bail. The approaching of the petitioner to the High

Court has been discussed earlier and held that the petition for

anticipatory bail filed before this Court is very well maintainable.
70.     The power to grant anticipatory bail must be exercised by

the Court in very exceptional cases. The Court must be satisfied

that there is a reasonable cause and a reasonable ground for grant

of anticipatory bail.
Section 438
Cr.P.C. protects the right to life and

personal liberty of such persons by providing them with a remedy
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 50



against frivolous detention. In a country where rifts and rivalries are

common, its citizens should have a remedy which prevents

disgracing their right to life and personal liberty.
71.     It is the duty of the Court to exercise its jurisdiction to protect

the personal liberty of a citizen. The High Court should not

foreclose itself from the exercise of the power when a citizen has

been arbitrarily deprived of their personal liberty in an excess of

state power. If the Courts do not interfere, we are troubling the

path on destruction. This proposition of law has been
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its recent decision in the case of
Arnab Manoranjan Goswami v. The State of Maharashtra and

Others
, decided on 11.11.2020.
72.     This Court is also of the view that the
PML Act
is very silent

for granting anticipatory bail, however, when a person's personal

liberty is violated, anticipatory bail can be granted. Further, when

the Directorate of Enforcement under
Section 19
of the PML Act

based on the materials available is empowered to arrest a person,

the said person is equally entitled to seek anticipatory bail before

the Court as per law, as it deals with his personal liberty, which is a

fundamental right guaranteed under the Constitution of India.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 51
73.     If an application for anticipatory bail is made to the High

Court or the Court of Sessions, it must apply its own mind to the

question and decide whether a case has been made out for

granting such relief. Prima facie, in the instant case, the

involvement of the petitioner in the alleged money laundering

cannot be gone into as the investigation is at the initial stage.
74.     In a catena of judgments, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

explained the object of
Section 438
Cr.P.C. to mean that a person

should not be harassed or humiliated in order to satisfy the grudge

or personal vendetta of the complainant.
75.     It is the specific case of the petitioner that he being the Ex-

Chief Minister of Manipur has been falsely implicated in order to

gain political mileage and further if the petitioner is arrested, then

the present Government would make believe to the people of

Manipur that the previous Government was corrupt and the present

Government is making all efforts to correct the misdeeds done by

the previous Government. This Court does not want to enter into

the political thicket, but at the same time, the contention of the

petitioner that all the allegations are on mere assumption without

any cogent material cannot be ignored.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 52
76.     The plea of the respondent Directorate of Enforcement that

approximately 64% of the total fund was systematically siphoned

off and they will also look into the fact that during search by the CBI

last year, there was a huge recovery of cash including

demonetized           currency   notes   are   all   admittedly,    requires

appreciation of evidence and the same cannot be a ground for

refusing to grant anticipatory bail to the petitioner.
77.     No flexible guidelines or straitjacket formula can be provided

for grant or refusal of the anticipatory bail because all

circumstances and situations of future cannot be clearly visualised

for the grant or refusal of anticipatory bail. In consonance with

legislative intention, the grant or refusal of anticipatory bail should

necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
78.     When a person apprehends arrest and approaches a Court

for anticipatory bail, his/her apprehension has to be based on

concrete facts relatable to a specific or particular offence. Petition

seeking anticipatory bail should contain clear and essential facts

relating to the offence, and why the applicant reasonably

apprehends his/her arrest, as well as his/her version of the facts.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 53
79.     In the present case, the apprehension expressed by the

petitioner is based on news item and the respondent also admitted

that there was news item and they have initiated investigation

under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
against the

petitioner.
80.     Though the respondent contends that no prosecution

complaint under the
PML Act
has been filed by them against the

petitioner, in his written submission, the learned counsel for the

respondent categorically stated that the Directorate of Enforcement

recorded ECIR No.01/GWZO/2019 for initiating investigation under

the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
for the offence of money

laundering committed in relation to the scheduled offences under
Section 420
and
120B
of the Indian Penal Code and
Section 13(2)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Thus, it is clear that the

respondent Directorate of Enforcement is trying to initiate and/or

register a case against the petitioner for the alleged money

laundering. Therefore, as rightly argued by the learned counsel for

the petitioner that there is a fear of petitioner that he will be

arrested by the respondent based on the aforesaid news article.
81.     It is true that antecedents of the accused must be seen while

considering the bail application, but at the same time the
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 54



allegations levelled by the respondent must also be seen. Court

has to put the facts of the case of the respondent and the petitioner

into a scale and weigh it to ascertain the truth. This Court is of the

considered opinion that in order to ascertain the truth, a fair and

unbiased investigation is necessary. In that light, by imposing some

stringent conditions, if the petitioner is ordered to be released on

anticipatory bail, it would serve both the ends. It would be worth to

mention at this stage that as against the anticipatory bail granted in

A.B.No.21 of 2017, the CBI has not preferred any appeal and the

petitioner    is      having   benefit   of   anticipatory   bail     in   FIR

No244(9)2017.
82.     Since the news item appeared in the online news is pursuant

to the CBI investigation, in which the petitioner has got anticipatory

bail, now the apprehension stated by the petitioner is bona fide and

as stated supra, the respondent themselves admitted that they

have initiated investigation against the petitioner under the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act
.             Thus, this Court is of the

opinion that the apprehension of arrest by the respondent

Directorate Enforcement is well founded and reasonable as the

petitioner is a public person.       This Court cannot lost sight of the

fact that the news article had received wide publication/coverage in

the media, both electronic and print. In the aforesaid facts and
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 55



circumstances of the case, the interest of justice warrants grant of

anticipatory bail to the petitioner in the investigation being

conducted by the respondent under the
Prevention of Money

Laundering Act
. Further, the petitioner is duty bound to co-operate

with the investigation by the respondent at all stages.
83.     Before parting, it is apposite to note that the petitioner is the

Ex-Chief Minister of the State and it is not as if he will run away

from the prosecution, if any, initiated against him. The learned

counsel for the petitioner, during the course of the arguments,

explicitly stated that the petitioner would extend fullest cooperation

if any prosecution is initiated. It is also nowhere the case of the

respondent that the petitioner is likely to abscond or avoid

participating in the prosecution.      This Court finds this to be an

acceptable plea on behalf of the petitioner.
84.     In the result, the petition is allowed and the petitioner is

granted anticipatory bail in connection with the respondent

investigation in ECIR No.01/GWZO/2019. In the event of his arrest

in the aforementioned investigation, subject to the following

conditions:-
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 56
i)     The petitioner, namely Okram Ibobi Singh,

                 son of O.Angoubi Singh shall execute a

                 personal bond for Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one

                 lakh only) with two sureties for the like sum to

                 the satisfaction of the respondent Directorate

                 of Enforcement.
ii)    The petitioner shall surrender before the

                 respondent Directorate of Enforcement within

                 fifteen days from today, failing which this

                 order shall automatically stand cancelled.
iii)   The petitioner shall co-operate with the

                 investigation as and when required by the

                 respondent Directorate of Enforcement.
iv) If the petitioner fails to appear despite

                 summons, the respondent is at liberty to

                 approach this Court for cancellation of

                 anticipatory bail.
v)     The petitioner shall not tamper with the

                 prosecution evidence in any manner.
vi) The petitioner shall not leave the country

                 without    permission   of   the    respondent

                 Enforcement Directorate.
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
P a g e | 57
vii) The petitioner shall not indulge in similar type

                   of criminal activities in future.
viii) If the petitioner violates any one of the

                   conditions, the bail is liable to be cancelled.
85.      Registry is directed to issue copy of this order to

both parties through their WhatsApp/E-mail.
JUDGE



        FR/NFR

      Sushil


   Yumkh Digitally signed
          by Yumkham
   am     Rother
          Date: 2020.12.16

   Rother 12:41:35 +05'30'
A.B. No. 42 of 2020
