Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 52 of 2020
Citation: SCC 565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as follows,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/171010802/

[Cites
38
, Cited by
7
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Dinesh Kumar @ Billa vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 6 July, 2020
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                            Cr.MP(M) No. 924 of 2020
                            Reserved on: 2nd July, 2020




                                                                     .
Date of Decision: 6th July, 2020





Dinesh Kumar @ Billa                                       ...Petitioner.

                            Versus





State of Himachal Pradesh                                  ...Respondent.

Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 YES.
For the petitioner          :        Mr. Sanjay Dutt Vasudeva, Advocate.
For the respondent          :        Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Addl. A.G., & Mr.

                                     Ram Lal Thakur, Asstt. A.G.

     COURT PROCEEDINGS CONVENED THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE


Anoop Chitkara, Judge

           The petitioner, who is under arrest from 22 nd May 2020, for selling
209 capsules to the main accused Rakesh Kumar, from whose possession the




Police had recovered the same on 17th Mar 2020, has come up before this





Court seeking bail.
2.         Based on a First Information Report (FIR), the police arrested the
petitioner, in FIR No. 52 of 2020, dated 17.3.2020, registered under Sections 22





& 29-61-85 of the
NDPS Act
, in Police Station Dharamshala, District Kangra,
Himachal Pradesh, disclosing cognizable and non-bailable offenses.
3.         Earlier, the petitioner filed a petition under
Section 439
CrPC before
Special Judge-II, Kangra at Dharamshala, HP. However, vide order dated
16.6.2020, the Court dismissed the petition, because in the opinion of the Court,
the Petitioner could not cross the rigors of
S. 37
of NDPS Act.
4.          Mr. Nand Lal Thakur learned Additional Advocate General had filed
the status report through e-mail, printout of which is available on file. He further
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
2
submits that he had sent a copy of the status report to learned counsel for the
petitioner on WhatsApp number.
5.         I have read the status report(s) and heard Mr. Sanjay Dutt Vasudeva,




                                                                    .
Advocate for the petitioner, Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Ld. Additional Advocate
General for the State of H.P.





FACTS:
6.         The gist of the facts apposite to decide this petition would suffice that
the Police had arrested the main accused Rakesh Rana for possessing 94





capsules of WE WECARE and 115 capsules of SPM PRX WOCKHARDY and in
all 209 capsules, which weighed 125.72 grams.            After arrest of the main
accused on 17.3.2020, in his interrogation, he revealed to the police that he is a
drug dependent and he has purchased the capsules from one Dinesh Kumar,

the petitioner herein. Due to the spread of Covid-19 disease, the police did not

arrest the accused Dinesh Kumar and arrested him only on 22 nd May, 2020.
PREVIOUS CRIMINAL HISTORY
7.         As per the police report the accused Satish Singh involved himself in
the following cases:
1).     FIR No. 150/16, dated 20.11.2016 under section 20-61-85 of
NDPS




     Act
, in Police Station, Shahpur;
2)     FIR No. 60/17, dated 2.4.2017, under section 21-61-85 of NDPS Act





     and 18 C of the Drugs and Cosmetic Act, Police Station, Shahpur; and
3)     Fir No. 158/16, dated 5.6.2016 under Section 341, 323, 506, read





     with
Section 34
IPC, Police Station Shahpur
8.      According to learned Counsel for the petitioner, these offences
mentioned in these FIRs are not that serious, to deny him all future bails, in
similar offences. He further submits that conditions may be put that in case the
petitioner repeats the offence, this bail may be canceled.
SUBMISSIONS:
9.      The learned counsel for the bail petitioner submits that the allegations
are false and concocted.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
3
10.    On the contrary, Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Additional Advocate General,
contends that the investigating officer has collected sufficient prima facie
evidence. He further submits that if this Court is inclined to grant bail, then such




                                                                     .
a bond must be subject to very stringent conditions.
11.    Mr. Sanjay Vasudeva very vehemently argued and also drew attention to
the orders of this Court in
Budhi Singh v. State of H.P., CrMPM
595 of 2020;
Manohar Lal v. State of H.P., CrMPM
126 of 2018;
Thakur Dass v. State of H.P.,
CrMPM
167 of 2010;
Stynder Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh
, 2010(1)
SimLC 490; and Nisar Ahmed Thakkar v. State of H.P., CrMPM 672 of 2008.
ANALYSIS AND REASONING:
12.     Pre-trial incarceration needs justification depending upon the heinous
nature of the offence, terms of the sentence prescribed in the statute for such a

crime, probability of the accused fleeing from justice, hampering the

investigation, and doing away with the victim(s) and witnesses. The Court is
under an obligation to maintain a balance between all stakeholders and
safeguard the interests of the victim, accused, society, and State.
13.
In
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab
, 1980 (2)
SCC 565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as follows,
         It is thus clear that the question whether to grant bail or




         not depends for its answer upon a variety of
         circumstances, the cumulative effect of which must enter
         into the judicial verdict. Any one single circumstance





         cannot be treated as of universal validity or as necessarily
         justifying the grant or refusal of bail
14.
In
Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public Prosecutor, High
Court of
Andhra Pradesh, (1978) 1 SCC 240, Supreme Court in Para 16, holds,

           The delicate light of the law favours release unless
           countered by the negative criteria necessitating that
           course.
15.
In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav
, 2005 (2)
SCC 42, a three-member bench of Supreme Court holds,

           "18. It is trite law that personal liberty cannot be taken
           away except in accordance with the procedure established
           by law. Personal liberty is a constitutional guarantee.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
4
However,
Article 21
which guarantees the above right also
           contemplates deprivation of personal liberty by procedure
           established by law. Under the criminal laws of this country,
           a person accused of offences which are non-bailable is




                                                                     .
liable to be detained in custody during the pendency of





           trial unless he is enlarged on bail in accordance with law.
           Such detention cannot be questioned as being violative of
Article 21
since the same is authorised by law. But even
           persons accused of non-bailable offences are entitled for





           bail if the court concerned comes to the conclusion that
           the prosecution has failed to establish a prima facie case
           against him and/or if the court is satisfied for reasons to be
           recorded that in spite of the existence of prima facie case
           there is a need to release such persons on bail where fact





           situations require it to do so. In that process a person
           whose application for enlargement on bail is once rejected
           is not precluded from filing a subsequent application for
           grant of bail if there is a change in the fact situation. In
           such cases if the circumstances then prevailing requires

           that such persons to be released on bail, in spite of his

           earlier applications being rejected, the courts can do so."
16.
Section 2
(vii-a) of the
NDPS Act
defines commercial quantity as the
quantity greater than the quantity specified in the schedule, and
S. 2
(xxiii-a),


defines a small quantity as the quantity lesser than the quantity specified in the
schedule of
NDPS Act
. The remaining quantity falls in an undefined category,
which is now generally called as intermediate quantity.
All Sections in the NDPS




Act
, which specify an offence, also mention the minimum and maximum





sentence, depending upon the quantity of the substance. When the substance
falls under commercial quantity statute mandates minimum sentence of ten





years of imprisonment and a minimum fine of INR One hundred thousand, and
bail is subject to the riders mandated in
S. 37
of NDPS Act.
17.    In the present case, as per the contentions of the State, the quantity of
substance seized is commercial quantity. Given the legislative mandate of
S. 37
of NDPS Act, the Court can release a person, accused of an offence punishable
under the
NDPS Act
for possessing a commercial quantity of contraband only
after passing its rigors.
Section 37
of the Act is extracted as under: -
"37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of
           Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974)
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
5
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be
           cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for
           2[offences under
section 19
or
section 24
or
section 27A
.
and also for offences involving commercial quantity] shall





           be released on bail or on his own bond unless
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to
           oppose the application for such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application,





           the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
           believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is
           not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
           (2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations





           under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) or
           any other law for the time being in force, on granting of
           bail."
18.    Reading of
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
mandates that two conditions are to be

satisfied before a person/accused of possessing a commercial quantity of drugs

or psychotropic substance, is to be released on bail.
19.    The first condition is to provide an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor


and clear her stand on the bail application. The second stipulation is that the
Court must be satisfied that reasonable grounds exist for believing that the
accused is not guilty of such offence, and that he is not likely to commit any




offence while on bail. If either of these two conditions is not met, the ban on
granting bail operates. The expression "reasonable grounds" means something





more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates substantial probable causes for
believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. Be that it may, if





such a finding is arrived at by the Court, then it is equivalent to giving a
certificate of discharge to the accused. Even on fulfilling one of the conditions,
the reasonable grounds for believing that during the period of bail, the accused
is not guilty of such an offence, the Court still cannot give a finding or assurance
that the accused is not likely to commit any such crime. Thus, the grant of bail
or denial of bail for possessing commercial quantity would depend on facts of
each case.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
6
20.    The investigation reveals that there was a phone call on 16 th March,
2020, between the main accused and the bail petitioner. The other evidence
agianst the bail petitioner is the confession of the main accused that he has




                                                                    .
purchased the capsules from him. Given the mandate of
Section 25
of the





Indian Evidence Act, the confession of co-accused shall not be proved.
Regarding exchange of phone calls, the investigation is silent about the history





of such phone calls and that the petitioner had phone calls from other numbers,
who were such persons. In the given facts, the solitary evidence of one or two
phone calls would not be a hindrance to deny the bail given the mandate of
Section 37
of the NDPS Act.
21.    JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON
S. 37
OF NDPS ACT:
a)    In
Union of India v. Merajuddin
, (1999) 6 SCC 43, a three Judges Bench
of Supreme Court while cancelling the bail, observed in Para 3, as follows,

           The High Court appears to have completely ignored the

           mandate of
Sec. 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and
           Psychotropic Substances Act while granting him bail. The
           High Court overlooked the prescribed procedure."
b)    In
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, a



three Judges Bench of Supreme Court holds,
7. The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the
           question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from the




           grant of opportunity to the public prosecutor, the other twin
           conditions which really have relevance so far the present





           accused-respondent is concerned, are (1) the satisfaction
           of the Court that there are reasonable grounds for
           believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged





           offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
           while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
           alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the
           accused being not guilty has to be based for reasonable
           grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
           something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
           substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
           is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
           contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
           facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to
           justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
           alleged offence.
c)    In
Satpal Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2018) 13 SCC 813, a bench of three
judges of Supreme Court directed that since the quantity involved was
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
7
commercial, as such High Court could not have and should not have passed the
order under sections 438 or 439
CrPC
, without reference to
Section 37
of the
NDPS Act.
.
d)   In
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705, Supreme
Court holds,
6.
Section 37
as amended starts with a non-obstante





            clause stating that notwithstanding anything contained in
            the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 no person accused
            of an offence prescribed therein shall be released on bail
            unless the conditions contained therein were satisfied.
The
            Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act
is a





            special enactment as already noted it was enacted with a
            view to make stringent provision for the control and
            regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and
            psychotropic substances. That being the underlying object
            and particularly when the provisions of
Section 37
of

            Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act are in

            negative terms limiting the scope of the applicability of the
            provisions of
Criminal Procedure Code
regarding bail, in
            our view, it cannot be held that the High Court's powers to
            grant bail under
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code are
            not subject to the limitation mentioned under
Section 37
of


            Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act. The
            non-obstante clause with which the Section starts should
            be given its due meaning and clearly it is intended to
            restrict the powers to grant bail. In case of inconsistency




            between
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code and
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic





            Substances Act, 1985
Section 37
prevails.
e)   In
Babua v. State of Orissa
, (2001) 2 SCC 566, Supreme Court holds,





            [3] In view of
Section 37(1)(b)
of the Act unless there are
            reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not
            guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit
            any offence while on bail alone will entitle him to a bail. In
            the present case, the petitioner attempted to secure bail
            on various grounds but failed. But those reasons would be
            insignificant if we bear in mind the scope of
Section 37(1)
(b) of the Act. At this stage of the case all that could be
            seen is whether the statements made on behalf of the
            prosecution witnesses, if believable, would result in
            conviction of the petitioner or not. At this juncture, we
            cannot say that the accused is not guilty of the offence if
            the allegations made in the charge are established. Nor
            can we say that the evidence having not been completely
            adduced before the Court that there are no grounds to
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
8
hold that he is not guilty of such offence. The other aspect
          to be borne in mind is that the liberty of a citizen has got to
          be balanced with the interest of the society. In cases
          where narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances are




                                                                    .
involved, the accused would indulge in activities which are





          lethal to the society. Therefore, it would certainly be in the
          interest of the society to keep such persons behind bars
          during the pendency of the proceedings before the Court,
          and the validity of
Section 37(1)(b)
having been upheld,





          we cannot take any other view.
f)   In Bijando Singh v. Md. Ibocha, 2004(10) SCC 151, Supreme Court
holds,
3. Being aggrieved by the order of the Special Court
          (NDPS), releasing the accused on bail, the appellant
          moved the Guwahati High Court against the said order on
          the ground that the order granting bail is contrary to the
          provisions of law and the appropriate authority never

          noticed the provisions of
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs

          And Psychotropic Substances Act. The High Court,
          however, being of the opinion that if the attendance of the
          accused is secured by means of bail bonds, then he is
          entitled to be released on bail. The High Court, thus, in our
          opinion, did not consider the provisions of
Section 37
of


          the Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act.
g)   In N.C.B.Trivandrarum v. Jalaluddin, 2004 Law Suit (SC) 1598,




Supreme Court observed,
3. ...Be that as it may another mandatory requirement of
Section 37
of the Act is that where Public Prosecutor
          opposes the bail application, the court should be satisfied
          that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the





          accused is not guilty of such offence and he is not likely to
          commit any offence while on bail. In the impugned order
          we do not find any such satisfaction recorded by the High
          Court while granting bail nor there is any material available
          to show that the High Court applied its mind to these
          mandatory requirements of the Act.
h)   In
Union of India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798, Supreme
Court holds,
6. As the provision itself provides no person shall be
          granted bail unless the two conditions are satisfied. They
          are; the satisfaction of the Court that there are reasonable
          grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty and.
          that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
9
Both the conditions have to be satisfied. If either of these
     two conditions is not satisfied, the bar operates and the
     accused cannot be released on bail.
7. The expression used in
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
is




                                                                .
"reasonable grounds". The expression means something





     more than prima facie grounds. It connotes substantial
     probable causes for believing that the accused is not guilty
     of the offence charged and this reasonable belief
     contemplated in turn points to existence of such facts and





     circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to justify
     recording of satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of
     the offence charged.
8. The word "reasonable" has in law the prima facie
     meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances





     of which the actor, called on to act reasonably, knows or
     ought to know. It is difficult to give an exact definition of
     the word 'reasonable'. Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, Fourth
     Edition, page 2258 states that it would be unreasonable to
     expect an exact definition of the word "reasonable'.
Reason varies it, its conclusions according to the

     idiosyncrasy of the individual, and the times and
     circumstances in which he thinks. The reasoning which
     built up the old scholastic logic sounds now like the jingling
     of a child's toy. (See : Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
     M/s Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar and another, (1987)4 SCC


     497 and Gujarat Water Supplies and Sewerage Board v.
     Unique Erectors (Gujarat) Pvt Ltd and another [(1989)1
     SCC 532].
9. It is often said "an attempt to give a specific meaning to




     the word 'reasonable' is trying to count what is not number
     and measure what is not space". The author of 'Words and





     Phrases' (Permanent Edition) has quoted from in re Nice
     &., Schreiber 123 F. 987, 988 to give a plausible meaning
     for the said word. He says, "the expression 'reasonable' is





     a relative term, and the facts of the particular controversy
     must be considered before the question as to what
     constitutes reasonable can be determined". It is not meant
     to be expedient or convenient but certainly something
     more than that.
10. The word 'reasonable' signifies "in accordance with
     reason". In the ultimate analysis it is a question of fact,
     whether a particular act is reasonable or not depends on
     the circumstances in a given situation. (See :
Municipal
     Corporation of Greater Mumbai and another v. Kamla Mills
     Ltd.
, 2003(4) RCR(Civil) 265 : (2003)6 SCC 315)."
11. The Court while considering the application for bail
     with reference to
Section 37
of the Act is not called upon
     to record a finding of not guilty. It is for the limited purpose
     essentially confined to the question of releasing the
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
10
accused on bail that the Court is called upon to see if
          there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
          accused is not guilty and records its satisfaction about the
          existence of such grounds. But the Court has not to




                                                                    .
consider the matter as if it is pronouncing a judgment of





          acquittal and recording a finding of not guilty.
12. Additionally, the Court has to record a finding that
          while on bail the accused is not likely to commit any
          offence and there should also exist some materials to





          come to such a conclusion.
i)   In
N.R. Mon v. Md. Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721, Supreme Court
holds,
9. ...The limitations on granting of bail come in only when
          the question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from
          the grant opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other
          twin conditions which really have relevance so far as the
          present accused-respondent is concerned, are: the

          satisfaction of the court that there are reasonable grounds

          for believing, that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
          offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
          while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
          alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the
          accused being not guilty has to be based on reasonable


          grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
          something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
          substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
          is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief




          contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
          facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to





          justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
          alleged offence. In the case hand the High Court seems to
          have completely overlooked underlying object of Section
37.
j)   In
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009) 2 SCC 624, Supreme
Court holds,
14. We may, however, hasten to add that while
          considering an application for bail with reference to
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
          Substances Act, the Court is not called upon to record a
          finding of 'not guilty'. At this stage, it is neither necessary
          nor desirable to weigh the evidence meticulously to arrive
          at a positive finding as to whether or not the accused has
          committed offence under the
Narcotic Drugs And
          Psychotropic Substances Act
. What is to be seen is
          whether there is reasonable ground for believing that the
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
11
accused is not guilty of the offence(s) he is charged with
          and further that he is not likely to commit an offence under
          the said Act while on bail. The satisfaction of the Court
          about the existence of the said twin conditions is for a




                                                                    .
limited purpose and is confined to the question of





          releasing the accused on bail.
k)   In
Union of India v. Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738, Supreme





Court holds,
7. ...
Section 37
of the NDPS Act contains special
          provisions with regard to grant of bail in respect of certain
          offences enumerated under the said Section. They are :-
(1) In the case of a person accused of an offence





          punishable under
Section 19
, (2) Under
Section 24
, (3)
          Under
Section 27A
and (4) Of offences involving
          commercial quantity. The accusation in the present case is
          with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial
          quantity. Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor

          opposes the application for bail to a person accused of the

          enumerated offences under
Section 37
of the NDPS Act,
          in case, the court proposes to grant bail to such a person,
          two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to
          the normal requirements under the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
. or any other enactment. (1) The court must be


          satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
          that the person is not guilty of such offence; (2) that
          person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
8. There is no such consideration with regard to the




          mandatory requirements, while releasing the respondents
          on bail.
9. Hence, we are satisfied that the matter needs to be
          considered afresh by the High Court. The impugned order
          is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for





          fresh consideration. It will be open to the parties to take all
          available contentions before the High Court.
l)   In
Sujit Tiwari v. State of Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84, in the given
facts, Supreme Court granted bail, by observing,
10. The prosecution story is that the appellant was aware
          of what his brother was doing and was actively helping his
          brother. At this stage we would not like to comment on the
          merits of the allegations levelled against the present
          appellant. But other than the few WhatsApp messages
          and his own statement which he has resiled from, there is
          very little other evidence. At this stage it appears that the
          appellant may not have even been aware of the entire
          conspiracy because even the prosecution story is that the
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
12
brother himself did not know what was loaded on the ship
          till he was informed by the owner of the vessel. Even when
          the heroin was loaded in the ship it was supposed to go
          towards Egypt and that would not have been a crime




                                                                    .
under the
NDPS Act
. It seems that Suprit Tiwari and other





          7 crew members then decided to make much more money
          by bringing the ship to India with the intention of disposing
          of the drugs in India. During this period the Master Suprit
          Tiwari took the help of Vishal Kumar Yadav and Irfan





          Sheikh who had to deliver the consignment to Suleman
          who had to arrange the money after delivery. The main
          allegation made against the appellant is that he sent the
          list of the crew members after deleting the names of 4
          Iranians and Esthekhar Alam to Vishal Kumar Yadav and





          Irfan Sheikh through WhatsApp with a view to make their
          disembarkation process easier. Even if we take the
          prosecution case at the highest, the appellant was aware
          that his brother was indulging in some illegal activity
          because obviously such huge amount of money could not

          be made otherwise. However, at this stage it cannot be

          said with certainty whether he was aware that drugs were
          being smuggled on the ship or not, though the allegation is
          that he made such a statement to the NCB under
Section
          67
of the NDPS Act.
11. At this stage, without going into the merits, we feel that


          the case of the appellant herein is totally different from the
          other accused. Reasonable possibility is there that he may
          be acquitted. He has been behind bars since his arrest on
          04.08.2017 i.e. for more than 2 years and he is a young




          man aged about 25 years. He is a B.Tech Graduate.
          Therefore, under facts and circumstances of this case we





          feel that this is a fit case where the appellant is entitled to
          bail because there is a possibility that he was unaware of
          the illegal activities of his brother and the other crew





          members. The case of the appellant is different from that
          of all the other accused, whether it be the Master of the
          ship, the crew members or the persons who introduced
          the Master to the prospective buyers and the prospective
          buyers.
12. We, however, feel that some stringent conditions will
          have to be imposed upon the appellant.
SUM UP:
22. From the summary of the law relating to rigors of
S.37
of NDPS Act, while
granting bail involving commercial quantities in the
NDPS Act
, the following
fundamental principles emerge:
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
13
a)   The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the question of
     granting bail arises on merits. [
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva
     Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
b)   In case the Court proposes to grant bail, two conditions are to be




                                                                   .
mandatorily satisfied in addition to the standard requirements under





     the provisions of the
CrPC
or any other enactment. [
Union of India v.
     Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738].
c)   Apart from the grant opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other
     twin conditions which really have relevance are the Court's





     satisfaction that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
     accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. [
N.R. Mon v. Md.
     Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721].
d)   The satisfaction contemplated regarding the accused being not guilty
     has to be more than prima facie grounds, considering substantial





     probable causes for believing and justifying that the accused is not
     guilty of the alleged offence. [
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva
     Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
e)   Twin conditions of
S. 37
are cumulative and not alternative. [
Customs,
     New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
f)

     If the statements of the prosecution witnesses are believed, then

     they would not result in a conviction. [
Babua v. State of Orissa
, (2001)
     2 SCC 566].
g)   At this stage, it is neither necessary nor desirable to weigh the
     evidence meticulously to arrive at a positive finding as to whether or
     not the accused has committed an offence under the
NDPS Act
and


     further that he is not likely to commit an offence under the said Act
     while on bail. [
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009) 2 SCC
     624].
h)   While considering the application for bail concerning
Section 37
, the




     Court is not called upon to record a finding of not guilty. [
Union of
     India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798].
i)   In case of inconsistency,
S. 37
of the NDPS Act prevails over
S. 439
CrPC. [
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705].
j)   Bail must be subject to stringent conditions. [
Sujit Tiwari v. State of





     Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84].
23. The difference in the order of bail and final judgment is similar to a sketch
and a painting. However, some sketches would be detailed and paintings with a
few strokes. Satisfying the rigors of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act is candling the
infertile eggs.
24.
In
Surinder Kumar Khanna v. Intelligence Officer Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence
, (2018) 8 SCC 271, Supreme Court holds,
13. In the present case it is accepted that apart from the
           aforesaid statements of co-accused there is no material
           suggesting involvement of the appellant in the crime in question.
           We are thus left with only one piece of material that is the
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
14
confessional statements of the co-accused as stated above. On
            the touchstone of law laid down by this Court such a
            confessional statement of a co-accused cannot by itself be
            taken as a substantive piece of evidence against another co-
.
accused and can at best be used or utilized in order to lend





            assurance to the Court. In the absence of any substantive
            evidence it would be inappropriate to base the conviction of the
            appellant purely on the statements of co-accused.
25.    Given the factual matrix, it is for the Investigating Officer to look into the
aspect of non-searching of his house and conduct further investigation per law,
if she so desires and thinks appropriate.
26.    The report under
Section 173(2)
CrPC does not restrict the police's
powers to investigate further, by following the law. Needless to say, that the
Prosecution has all the rights of further investigation under
S. 173(8)
CrPC,

following the law. However, the discussions mentioned above, take the case out

of the rigors of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act and makes out a case for bail.
27. The recovery did not take place directly from the petitioner. Suffice to say
that the petitioner has crossed the riders of
Section 37
of the NDPS Act.
28.    The petitioner is a permanent resident of District Kangra, therefore, his
presence can always be secured.
29.    After considering the fact that the main accused from whom the police
had recovered the capsules for which the present petitioner stands arraigned as





co-accused, has already been released on bail, coupled with the situation that
the only admissible evidence between the main accused and the bail petitioner





being a couple of phone calls on the day when the main accused was arrested,
and the fact that at the time of arrest the I.O. did not seek search warrant of his
house or associate the police official of the concerned jurisdiction to search his
house to trace similar kind of capsules and other contraband from his house,
cummulatively would not be sufficient to deny him bail. Another factor is the
lock-down due to Covid-19 disease did not prohibit the police to arrest the
accused as such the reasons to explain the delay in arrest is not supported by
any guidelines of the State or Central Government, which prohibits the police to
conduct the investigation.       Therefore, in the cumulative effect of all these
factors, the petitioner is entitled to bail.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
15
30.    Without commenting on the merits of the evidence collected so far, the
confession against co-accused is prima-facie inadmissible, and the points




                                                                     .
mentioned above would create reasons to make this Court believe that till now,





the petitioner has made out a case for bail. To fulfill the second part of
Section
37
of the NDPS Act, this Court can impose stringent conditions to ensure and





satisfy that the accused does not repeat the offence.
31.    Any detailed discussions about the evidence may prejudice the case of
the prosecution or the accused.         Suffice it to say that due to the reasons





mentioned above, and keeping in view the nature of allegations, this Court
believes that further incarceration of the accused during the period of trial is
neither warranted, nor justified, or going to achieve any significant purpose:
32.    To ensure that he does not get an opportunity to commit an offence while

on bail and the Court is putting the following stringent conditions and this bail
shall be subject to the strict terms.
33.    Given the above reasoning, the Court is granting bail to the petitioner,


subject to the imposition of following stringent conditions, which shall be over
and above, and irrespective of the contents of the form of bail bonds in chapter
XXXIII of
CrPC
. Consequently, the present petition is allowed. The petitioner




shall be released on bail in the present case, connected with the FIR mentioned





above, on his furnishing a personal bond of INR 50,000/, (INR Fifty thousand
only), to the satisfaction of the Trial Court. The petitioner shall also furnish one





surety for INR 5000 (INR Five thousand only), to the satisfaction of the
Sessions Court/Special Court/ Chief Judicial Magistrate/Ilaqua Magistrate/Duty
Magistrate/the Court, which is exercising jurisdiction over the concerned Police
Station where FIR is registered. Trial Court. The furnishing of bail bonds shall
be deemed acceptance of all stipulations, terms, and conditions of this bail
order:
a)    The petitioner to give security to the concerned Court(s), for
      attendance on every date, unless exempted, and in case of Appeal, also
      promise to appear before the higher Court, in terms of
Section 437-A
CrPC.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
16
b)      The petitioner shall give details of AADHAR number,
    phone       number(s)       (if    available),   WhatsApp           number         (if
    available), e-mail (if available), personal bank account(s) (if




                                                                     .
available), on the reverse page of the personal bonds and





    the officer attesting the personal bonds shall ascertain the
    identity of the bail-petitioner, through these documents.
c)      The Attesting officer shall on the reverse page of
    personal bonds, mention the permanent address of the
    petitioner along with the above-mentioned information,
    whatever is available.
d)      The petitioner shall join the investigation as and when called by the
    Investigating Officer or any superior officer.
e)      The petitioner shall not influence, threaten, browbeat, or pressurize

    the witnesses and the Police officials.
f)      The petitioner shall not make any inducement, threat, or promise,
    directly or indirectly, to the Investigating officer, or any other person
    acquainted with the facts of the case, to dissuade them from disclosing



    such facts to the Police, or the Court, or to tamper with the evidence.
g)      Once the trial begins, the appellant shall not in any manner try to
    delay the trial. The petitioner undertakes to appear before the concerned




    Court, on the issuance of summons/warrants by such Court. The petitioner





    shall attend the trial on each date, unless exempted, and in case of
    Appeal, also promise to appear before the higher Court, in terms of
Section 437-A
CrPC.
h)      There shall be a presumption of proper service to the petitioner about
    the date of hearing in the concerned Court, even if it takes place through
    SMS/ WhatsApp message/ E-Mail/ or any other similar medium, by the
    Court.
i)      In the first instance, the Court shall issue summons and may inform
    the Petitioner about such summons through SMS/ WhatsApp message/E-
    Mail.
j)      In case the petitioner fails to appear before the Court on the specified
    date, then the concerned Court may issue bailable warrants, and to enable
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
17
the accused to know the date, the Court may, if it so desires, also inform
    the petitioner about such Bailable warrants through SMS/ WhatsApp
    message/ E-Mail.
.
k)   Finally, if the petitioner still fails to put in an appearance, then the





    concerned Court may issue Non-Bailable warrants to procure the
    petitioner's presence and send the petitioner to the Judicial custody for a





    period for which the concerned Court may deem fit and proper.
l)   In case of Non-appearance, then irrespective of the contents of the
    bail bonds, the petitioner undertakes to pay all the expenditure (only the





    principal amount without interest), that the State might incur to produce
    him before such Court, provided such amount exceeds the amount
    recoverable after forfeiture of the bail bonds, and also subject to the
    provisions of
Sections 446
&
446-A
of CrPC. The petitioner's failure to

    reimburse the State shall entitle the trial Court to order the transfer of

    money from the bank account(s) of the petitioner. However, this recovery
    is subject to the condition that the expenditure incurred must be spent to
    trace the petitioner and it relates to the exercise undertaken solely to



    arrest the petitioner in that FIR, and during that voyage, the Police had not
    gone for any other purpose/function what so ever.
m)   The petitioner shall abstain from all criminal activities. If done, then
    while considering bail in the fresh FIR, the Court shall take into account





    that even earlier, the Court had cautioned the accused not to do so.
n)   The petitioner shall intimate about the change of residential address





    and change of phone numbers, WhatsApp number, e-mail accounts, within
    10 days from such modification, to the police station of this FIR, and also
    to the concerned Court.
o)   The petitioner shall, within ten days of his release from prison,
    procure a smartphone, and inform its IMEI number and other details to the
    SHO/I.O. of the Police station mentioned before. He shall keep the phone
    location/GPS always on the "ON" mode. Before replacing his mobile
    phone, he shall produce the existing phone to the SHO/I.O. of the police
    station and give details of the new phone. Whenever the SHO, I.O., or any
    officer of the concerned Police Station, ask him to share his location, then
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
18
he shall immediately do so. The petitioner shall neither clear the location
    history nor format his phone without permission of the concerned SHO/I.O.
    or any officer of the concerned Police Station.
.
p)   During the pendency of the trial, if the petitioner commits any offence
    under
NDPS Act
, even if it involves small quantity, then it shall be open for
    the State to apply for cancellation of this bail order.
q)   In case of violation of any of the conditions as stipulated in this order,
    the State/Public Prosecutor may apply for cancellation of bail of the
    petitioner, and even the concerned trial Court shall be competent to cancel





    the bail. Otherwise, the bail bonds shall continue to remain in force
    throughout the trial and also after that in terms of
Section 437-A
of the
    CrPC.
r)  The learned counsel for the petitioner, as well as the attesting officer,

    shall explain the conditions of this bail to the petitioner.
s)   The petitioner shall surrender all firearms along with ammunitions, if
    any, along with the arms license to the concerned authority within 30 days
    from today. However, subject to the provisions of the
Indian Arms Act,



    1959
, the petitioner shall be entitled to renew and take it back, in case of
    acquittal in this case.
34.      In case the petitioner finds the bail condition(s) as violating
           fundamental, human, or other rights, or causing difficulty due to any





           situation, then for modification of such term(s), the petitioner may
           file a reasoned application before this Court, and after taking





           cognizance, even before the Court taking cognizance or the trial
           Court, as the case may be, and such Court shall also be competent
           to modify or delete any condition.
35.      The officer in whose presence the petitioner puts
           signatures on personal bonds shall explain all conditions of this bail
           order to the petitioner, in vernacular.
36.      The petitioner undertakes to comply with all the directions
           given in this order. Furnishing of bail bonds by the petitioner is the
           acceptance of all such conditions.
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
19
37.     The officer attesting the personal bonds shall ascertain the
     identity of the bail-petitioner, through these documents, and




                                                             .
mention details on the reverse page of the personal bonds.
38.     Consequently, the petitioner shall be released on bail in the
     present case, in connection with the FIR mentioned above, on





     her/his furnishing bail bonds in the terms described above.
39.     This order does not, in any manner, limit or restrict the
     rights of the Police or the investigating agency, from further





     investigation in accordance with law.
40.     The present bail order is only for the FIR mentioned above.
     It shall not be a blanket order of bail in any other case(s) registered

     against the petitioner.
41.     Any    observation    made      hereinabove      is   neither     an
     expression of opinion on the merits of the case, nor shall the trial
     Court advert to these comments.
42.     The Court Master shall handover this order to the
     concerned branch of the Registry of this Court, and the said official




     shall immediately send a copy of this order to the District and
     Sessions Judge, concerned, by e-mail. The Court attesting the





     bonds shall not insist upon the certified copy of this order and shall
     download the same from the website of this Court, or accept a copy





     attested by an Advocate, which shall be sufficient for the record.
     The Court Master shall handover an authenticated copy of this
     order to the Counsel for the Petitioner and the Learned Advocate
     General if they ask for the same.
43.     In return for the freedom curtailed for breaking the law, the
     Court believes that the accused shall also reciprocate through
     desirable behavior.
44.     While deciding the propositions of law involved in this
     matter, I have considered all the similar orders/judgments
     pronounced by me. Thus, this order is more comprehensive and up
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
20
to date. Consequently, given above, all previous judgments/orders
            passed by me, where the proposition of law was similar, or
            somewhat similar, be not cited as precedents.
.
45.      The petition stands allowed in the terms mentioned above.
All pending applications, if any, stand closed.
(Anoop Chitkara),





                                                              Judge.
July 06, 2020 (ps)




                        r             to
::: Downloaded on - 06/07/2020 20:21:46 :::HCHP
