Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/173522090/

[Cites
32
, Cited by
0
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Amit Kumar & Another vs State Of Himachal Pradesh & Others on 17 December, 2020
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA
                                  Cr.MMO No. 384 of 2020
                                  Order reserved on : 14.12.2020
                                  Date of Decision : 17.12.2020.
.
Amit Kumar & Another                                         ...Petitioners.
                                  Versus
    State of Himachal Pradesh & others                           ...Respondents.





    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 No.





    For the petitioners    :               Petitioners in person with Mr. Ashok
                                           Chaudhary, Advocate.
For the respondents   :                Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Addl. A.G., for
                                           respondent No.1.
r             Respondents No.2 & 3 in                 person

                                           with Mr. M.A. Safee, Advocate.


    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
For quashing of FIR and consequential proceedings, husband and
    wife, who are petitioners No.1 & 2, have come up before this Court under
Section
    482
CrPC on the grounds that the FIR was registered on the basis of the complaint




    of the father of the wife, wherein allegations were imputed against the husband for





    kidnapping her in November 2017, when she was minor, aged 16 years, and they
    were unmarried, whereas she had left her home on her own, and on attaining
    majority, they voluntarily married, and are now living happily.
2.             Based on the complaint of second respondent Sh. Om Prakash,
    which disclosed cognizable and non-bailable offences, an FIR No.295 of 2017
    was registered in Police Station, Kangra, H.P. The investigation revealed that
    second respondent, Shri Om Prakash, gave a written complaint to the SHO, Police
    Station, Sadar, District Kangra, H.P. He complained that his daughter had gone to
    the School as a routine. In the evening, she did not return. Upon that they
    searched her by calling relatives, but she could not be traced. He further alleged
    that they have suspicion that Amit Kumar, petitioner No.1 herein has allured his
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
2
daughter. His wife has received a message of 'Sorry' from a mobile number
    ending with digits 190 and another phone was received from Phone number
    ending with digits 336. Both these phone numbers were used by Mehar Chand,
    father of Amit Kumar. As such, if anything happened to his daughter, who was




                                                                          .
minor, they would be responsible. Since the contents disclosed cognizable and
    non-bailable offences, as such the Police registered FIR against petitioner Amit
    Kumar.    After completion of the investigation, the police filed report under





    Section 173 Cr.P.C.
3.              The present petition has been filed jointly by Amit Kumar and the
    girl. In the memo of parties, she has given her address as wife of Amit Kumar.
The petition is supported by the affidavit of Amit Kumar. The contents of the
    petition reveals that the petitioner and the girl had solemnized marriage on
    26.11.2018 at Mata Mansa Devi Temple, Chamunda, Tehsil Dharamshala, District

    Kangra, H.P. They have annexed the affidavits given at that time and extract of

    entry of the marriage as Annexure P-3. A perusal of Annexure P-3 reveals that
    Amit Sharma, son of Shri Mehar Chand Sharma, whose date of birth is
    25.02.1996, had married the victim on 26 th November, 2018. In the petition, the


    parents of the victim have been arraigned as respondents No.2 and 3 and the State
    of Himachal Pradesh as respondents No.1.
4.              On 14.12.2020, this matter was taken up in Physical Court as a




    special case. Although, the proceedings in other cases were taken through video
    conference due to Covid-19 pandemic.
5.              Learned Additional Advocate General has also handed over the
    reply in the Court, which is taken on record.
6.              When the matter was heard on 14.12.2020, the prosecutrix
    (Petitioner No. 2) was present in Court along with her husband namely Amit
    Kumar, father Shri Om Prakash and mother Smt. Manju Lata. Learned Additional
    Advocate General, on instructions received from the Police official present in the
    Court, did not dispute their identity.
7.              The parents of the girl were also present in the Court. Initially the
    father was called and he was inquired, on which he stated that his daughter had
    married on attaining the age of majority and she is living happily. Subsequently,
    his statement on oath was recorded. After that the father was sent outside the
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
3
Court room and mother of the girl Smt. Manju Lata was inquired about the
    conditions of the girl. This Court specifically inquired from Ms. Manju Lata
    about the fact that whether in alone, the victim complained about her married life,
    to which she stated that as on date, her daughter is living happily.
.
8.             Father, who is arraigned as second respondent stated in presence of
    his counsel that the Police had registered FIR No.295 of 2017, Annexure P-1 on
    his complaint. At that time, his daughter was around 16 years of age. She had left





    the home on her own. Now she has solemnized marriage with Amit Kumar son of
    Shri Mehar Chand, resident of village Baag, P.O. Daulatpur, Tehsil and District
    Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. As per his knowledge, his daughter is living happily





    with her husband and he does not want to continue with the FIR and it be
    quashed. He is making this statement without any coercion and free state of mind.
    He has firm belief that if this FIR is not quashed, it may be a factor in spoiling of

    matrimonial life of his daughter and on the other hand, he has firm belief that if

    this FIR is quashed, it will lead to very happy married life of his daughter.
9.             Mother, who is arraigned as second respondent stated in presence
    of her counsel that her daughter had voluntarily left the home, at the time, when


    she was 16 years of age. After attaining the age of majority i.e. 18 years, she
    performed marriage with Amit Kumar. Her daughter is living happily with her
    husband and she wants this FIR be quashed.
10.            After that parents were sent out and the girl was called. At this
    stage, in the Court room, proceedings were conducted in Camera and apart from





    female Research Assistant of Court, Private Secretary, learned counsel for the
    parties, none was present. On inquiry from the victim, she appeared to be a bold





    girl and stated that now she has taken admission in the first year of LLB course in
    Punjab University, Chandigarh. She told that she had left the home on her own
    and she was and she is in love with the petitioner and is living very happily with
    him till date. She stated that she is hopeful that her husband would not take
    advantage of this compromise and would keep her happy in future also. Seeing
    the demeanor of the girl, her statement was recorded separately.
11.            The girl, in her statement on oath, has stated that she has
    compromised the entire matter with the accused without any coercion, duress,
    pressure or any wrong tactics. She further states that she made statement in her
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
4
full conscious state of mind and admitted that she is aware that this stand would
    result in the quashing of F.I.R. against the petitioner/accused. She also stated that
    she, on her own, had left her father's home, when she was 16 years of age. On
    attaining the age of 18 years, she, on her own, performed the marriage with




                                                                          .
accused Amit Kumar. It was a love marriage. She was in love with him when she
    was 14 years of age. After her wedding with Amit Kumar, she is living happily
    with him. She wanted this FIR, registered at the instance of her father, to be





    quashed.   She had made a statement under
Section 164
Cr.P.C., before the
    concerned Magistrate under the pressure of her relatives. At that time, keeping in
    view her conduct of leaving her home, without informing her parents has put her





    under great mental stress, which led to that statement. Whatever, she had stated
    before concerned Judicial Magistrate, in her statement under
Section 164
Cr.P.C.,
    was not out of her free will. Today, what she is stating before this Court is in

    absolute free and compose state of mind. She is now 20 years of age and she

    understands what is good and what is bad for her, what is right and what is wrong
    for her and she is fully informed. She wanted this FIR to be quashed because its
    continuation may affect her happy married life.
12.             The demeanor of the girl was seen by the Court and it was noticed
    that she was well oriented to place and time; was in a perfect mental and physical
    state, wearing costumes of a newly wedded wife; she was looking happy, there




    was no sign of fear and she was sitting in the Court room quietly. This Court did
    not notice any sort of threat directly or even indirectly on her. She stated that she





    is a student of 1st year of Law from Panjab University, Chandigarh.
13.            Admittedly after attainment of majority, the girl married the





    accused. They are living together a happy married life.
14.            Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District
    Magistrate as a normal procedure. However, there is inherent jurisdiction of the
    High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to intervene in
    such kind of matter and it is not the requirement of law that the cancellation has to
    be approved only through the District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of High
    Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be exercised, depending upon the facts
    and circumstances of each and every case.
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
5
15.            Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to maintain the
    stand which they have taken in this compromise which is likely to result in the
    acquittal of the accused. Prima facie, it appears that the complaint was used
    because the girl had left home and accused was a suspect. The parties are likely to




                                                                           .
live together for lifetime and intervention at this stage would create cordial
    environment for peaceful relation between them.
16.            If the inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC is not invoked,





    then it may lead to bitterness in relations. Every time the accused will be
    summoned in the Court, he would blame complainant for the money spent on case
    and travel.
17.            Yuvan Noah Harari, in his world famous book, "Sapiens- A Brief
    History of Humankind", (London: Vintage, 2011), p-427-428, wrote about the
    impact of happy married life, as follows:
Family and community seem to have more impact on our
                     happiness than money and health. People with strong families

                     who live in tight-knit and supportive communities are
                     significantly happier than people whose families are
                     dysfunctional and who have never found (or never sought) a
                     community to be part of. Marriage is particularly important.
                     Repeated studies have found that there is a very close correction


                     between good marriages and high subjective well-being, and
                     between bad marriages and misery. This holds true irrespective
                     of economic or even physical conditions. An impecunious
                     invalid surrounded by a loving spouse, a devoted family and a




                     warm community may well feel better than an alienated
                     billionaire, provided that the invalid's poverty is not too severe
                     and that his illness is not degenerative or painful.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
18.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H. Chanchani and
    another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination
    of the question as regards the propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking
    cognizance and issuing process need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing
    the charge. The Court observed thus :-
.... .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to us
                     inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to plead at
                     the time of framing of charges that there is no sufficient
                     material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred from
                     approaching the court even at an earliest (sic earlier) point of
                     time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
6
summons the accused to appear to contend that the very
                     issuance of the order of taking cognizance is invalid on the
                     ground that no offence can be said to have been made out on the
                     allegations made in the complaint petition. It has been held in a
                     number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be
                     exercised sparingly and in the interest of justice. But allowing




                                                                            .
the criminal proceeding to continue even where the allegations





                     in the complaint petition do not make out any offence would be
                     tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore,
                     there cannot be any dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
19.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd. and
    another
, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:-
8. .... .... ....There is no hard and fast rule that the objection as
                     to cognizability of offence and maintainability of the complaint
                     should be allowed to be raised only at the time of framing the
                     charge.
20.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 758,


    the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court holds as under:-
30.
In the light of these judgments of the Supreme Court, we
                     have no doubt in our mind that under
Section 482
of the Code
                     of Criminal Procedure, the High Court has the power to quash


                     an FIR or even a complaint subject to limitations and conditions
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various judgments.
It need not wait for completion of investigation and taking
                     cognizance by the Magistrate. There is no dispute that this
                     power has to be exercised by the High Courts very sparingly




                     with circumspection and also in rarest of rare cases. Though
                     there are limitations on exercise of power by the High Court,





                     yet that would not in any way suggest that High Court lacks the
                     power.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
21.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three
    Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction
                      of the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a
                      proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any
                      Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily,
                      criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person must
                      be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
                      would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an
                      interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to
                      lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise
                      of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
7
categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and
        should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may
        be cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take
        the view that the institution or continuance of criminal
        proceedings against an accused person may amount to the
        abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the




                                                              .
impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the





        criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence
        alleged to have been committed by an accused person and it
        manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the
        institution or continuance of the said proceeding, the High





        Court would be justified in quashing the proceedings on that
        ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may, for instance,
        furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise where
        the allegations in the First Information Report or the
        complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and





        accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged;
        in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is
        a matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First
        Information Report to decide whether the offence alleged is
        disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate for the
        High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow

        the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the

        accused person. A third category of cases in which the inherent
        jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked
        may also arise. In cases falling under this category the
        allegations made against the accused person do constitute an
        offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced in


        support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly
        fails to prove the charge.
In dealing with this class of cases, it
        is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
        where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence




        which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the
        accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence which
        on its appreciation may or may not support the accusation in





        question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the
        High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether
        the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the function
        of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to





        any party to invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and
        contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the
        accusation made against the accused would not be sustained.
        Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent
        jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of
        quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of the
        judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G.
        Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar
        v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State
        of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (
AIR 1954 Punj 193), Nripendra
        Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal 1018
        and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47
        Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39).
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
8
22.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao
    Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under:-
7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at
                     the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by




                                                                            .
the court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as
                     made prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to





                     take into consideration any special features which appear in a
                     particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the
                     interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue. This is so
                     on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique





                     purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an
                     ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is
                     likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to
                     continue, the court may while taking into consideration the
                     special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it





                     may be at a preliminary stage.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
23.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and

    Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr., Criminal Appeal No. 1723 of 2017, decided on

    4.10.2017, a Three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad
    principles for quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
15. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
                  subject, may be summarised in the following propositions :
(i)
Section 482
preserves the inherent powers of the High Court
                     to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the




                     ends of justice. The provision does not confer new powers. It
                     only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in the High





                     Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
                     quash a First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on





                     the ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the
                     offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of
                     jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
                     compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by
                     the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of Criminal
                     Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under
Section 482
is
                     attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
                     complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction
                     under
Section 482
, the High Court must evaluate whether the
                     ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
9
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
                    ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends
                    of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information
                    Report should be quashed on the ground that the offender and




                                                                           .
victim have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts





                    and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive elaboration
                    of principles can be formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under
Section 482
and while





                    dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High
                    Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
                    offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental
                    depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
                    appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the





                    victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
                    speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon
                    society. The decision to continue with the trial in such cases is
                    founded on the overriding element of public interest in
                    punishing persons for serious offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be

                    criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant
                    element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so
                    far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from


                    commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
                    transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
                    situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the
                    dispute;
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
                    proceeding if in view of the compromise between the





                    disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and the
                    continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause oppression
                    and prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
                    propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving
                    the financial and economic well-being of the state have
                    implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute
                    between private disputants. The High Court would be justified
                    in declining to quash where the offender is involved in an
                    activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour.
                    The consequences of the act complained of upon the financial
                    or economic system will weigh in the balance.
24.           A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian Singh v.
    State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on quashing on account
    of compromise/compounding, in the following terms:
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
10
53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language suggests,
        saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by
        virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the
        process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It
        begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which means that
        the provision is an overriding provision. These words leave no




                                                               .
manner of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code limits





        or restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise of
        such power is provided in
Section 482
itself i.e., to prevent
        abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the
        ends of justice. As has been repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers no new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards
        existing inherent powers possessed by High Court necessary to
        prevent abuse of the process of any Court or to secure the ends
        of justice. It is equally well settled that the power is not to be
        resorted to if there is specific provision in the Code for the





        redress of the grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be
        exercised very sparingly and it should not be exercised as
        against the express bar of law engrafted in any other provision
        of the Code.
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground
        of settlement between an offender and victim is not the same

        thing as compounding of offence. They are different and not
        interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of compounding
        of offences given to a court under
Section 320
is materially
        different from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High
        Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of


        offences, power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the
        provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is guided
        solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the
        formation of opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal




        offence or criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided
        by the material on record as to whether the ends of justice
        would justify such exercise of power although the ultimate





        consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having
        regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and victim





        has been settled although offences are not compoundable, it
        does so as in its opinion, continuation of criminal proceedings
        will be an exercise in futility and justice in the case demands
        that the dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace is
        restored; securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding
        factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful effect on
        the public and consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers
        and threatens well-being of society and it is not safe to leave the
        crime- doer only because he and the victim have settled the
        dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation,
        yet certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
        or without permission of the Court. In respect of serious
        offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of
        mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of moral
        turpitude under special statutes, like Prevention of Corruption
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
11
Act or the offences committed by public servants while working
                     in that capacity, the settlement between offender and victim can
                     have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which
                     overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour having
                     arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial,
                     partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out




                                                                           .
of matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family





                     dispute, where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender
                     and victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
                     irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made
                     compoundable, the High Court may within the framework of its





                     inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal
                     complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that on the face of such
                     settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of offender being
                     convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice
                     shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated. The





                     above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will
                     depend on its own facts and no hard and fast category can be
                     prescribed.
25.
In Criminal Appeal No. 349 of 2019, titled as
State of Madhya

    Pradesh vs. Laxmi Narayan
, decided on 5th of March, 2019, the Hon'ble Supreme

    Court has held as under:
13. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of
                    this Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed


                    and held as under:
i) that the power conferred under
Section 482
of the Code to
                         quash the criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable




                         offences under
Section 320
of the Code can be exercised
                         having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil
                         character, particularly those arising out of commercial





                         transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or
                         family disputes and when the parties have resolved the entire
                         dispute amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions





                         which involved heinous and serious offences of mental
                         depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such
                         offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact
                         on society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the
                         offences under the special statutes like
Prevention of
                         Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants
                         while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely
                         on the basis of compromise between the victim and the
                         offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act etc.
                         would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences
                         and therefore are to be treated as crime against the society
                         and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
12
criminal proceedings for the offence under
Section 307
IPC
                  and/or the
Arms Act
etc. which have a serious impact on the
                  society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers
                  under Section 482 of the Code, on the ground that the parties
                  have resolved their entire dispute amongst themselves.
However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely




                                                                    .
because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or





                  the charge is framed under this provision. It would be open
                  to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation
                  of
Section 307
IPC is there for the sake of it or the
                  prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if





                  proved, would lead to framing the charge under
Section
                  307
IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
                  Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such
                  injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
                  nature of weapons used etc. However, such an exercise by





                  the High Court would be permissible only after the evidence
                  is collected after investigation and the charge sheet
                  is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such
                  exercise is not permissible when the matter is still under
                  investigation. Therefore, the ultimate conclusion in
                  paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in the

                  case of Narinder Singh (supra) should be read harmoniously

                  and to be read as a whole and in the circumstances stated
                  hereinabove;
v) while exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code
                  to quash the criminal proceedings in respect of non-
                  compoundable offences, which are private in nature and do


                  not have a serious impact on society, on the ground that
                  there is a settlement/compromise between the victim and the
                  offender, the High Court is required to consider the
                  antecedents of the accused; the conduct of the accused,




                  namely, whether the accused was absconding and why he
                  was absconding, how he had managed with the complainant
                  to enter into a compromise etc.
14. Insofar as the present case is concerned, the High Court has
              quashed the criminal proceedings for the offences under
Sections
              307
and
34
IPC mechanically and even when the investigation





              was under progress. Somehow, the accused managed to enter into
              a compromise with the complainant and sought quashing of the
              FIR on the basis of a settlement. The allegations are serious in
              nature. He used the fire arm also in commission of the offence.
              Therefore, the gravity of the offence and the conduct of the
              accused is not at all considered by the High Court and solely on
              the basis of a settlement between the accused and the
              complainant, the High Court has mechanically quashed the FIR,
              in exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code, which is not
              sustainable in the eyes of law. The High Court has also failed to
              note the antecedents of the accused.
NON-COMPOUNDABLE OFFENCES CAN BE QUASHED:
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
13
26.             In the present case, the offences are not compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. However, in view of the entire facts and circumstances of the
    case, the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC can be invoked to quash the
    FIR and subsequent proceedings.
.
27.
In
Mahesh Chand v. State of Rajasthan
, 1990 SCC 781, the
    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:
2. The accused were acquitted by the trial court, but they were
                     convicted by the High Court for the offence under
section 307
Indian Penal Code This offence is not compoundable under law.
The parties, however. want to treat it a special case, in view of





                     the peculiar circumstances of the case. It is said and indeed not
                     disputed that one of the accused is a lawyer practising in the
                     lower court. There was a counter case arising out of the same
                     transaction. It is said that this case has already been
                     compromised. The decision of this Court in
Suresh Babu v. State

                     of Andhra Pradesh
, 1987(2) JT 361, has been also referred to in
                     support of the plea for permission to compound the offence.
3. We gave our anxious consideration to the case and also the
                     plea put forward for seeking permission to compound the
                     offence. After examining the nature of the case and the
                     circumstances under which the offence was committed, it may be


                     proper that the trial court shall permit them to compound the
                     offence.
28.
In
Y. Suresh Babu v State of A.P.
, 2005 (1) SCC 347, Hon'ble




    Supreme Court, while dealing with
section 326
of IPC, which was non-
    compoundable offence, permitted the parties to compound the offence.
29.
In
Bharti v. State of Haryana
, 2014(4) SCC 14, Hon'ble Supreme
    Court holds as under:
6. We are mindful of the fact that
Section 354
of the IPC is, as
                       of today, non-compoundable. But, as noticed by us, it was
                       compoundable when the instant offence was committed with
                       the permission of the court. Even then, we would have
                       hesitated to permit compounding of the offence. But, facts of
                       this case are very peculiar. Respondent No.2 and her husband
                       have, even today, maintained their stand taken in the trial court
                       that they have entered into a compromise with the appellant. As
                       we have already noted, respondent No.2 has filed an affidavit
                       to that effect in this Court. Compromise is, therefore, not an
                       afterthought. Pertinently, the incident in question took-place
                       way back in the year 2000. About 13 long years have gone-by.
In her affidavit respondent No. 2 has stated that the appellant is
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
14
her neighbour and they are staying peacefully since 2000 till
                       date. We are of the opinion that since the appellant and
                       respondent No. 2 are neighbours it would be in the interest of
                       justice to permit the parties to compound the offences. If the
                       conviction is confirmed, the relations may get strained and the
                       peace, which is now prevailing between the two families, may




                                                                           .
be disturbed. In the peculiar facts of this case, therefore, in





                       order to accord quietus to the disputes between the appellant
                       and respondent No. 2 and in the larger interest of peace, we
                       permit the appellant and respondent No. 2 to compound the
                       offences. Accordingly, offences under
Sections 451
and
354
of





                       the IPC are permitted to be compounded. The impugned
                       judgment is set aside. The appellant is acquitted. The appellant-
                       Bharti is in jail. The appellant-Bharti should be released
                       forthwith, unless he is required in any other case.
30.
In
Saloni Rupam Bhartiya v. Rupam Prahlad Bhartiya
, 2015(4)
    R.C.R.(Criminal) 172, a three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, while
    dealing with
Section 498-A
of IPC, which was non-compoundable offence, holds
    as follows:
It was submitted by learned counsel for the parties that in the
                        light of the above subsequent developments especially the
                        fact that the marriage between the parties itself stands
                        dissolved by a decree passed by a competent court, nothing
                        really remained between the parties to be addressed and that



                        the conviction of the respondent-husband under
Section
                        498A
of the Indian Penal Code could be set aside. We see no
                        reason to decline that prayer. In the circumstances, therefore,
                        and in the light of the fact that the parties have successfully




                        negotiated an amicable settlement sinking and resolving all
                        their differences and disputes and finding a lasting solution





                        on all the outstanding issues between themselves, we see no
                        reason why the conviction recorded by the courts below and
                        the sentence of imprisonment till the rising of the Court,
                        which the respondent has already undergone should continue





                        to blemish the respondent-husband. We accordingly set aside
                        the judgment and order of conviction of the respondent under
Section 498A
of the Indian Penal Code.
RELIEF:
31.           In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as judicial
    precedents, a few of which have been mentioned hereinabove, I am of the
    considered opinion that continuation of these proceedings will only cause
    unnecessary burden on the trial Court but in all likelihood is going to cause
    distressing hardship on both the victim as well as the accused, without resulting
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
15
into any fruitful purpose whatsoever. The accused and the prosecutrix are living
    happily. The denial of relief may bring the bitterness in the euphoria of new
    wedding. Moreover, our trial Courts are already burdened with so many cases and
    it will be a total wastage of the valuable time of the Courts. If these types of




                                                                           .
proceedings are permitted to be continued and the accused are prosecuted, it will
    serve no purpose whatsoever. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that this is
    a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of





    the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the above mentioned FIR and
    consequent proceedings.
32.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State of Himachal





    Pradesh (SC
); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:-
47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is
                     concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the order
                     of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was already
                     pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions

                     against the order of the High Court rejecting their petition for

                     quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to these peculiar
                     facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In any case, once we
                     hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of cognizance would
                     automatically stands vitiated.
CONSEQUENCES:
33.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR
    639, at p 642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when parties, despite
                     falling apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship or





                     reunion.
34.            Consequently, this petition is allowed and FIR No.295 of 2017,





    registered at Police Station Kangra, District Kangra (H.P.) for the commission of
    offences punishable under
Sections 363
,
376
,
506
of the Indian Penal Code and
Section 4
of the POCSO, is quashed.          Since FIR has been quashed, all the
    consequential proceedings, if any, are also quashed and set aside. The bail bonds
    are accordingly cancelled and discharged. Pending application(s), if any, also
    stands disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                                          Judge.
December 17, 2020 (ps)
::: Downloaded on - 21/12/2020 20:16:28 :::HCHP
