Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 5
                                          of 2009
Citation: SCC 303). However, in a given case,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/178439365/

[Cites
31
, Cited by
24
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Sahil Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 24 August, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AT
                           SHIMLA

                 ON THE 24TH DAY OF AUGUST, 2021




                                                      .
BEFORE
             HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANOOP CHITKARA





         CRIMINAL MISC. PETITION (MAIN) U/S 482 CRPC No.
                           348 of 2021

    Between:-
1.     SAHIL KUMAR
           SON OF SHRI PARKASH CHAND,
2.     SONI KUMAR
           SON OF SHRI PARSHOTAM      CHAND,
3.     RAGHUNADAN SHARMA
           SON OF SHRI KRISHAN KUMAR SHARMA,
4.     SUNIL RANA,
           SON OF SHRI RANJEET SINGH




    ALL ARE RESIDENTS OF
    VILLAGE AND POST OFFICE NERTI,





    TEHSIL SHAHPUR,
    DISTRICT KANGRA (HP)





                                              .....PETITIONERS

    (BY SH. VISHWA BHUSHAN AND SH. GURMEET
    BHARDWAJ, ADVOCATES)

    AND
1.     THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH
           THROUGH ADDITIONAL CHIEF SECRETARY
           PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
2
(HOME) TO THE GOVERNMENT
          OF HIMACHAL PRADESH,
          SHIMLA-171002 (H.P.)




                                                            .
2.    DR. VIPIN KUMAR





          SON OF SHRI DHANI RAM,
          PRESENTLY WORKING AS
          ASSISTANT PROFESSOR





          (SURGICAL GASRA), IN THE
          DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY,
          INDIRA GANDHI    MEDICAL
           COLLEGE,    SHIMLA(H.P.)




                                     .....RESPONDENTS
    (1.   SH. ARVIND SHARMA, ADDITIONAL   ADVOCATE
          GENERAL, WITH SH. MANOJ BAGGA,    SSISTANT
          ADVOCATS GENERAL, FOR RESPONDENT NO.1
2.    SH.  ASHOK    KUMAR,                ADVOCATE,                    FOR
          RESPONDENT NO.2)

         Reserved on: 23.08.2021



         Decided on: 24.08.2021
    ____________________________________________________
              This petition coming on for admission this day, the




    Court passed the following:
FIR     Dated        Police Station   Sections
    No.





    86      16.04.2018   Kangra,          353 and 186 read with
                         district
Section 34
of IPC and
                         Kangra, H.P.     Section 3 of HP Medicare
                                          Service Person Act No.5
                                          of 2009.
2.         The petitioners, arraigned as accused in the FIR
    mentioned above, have come up before this Court under Section
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
3
482,
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973, for quashing the
    proceedings because they have compromised the matter.
3.           Ld. Counsel for the parties submitted that the parties




                                                                .
have resolved the criminal dispute between them and seek
    quashing of the FIR mentioned above and closure of all





    consequential proceedings.
ANALYSIS:
4.           Ld. Additional Advocate General contended that the





    High      Court    cannot   quash   FIR   solely      based        on     the
    settlement/compromise between the complainant and the accused,
    without even considering the gravity and seriousness of the


    offences alleged against the accused persons because the offences
    alleged were against the society at large and not restricted to the
    personal disputes between the parties.
5.           A perusal of statement of the complainant and other
    evidence collected by the prosecution reveal that the occurrence




    took place on a spur of moment and without any preparation for





    it. The victim is not a layman, but a qualified person. Before
    entering into compromise, he must have thought on it. Given his





    statement that the FIR be quashed, it would not be justified for
    this Court to take contrary opinion. He was the person, who was
    present at the spot and knew the position at its best.
6.           The following aspects would be relevant to conclude
    this petition: -
a)    On 23.08.2021 the victim was present in the Court. His
         statement was also recorded, on oath, in which he says that
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
4
he has compromised the entire matter with the accused
         persons without any pressure and in a conscious state of
         mind and admitted that he is aware that this stand would




                                                                .
result in the quashing of F.I.R. against the petitioners.
b) The parties have amicably settled the matter between





         them in terms of the compromise deed (Annexure P-2). The
         complainant does not dispute this compromise deed.
c)   In the given facts, the occurrence does not affect public





         peace or tranquility.
d) The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will,
         and the purpose of criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in


         nature and to work for bringing peace in family and society.
e)   The pendency of trial affects career and happiness.
f)   Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to



         maintain the stand they have taken in this compromise,
         which is expected to result in the accuseds' acquittal.
g)   Accused is/are the first offender(s).
h) The accused are facing prosecution for the last more
         than three years





    JUDICIAL       PRECEDENTS           ON     QUASHING               UNDER
    SECTION 326
IPC
:
7.
In
Yogendra Yadav v State of Jharkhand
,
    21.7.2014, Supreme Court holds,
              [4]. Now, the question before this Court is
              whether this Court can compound the offences
              under
Sections 326
and
307
of the IPC which are
              non-compoundable. Needless to say that offences
              which are non-compoundable cannot be
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
5
compounded by the court. Courts draw the power
            of compounding offences from
Section 320
of
            the Code.
The said provision has to be strictly
            followed (
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
,




                                                             .
(2012)10 SCC 303). However, in a given case,





            the High Court can quash a criminal proceeding
            in exercise of its power under
section 482
of the
            Code having regard to the fact that the parties





            have amicably settled their disputes and the
            victim has no objection, even though the
            offences are non-compoundable. In which cases
            the High Court can exercise its discretion to




            quash the proceedings will depend on facts and
            circumstances of each case. Offences which
            involve moral turpitude, grave offences like rape,
            murder etc. cannot be effaced by quashing the

            proceedings because that will have harmful

            effect on the society. Such offences cannot be
            said to be restricted to two individuals or two
            groups. If such offences are quashed, it may send
            wrong signal to the society. However, when the



            High Court is convinced that the offences are
            entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not
            affect public peace or tranquillity and where it




            feels that quashing of such proceedings on
            account of compromise would bring about peace





            and would secure ends of justice, it should not
            hesitate to quash them. In such cases, the





            prosecution becomes a lame prosecution.
            Pursuing such a lame prosecution would be
            waste of time and energy. That will also unsettle
            the compromise and obstruct restoration of
            peace.
8.        In DimpeyGujraj v Union Territory, 2013 (11)
    SCC 497, Supreme Court holds,
            [5].
In light of the above observations of this
            court in
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab and
            another
, 2012(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 543 : 2012(4)
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
6
Recent Apex Judgments (R.A.J.) 549 : 2012(5)
             CTC 526 (SC) we feel that this is a case where
             the continuation of criminal proceedings would
             tantamount to abuse of process of law because




                                                              .
the alleged offences are not heinous offences





             showing extreme depravity nor are they against
             the society. They are offences of a personal
             nature and burying them would bring about





             peace and amity between the two sides. In the
             circumstances of the case, FIR No. 163 dated
             26/10/2006 registered under
Section 147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
307
,
452
and
506
of the Indian Penal




             Code at Police Station Sector 3, Chandigarh and
             all consequential proceedings arising therefrom
             including the final report presented under
Section
             173
of the Code and charges framed by the trial

             court are hereby quashed.
9.
In
Y. Suresh Babu v State of A.P.
, 2005 (1) SCC
    347, Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with
section 326
of



    IPC, which was non-compoundable offence, permitted the parties
    to compound the offence.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
10.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
,
    1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the





    determination of the question as regards the propriety of the order
    of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need not
    necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court
    holds, "...This argument, however, does not appeal to us
    inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to plead at the
    time of framing of charges that there is no sufficient material for
    such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
7
Criminal Procedure Code
, he is debarred from approaching the
    court even at an earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the
    Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and summons the




                                                               .
accused to appear to contend that the very issuance of the order of
    taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be





    said to have been made out on the allegations made in the
    complaint petition. It has been held in a number of cases that
    power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the





    interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to
    continue even where the allegations in the complaint petition do
    not make out any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the


    process of court, and therefore, there cannot be any dispute that in
    such case power under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
11.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1)



    R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High
    Court observed that the High Court need not wait for completion




    of investigation and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
NON-COMPOUNDABLE OFFENCES CAN BE QUASHED:
12.         In the present case, the offence under
Section 498-A
IPC is not compoundable under
Section 320
CrPC. However, the
    following precedents are relevant.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh
    v Laxmi Narayan, Cr.A No.
349 of 2019, decided on 5th of
    March, 2019, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds, [13]. Considering
    the law on the point and the other decisions of this Court on the
    point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed and held as under:
i) that the power conferred under
Section 482
of
             the Code to quash the criminal proceedings for
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
8
the non-compoundable offences under
Section
     320
of the Code can be exercised having
     overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil
     character, particularly those arising out of




                                                      .
commercial transactions or arising out of





     matrimonial relationship or family disputes and
     when the parties have resolved the entire dispute
     amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those
     prosecutions which involved heinous and serious
     offences of mental depravity or offences like
     murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not




     private in nature and have a serious impact on
     society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised
     for the offences under the special statutes

     like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences

     committed by public servants while working in
     that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the
     basis of compromise between the victim and the
     offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms
     Act etc. would fall in the category of heinous and
     serious offences and therefore are to be treated as




     crime against the society and not against the
     individual alone, and therefore, the criminal





     proceedings for the offence under
Section
     307
IPC and/or the
Arms Act
etc. which have a





     serious impact on the society cannot be quashed
     in exercise of powers under Section 482 of the
     Code, on the ground that the parties have
     resolved their entire dispute amongst themselves.
     However, the High Court would not rest its
     decision merely because there is a mention
     of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the charge is
     framed under this provision. It would be open to
     the High Court to examine as to whether
     incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is there for the
     sake of it or the prosecution has collected
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
9
sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead
             to framing the charge under
Section 307
IPC. For
             this purpose, it would be open to the High Court
             to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether




                                                             .
such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts





             of the body, nature of weapons used etc.
             However, such an exercise by the High Court
             would be permissible only after the evidence is





             collected after investigation and the charge sheet
             is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial.
             Such exercise is not permissible when the matter
             is still under investigation. Therefore, the




             ultimate conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7
             of the decision of this Court in the case of
Narinder Singh
(supra) should be read
             harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in

             the circumstances stated hereinabove;
v) while exercising the power under Section
             482 of the Code to quash the criminal
             proceedings in respect of non-compoundable
             offences, which are private in nature and do not



             have a serious impact on society, on the ground
             that there is a settlement/compromise between
             the victim and the offender, the High Court is




             required to consider the antecedents of the
             accused; the conduct of the accused, namely,





             whether the accused was absconding and why he
             was absconding, how he had managed with the





             complainant to enter into a compromise etc.
13.
In
Narinder Singh v State of Punjab
, 2014 (2)
    R.C.R. (Criminal) 482, Supreme Court holds, "[31]. In view of
    the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
    principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving
    adequate treatment to the settlement between the parties and
    exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code while
    accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
10
to accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
    criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the




                                                             .
Code is to be distinguished from the power





             which lies in the Court to compound the offences
             under Section 320 of the Code. No doubt, under
             Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has





             inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings
             even in those cases which are not compoundable,
             where the parties have settled the matter between
             themselves. However, this power is to be




             exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement
             and on that basis petition for quashing the
             criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor

             in such cases would be to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
                   any Court. While exercising the power
                   the High Court is to form an opinion on



                   either of the aforesaid two objectives.
             (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those
             prosecutions which involve heinous and serious




             offences of mental depravity or offences like
             murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not





             private in nature and have a serious impact on
             society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have





             been committed under special statute like the
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences
             committed by Public Servants while working in
             that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the
             basis of compromise between the victim and the
             offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having
             overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil
             character, particularly those arising out of
             commercial transactions or arising out of
             matrimonial relationship or family disputes
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
11
should be quashed when the parties have
     resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
     (V) While exercising its powers, the High Court
     is to examine as to whether the possibility of




                                                       .
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation





     of criminal cases would put the accused to great
     oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice
     would be caused to him by not quashing the





     criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under
Section 307
IPC would fall
     in the category of heinous and serious offences
     and therefore is to be generally treated as crime




     against the society and not against the individual
     alone. However, the High Court would not rest
     its decision merely because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the charge is

     framed under this provision. It would be open to

     the High Court to examine as to whether
     incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is there for the
     sake of it or the prosecution has collected
     sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead



     to proving the charge under
Section 307
IPC. For
     this purpose, it would be open to the High Court
     to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether




     such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts
     of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical





     report in respect of injuries suffered by the
     victim can generally be the guiding factor. On





     the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High
     Court can examine as to whether there is a strong
     possibility of conviction or the chances of
     conviction are remote and bleak. In the former
     case it can refuse to accept the settlement and
     quash the criminal proceedings whereas in the
     later case it would be permissible for the High
     Court to accept the plea compounding the
     offence based on complete settlement between
     the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
     swayed by the fact that the settlement between
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
12
the parties is going to result in harmony between
     them which may improve their future
     relationship.
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its




                                                       .
power under Section 482 of the Code or not,





     timings of settlement play a crucial role. Those
     cases where the settlement is arrived at
     immediately after the alleged commission of





     offence and the matter is still under investigation,
     the High Court may be liberal in accepting the
     settlement      to     quash       the     criminal
     proceedings/investigation. It is because of the




     reason that at this stage the investigation is still
     on and even the charge sheet has not been filed.
     Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed
     but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is

     still at infancy stage, the High Court can show

     benevolence in exercising its powers favourably,
     but after prima facie assessment of the
     circumstances/material mentioned above. On the
     other hand, where the prosecution evidence is



     almost complete or after the conclusion of the
     evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,
     normally the High Court should refrain from




     exercising its power under Section 482 of the
     Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in





     a position to decide the case finally on merits and
     to come a conclusion as to whether the offence





     under
Section 307
IPC is committed or not.
     Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is
     already recorded by the trial court and the matter
     is at the appellate stage before the High Court,
     mere compromise between the parties would not
     be a ground to accept the same resulting in
     acquittal of the offender who has already been
     convicted by the trial court. Here charge is
     proved under
Section 307
IPC and conviction is
     already recorded of a heinous crime and,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
13
therefore, there is no question of sparing a
             convict found guilty of such a crime.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF




                                                               .
QUASHING:
14.         The law is almost settled by larger benches





    judgments of Supreme Court that the offences, those are not
    listed as compoundable, under
Section 320
Cr.PC, can also be
    compounded, and the procedure to follow would be by quashing





    the FIR, and consequent proceedings.
In
R.P. Kapur v State of
    Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three-member Bench of Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds, "[6]. ...It is well established that the


    inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash
    proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the
    process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an accused
    person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the




    High Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said





    proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable
    or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern





    the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may
    indicate some categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction
    can and should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There
    may be cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take
    the view that the institution or continuance of criminal
    proceedings against an accused person may amount to the abuse
    of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the impugned
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
14
proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal
    proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have
    been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears




                                                                .
that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of
    the said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in





    quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite
    sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category.
    Cases may also arise where the allegations in the First





    Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at
    their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute
    the offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating


    evidence arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the complaint
    or the First Information Report to decide whether the offence
    alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate for



    the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow
    the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the accused




    person. A third category of cases in which the inherent





    jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may
    also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations





    made against the accused person do constitute an offence alleged
    but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support of the
    case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the
    charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is important to bear
    in mind the distinction between a case where there is no legal
    evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and
    clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
15
there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not
    support the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction
    under S. 561-A, the High Court would not embark upon an




                                                                .
enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not.
    That is the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would





    not be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent
    jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the
    evidence the accusation made against the accused would not be





    sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the
    inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the
    matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of


    the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G.
    Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v.
    Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of



    Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954 Punj 193), NripendraBhusan
    Roy v. GobinaBandhu Majumdar, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and




    Ramanathan Chettiyar v. SivaramaSubramania, ILR 47 Mad 722





    : (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
15.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao





    ChandrojiraoAngre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench
    of the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[7]. The legal position is
    well-settled that when a prosecution at the initial stage is asked to
    be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the
    uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the
    offence. It is also for the court to take into consideration any
    special features which appear in a particular case to consider
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
16
whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a
    prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the court
    cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the




                                                                .
opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak
    and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by





    allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may while
    taking into consideration the special facts of a case also quash the
    proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary stage."
16.         A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled
    the law on quashing on account of compromise/compounding, in


    the following terms. "[53]. Section 482 of the Code, as its very
    language suggests, saves the inherent power of the High Court
    which it has by virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse



    of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
    justice. It begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which




    means that the provision is an overriding provision. These words





    leave no manner of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code
    limits or restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise





    of such power is provided in Section 482 itself i.e., to prevent
    abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends
    of justice. As has been repeatedly stated that Section 482 confers
    no new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards existing
    inherent powers possessed by High Court necessary to prevent
    abuse of the process of any Court or to secure the ends of justice.
    It is equally well settled that the power is not to be resorted to if
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
17
there is specific provision in the Code for the redress of the
    grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be exercised very
    sparingly and it should not be exercised as against the express bar




                                                              .
of law engrafted in any other provision of the Code. [57].
    Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of





    settlement between an offender and victim is not the same thing
    as compounding of offence. They are different and not
    interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of





    offences given to a court under Section 320 is materially different
    from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court in
    exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences,


    power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the provisions
    contained in Section 320 and the court is guided solely and
    squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of



    opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal offence or
    criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the




    material on record as to whether the ends of justice would justify





    such exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may
    be acquittal or dismissal of indictment. [58]. Where High Court





    quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to the fact that
    dispute between the offender and victim has been settled although
    offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion,
    continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise in
    futility and justice in the case demands that the dispute between
    the parties is put to an end and peace is restored; securing the
    ends of justice being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
18
crimes are acts which have harmful effect on the public and
    consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers and threatens
    well-being of society and it is not safe to leave the crime- doer




                                                               .
only because he and the victim have settled the dispute amicably
    or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet certain crimes





    have been made compoundable in law, with or without
    permission of the Court. In respect of serious offences like
    murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of mental depravity





    under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of moral turpitude under
    special statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences
    committed by public servants while working in that capacity, the


    settlement between offender and victim can have no legal
    sanction at all. However, certain offences which overwhelmingly
    and predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil,



    mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or such like
    transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony, particularly




    relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong is





    basically to victim and the offender and victim have settled all
    disputes between them amicably, irrespective of the fact that such





    offences have not been made compoundable, the High Court may
    within the framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal
    proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that on
    the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of
    offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
    proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be
    defeated. The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
19
case will depend on its own facts and no hard and fast category
    can be prescribed."
17.        In ParbatbhaiAahir v State of Gujarat, (2017) 9




                                                              .
SCC 641, a three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid
    down the broad principles for quashing of FIR, which are





    reproduced as follows:
[16]. The broad principles which emerge from
             the precedents on the subject, may be
             summarised in the following propositions:
16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers
             of the High Court to prevent an abuse of the
             process of any court or to secure the ends of
             justice. The provision does not confer new

             powers. It only recognises and preserves powers

             which inhere in the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the
             High Court to quash a First Information Report
             or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a



             settlement has been arrived at between the
             offender and the victim is not the same as the
             invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of




             compounding an offence. While compounding an
             offence, the power of the court is governed by





             the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash





             under Section 482 is attracted even if the offence
             is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal
             proceeding or complaint should be quashed in
             exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the
             High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
             justice would justify the exercise of the inherent
             power;
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High
             Court has a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
20
exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)
     to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
     16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or
     First Information Report should be quashed on




                                                       .
the ground that the offender and victim have





     settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the
     facts and circumstances of each case and no
     exhaustive elaboration of principles can be





     formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under
     Section 482 and while dealing with a plea that
     the dispute has been settled, the High Court must




     have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
     offence. Heinous and serious offences involving
     mental depravity or offences such as murder,
     rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed

     though the victim or the family of the victim

     have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
     speaking, not private in nature but have a serious
     impact upon society. The decision to continue
     with the trial in such cases is founded on the



     overriding element of public interest in punishing
     persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences,




     there may be criminal cases which have an
     overwhelming or predominant element of a civil





     dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far
     as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is





     concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which
     arise from commercial, financial, mercantile,
     partnership or similar transactions with an
     essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
     situations fall for quashing where parties have
     settled the dispute;
16(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash
     the criminal proceeding if in view of the
     compromise between the disputants, the
     possibility of a conviction is remote and the
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
21
continuation of a criminal proceeding would
             cause oppression and prejudice; and
             16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle
             set out in propositions (viii) and (ix) above.
.
Economic offences involving the financial and





             economic well-being of the state have
             implications which lie beyond the domain of a
             mere dispute between private disputants. The





             High Court would be justified in declining to
             quash where the offender is involved in an
             activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
             misdemeanour. The consequences of the act




             complained of upon the financial or economic
             system will weigh in the balance.
CONCLUSION:
18.         Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through
    District Magistrate as a routine procedure. However, the High
    Court's inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CRPC, to



    intervene in such kind of matter, and it is not the requirement of
    law that the cancellation has to be approved only through the




    District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of the High Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be exercised, depending upon the
    facts and circumstances. The parties are likely to live together for





    a lifetime, and intervention would create a cordial environment
    for peaceful relations between them.
19.         This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of
    the Code of Criminal Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter.
Given the entirety of the case and judicial precedents, I am of the
    considered opinion that the continuation of these proceedings will
    not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
22
20.           In   the   present   case,   the    offenses         are     not
    compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. Be that as it may, this
    Court is inclined to invoke the inherent jurisdiction under section




                                                                 .
482
CrPC
to quash the FIR and all subsequent proceedings in the
    peculiar facts and circumstances.
21.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State
    of Himachal Pradesh
, 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme
    Court holds "[47]. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of





    2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging
    the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter
    was already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave


    Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting their
    petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to
    these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In any



    case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of
    cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
22.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
,





    (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p 642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed
    that the finest hour of Justice arises propitiously when parties,





    who fell apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship
    or reunion.
23.           Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit
    case where inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section
    482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the
    proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is
    quashed, and all the consequential proceedings are also quashed
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
23
and set aside. The bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All
    pending application(s), if any, stand closed.
24.          In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case,




                                                               .
the petition is allowed in the aforementioned terms.
Copy dasti





                                               Anoop Chitkara,
                                                   Judge





    August 24, 2021
      (R.Atal)
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 22:56:10 :::CIS
