Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 50 of 1993
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2009 SC 178, (2009) 4 MAD LJ 343 (2009) 8 SCALE 351, (2009) 8 SCALE 351, AIRONLINE 2009 SC 487
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1792264/

[Cites
94
, Cited by
149
]
Supreme Court of India
N.Kannadasan vs Ajoy Khose & Ors on 6 May, 2009
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2009 SC 178, (2009) 4 MAD LJ 343 (2009) 8 SCALE 351, (2009) 8 SCALE 351, AIRONLINE 2009 SC 487
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
S.B. Sinha
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7360 OF 2008

N. Kannadasan                                      ..... Appellant

                  Versus

Ajoy Khose and others                              .... Respondents


                              WITH
                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7368 OF 2008

N. Kannadasan                                      ..... Appellant

                  Versus

Anna Mathew and others                             .... Respondents


                              WITH
                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7371 OF 2008

Government of Tamil Nadu rep. by its Secretary     ..... Appellant

                  Versus

Ajoy Khose and others                              .... Respondents

                              AND
                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7372 OF 2008

Government of Tamil Nadu rep. by its Secretary     ..... Appellant

                  Versus

Anna Mathew and others                             .... Respondents
                              JUDGMENT


S.B. SINHA, J.
INTRODUCTION


      Justiciability of the recommendations of the Chief Justice of Madras

High Court for appointment of Shri N. Kannadasan (the appellant) as the

President of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (`the

Commission') in terms of
Section 16
of the Consumers Protection Act,

1986 (`the Act') is the question involved herein.


BACKGROUND FACTS :
The said question arises in the following factual matrix.
The appellant was an Advocate practicing in the Madras High Court.
He was appointed as an Additional Judge of the said Court for a period of

two years on or about 6th November, 2003.           During his tenure as an

Additional Judge a representation was made from the Members of the Bar

alleging lack of probity against him inter alia contending :
(A) (i)      several orders had been passed by him granting

                   bail in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
2
(NDPS) matters in contravention of the mandate laid

                   down in
Section 37
of the NDPS Act despite the refusal

                   of bail on earlier occasions either by him or by other

                   Judges ;
(ii)    bail granted by him had subsequently been

                   cancelled by other Judges ;
(iii)   Abuse of office to work the judicial system to his

                   own benefit through his former juniors


            (B)    Adverse reports from intelligence agencies.
Indisputably he was not appointed as a Permanent Judge as a result

whereof demitted his office on 5th November, 2005. He resumed practice in

Madras High Court. On a query made by the High Court as to whether the

appellant was entitled to pensionary and other benefits, the Government of

India by its letter dated 29th March, 2007 replied that he be treated at par

with the retired Judges of the High Court for the purposes of obtaining

medical benefits but would not be entitled to any pensionary benefits.
In the meantime on or about 6th November, 2006 he was appointed as

an Additional Advocate General of the State of Madras. Appellant intended

to have his name included in the list of retired Judges wherefor he wrote a
3
letter to the Registrar General of the Madras High Court on 24th May, 2008.

Indisputably his name was included in the said list by a Resolution adopted

in that behalf by the Full Court on 11th July, 2008.


PROCEEDINGS FOR APPOINTEMNT


      Before the post of President of the Commission fell vacant, the

Government of Tamil Nadu by a letter dated 30th May, 2008 requested the

Registrar General of the High Court to forward names of eligible candidates

for appointment as President of the Commission. The said post, however,

fell vacant only on 5th July, 2008.
A note prepared by the Registry of the said Court as contained in

Roc.341/2008 dated 14th July, 2008 refers to the letter of the Government

dated 30th May, 2008.
Upon quoting
Section 16
of the Act, it proceeds as follows:
"In view of the above, if your Lordship is so
             pleased, willingness may be called for from the
             Hon'ble judges retired in or after the year 2006, so
             that, if appointed they may have a tenure of not
             less than 2-1/2 years.
It is further submitted that the Hon'ble Thiru
             Justice N. KANNADASAN, Former Judge, who
             has completed 2 years of service as Additional
             Judge, High Court of Madras ceased to hold the
             Office on and from 06.11.2005. His Lordship's
             date of birth is 15.11.1955.
4
Further, it is submitted that the Hon'ble Thiru
Justice N. KANNADASAN, Former Additional
Judge, High Court, Madras and now Additional
Advocate General has addressed a letter to the
Registry in connection with the inclusion of His
Lordship's name in the category of Retired/Former
Judge etc.

As directed by your Lordship, the said matter was
placed before the full court which was held on
11th July, 2008 and minuted as follows:
Considered the representation of Hon'ble
      Thiru Justice N. KANNADASAN, Former
      Judge of the High Court in the light of the
      communication of Ministry of Law and
      Justice, Government of India dated
      29.03.2007.
Discussed the matter

It is resolved that the name of Hon'ble Thiru
Justice N. KANNADASAN be included as one of
the Retired Judges of the High Court in the records
of this Registry.
Further, it is submitted that the list of Hon'ble
Judges, retired during 2006 and 2007 is submitted
below 2006:
1. Hon'ble Thiru Justice T.V. MASILAMANI
      (Chairman      DRAT)        -  29.05.2006
      Chairman, DRAT
2. Hon'ble Thiru Justice A.R. RAMALINGAM
- 12.11.2006
- 2007
1.Hon'ble Thiru Justice M. HANIKACHALAM,
     (Admission Committee)       - 07.03.07
2. Hon'ble Thiru Justice J.A.K. SAMPATHKUMAR
     (Chairman, Human Rights Commission,
     Puducherry) - 05.05.2007
5
3.Hon'ble Thiru Justice R. BALASUBRAMANIAN
                 (Advisor, State Legal Services Authority)
- 15.08.2007
4. Hon'ble Thiru Justice N. KANNADASAN
                 (D.O.B. - 15.11.1955)     - 05.11.2005


            The term of Office of the President of the State
            Consumer Dispute Redresssal Commission will be
            5 years or up to the age of 67 years.
In this connection, it is respectfully submitted for
            consideration and orders.
Whether:-
the list of retired Hon'ble Judges except
                 Hon'ble Thiru Justice T.V. MASILAMANI
                 (Chairman DRAT) and including            N.
                 Kannadasdan, Former Additional Judge
                 may be forwarded to the Government,
                 for consideration for the post of President
                 of State Consumer Dispute Redressal
                 Commission.
Sd/- SO J           Sd/-
                    14.07.2008          15.06.2008 Regr A

                  I     send     the      panel    of     three
                  retired Judges of this Hon'ble Court

                          1. Justice A.R. Ramalingam
                          2. Justice M. Thanikachalam
                          3. Justice N. KANNADASAN
                                          Sd/- CJ
                                        16.06.2008"
The Government of Tamil Nadu appointed Shri Kannadasan as the

president of the Commission by issuing G.O. Ms. No.144 on 26th July, 2008.
6
WRIT PROCEEDINGS


      Three writ petitions were filed by some Legal Practioners before the

Madras High Court.
Writ Petition No.18731 of 2008 was filed by one Anna Mathew and

ten others for issuance of writ of Quo Warranto against Shri Kannadasan

requiring him to show the authority to hold the office of President of the

Commission and consequently declaring G.O. Ms. No. 144 of 26th July,

2008 as illegal and unconstitutional.
Writ Petition No.21495 was filed by one R. Jaikumar and seven others

for issuance of writ of declaration to declare that the decision taken by the

Full Court of the Madras High Court in July, 2008 to treat Sh. Kannadasan

as a retired judge is unconstitutional and non-est in law.
Writ Petition No.21504 of 2008 was filed by Ajoy Khose and three

others for issuance of a writ of declaration declaring G.O. Ms. No.144 dated

26th July, 2008 issued by the Government of Taml Nadu as illegal and ultra

vires of the Constitution of India.
The Chief Justice of the High Court initially was impleaded as a party

in the said proceedings but later on his name was deleted.
7
By reason of the impugned judgment dated December 12, 2008 Writ

Petition Nos. 18731 of 2008 and 21504 of 2008 have been allowed while

Writ Petition No. 21495 of 2008 has been dismissed.
Before the High Court averments touching upon the lack of integrity

and honesty on the part of the appellant were made by the writ petitioners.
The High Court, however, did not think it necessary to consider them in

detail.
QUESTIONS BEFORE THE HIGH COURT :
Before the High Court, the writ petitioners-respondents raised the

following questions :-
"i) Whether the earlier recommendations of the
                Constitutional functionaries under
Article 217
,
                viz. the Chief Justice of the High Court and the
                Chief Justice of India and the Collegium of the
                Supreme Court and of the Central Government
                that a person should not be considered as a Judge
                on grounds of unsuitability and as being public
                interest, are not vital and decisive considerations
                that should weigh with the Chief Justice of the
                High Court in considering the same person for
                appointment to any judicial office under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
or any other
                similar offices in other             Tribunals &
                Commissions ?
8
ii) Since an independent and fair judiciary is part
             of the basic structure of the Constitution of India,
             can a person found wanting in the necessary
             intellectual and moral requirements to be a
             Judge, be considered again for any other judicial
             office ?
iii) If the Government considers and appoints
             such a person to any judicial office, would it not
             amount to interfering with the independence of
             the judiciary contrary to
Article 50
of the
             Constitution of India ?
iv) Whether the expression "is or has been a
             Judge of the High Court" in
Section 16
would
             include even a Judge, who had demitted office on
             account of impeachment or unsuitability to hold a
             judicial office ?
v) Whether an Additional Judge can be
             considered as a retired Judge to be eligible for
             appointment to judicial offices in various
             Tribunals and Commissions ?"
The High Court inter alia formulated the following three questions for its

consideration :-
"(1) Whether Respondent No. 1 was ineligible to
             be appointed as the President of the State
             Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission?
(2) Whether the requirement of consultation with
             the Honourable the Chief Justice had been
             fulfilled ?
(3) Whether the appointment of Respondent No. 1
             can be declared illegal and invalid on the ground
             that such appointment was against public interest?
9
FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT


Re : Question No.1


      Upon considering a few decisions of this Court as also the provisions

of the Constitution of India vis-`-vis
Section 16
of the Act, the High Court

held that having regard to the fact that an additional judge appointed for a

period of two years can revert back to practice and would be entitled to

appear before any court of law including the lower courts, there existed a

distinction between a Permanent Judge and an Additional Judge.
Section 16
of the Act requires that the President of the Commission, be a person `who is

or has been a judge' and accordingly an additional judge who has demitted

office being not a retired judge, could not have been appointed. Although a

literal interpretation having regard to the decision of this Court
S.P. Gupta

v. Union of India
, [(1981) Supp. SCC 87] may lead to the conclusion that an

additional judge would be deemed to be a judge of the High Court for all

purposes, in a case of the nature before it, the principle of purposive

interpretation should be applied as it would indeed be a travesty of all

canons of principles of jurisprudence if it is held, by adopting a cussedly

narrow literal interpretation, that a person who was found by the appropriate

Constitutional functionaries, which includes the Chief Justice of the High

Court and the Collegium of the Supreme Court, unsuitable to be continued
10
as an additional Judge yesterday, is eligible today for being appointed as ad-

hoc Judge, for which only a retired Judge is eligible, on the specious plea,

that the person "has held the office of a Judge".
Re :- Question No.2


      The High Court noticed that no affidavit has been filed by the Chief

Justice of the High Court or on his behalf. Upon taking into consideration

the correspondences entered into by and between the State and the Registry

leading to the sending of the panel by the Chief Justice, it was held :-
"78. Judged in the light of the discussion made
             earlier, the inevitable conclusion is that there has
             not been any effective consultation mainly on
             account of the fact that the Consultee, namely, the
             Honourable the Chief Justice has recommended
             the name of Respondent No. 1 without at all
             considering the background as available in the
             High Court records regarding the circumstances
             under which there was no extension of the term of
             Respondent No. 1. It is no doubt true that this
             Court is neither required nor expected to consider
             the desirability of a person to be appointed for a
             particular post as that is a matter for the authorities
             concerned; (in this case the State Government and
             the Honourable the Chief Justice) to consider. But,
             where a decision itself is thickly clouded by non-
             consideration of the most relevant and vital aspect,
             the ultimate appointment is vitiated not because
             the appointee is not desirable or otherwise, but
             because mandatory statutory requirement of
             consultation has not been rendered effectively and
             meaningfully. Therefore, even assuming that
             Respondent No. 1 was theoretically eligible for
11
being considered, the process of consultation
             having been vitiated, the ultimate order is also
             vulnerable."
Re : Question No.3


      The records produced by the Additional Solicitor General appearing

for the Central Government and the learned counsel for the High Court,

despite the fact that no privilege had been claimed, the High Court did not

think it fit to permit the counsel for the contesting parties to peruse the same

as in its opinion it would open a collateral battle on the question relating to

confirmation of Shri Kannadasan which was not and could not be an issue.

It was opined :
(A)   Indisputably the allegations made in the said writ petitions that Shri

Kannadasan is not entitled to be considered for the post of the chairman of

the commission would have to be accepted; his tenure as additional judge

and/or appointed as a permanent judge, having not been confirmed, on the

basis of the allegations touching upon his integrity and honestly.
(B)   An additional judge who had demitted the office on the expiry of the

term being not a permanent judge was ineligible for appointment in terms of
Section 16
of the Act.
12
(C)   The recommendations. made by the Chief Justice of the High Court is

vitiated in law as before him all the relevant records relating to his non-
appointment as permanent judge and demission of office were not placed

and thus the decision making process became vitiated.
On the basis of the said findings, Writ Petition No.18731 of 2008 and

Writ Petition No.21504 of 2008 were allowed.
Writ Petition No.l2149 of 2008 for a declaration that the Full Court

Reference dated 11.07.2008 was unconstitutional was, however, dismissed.
Government of Tamil Nadu and Shri Kannadasan are before us in

these four appeals.
SUBMISSIONS


      Mr. K.K. Venugopal and Mr. U.U. Lalit, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellants, inter alia, would contend :-
1. Having regard to the constitutional scheme contained in
Articles 216
to 224A of the Constitution of India, a permanent judge as also an

      additional judge would be a judge for all purposes including power;
salary; remuneration; judicial functions; control over the subordinate

      judiciary etc.
13
2. An Additional Judge does not cease to be a judge of the High Court

   only because he was not re-appointed as a Permanent Judge thereof.
3. As an Additional Judge of a High Court is not appointed on probation,

   the High Court committed a serious error in applying in the theory of

   `confirmation in service' which is foreign to the concept of

   appointment and status of a High Court judge.
4. A writ of Quo Warranto could be issued only when a candidate does

   not specify the requisite eligibility criterion specified in the statute.
5. Suitability or otherwise of a candidate appointed by the State in

   exercise of its statutory power cannot be a subject matter of judicial

   review, far less for the purpose of issuance of a writ of quo warraanto.
6. The consultative process having been initiated by the Chief Justice of

   the High Court by recommending a panel of 3 names, the State was

   within its right to select any one of them as President of the

   Commission.      Recommendations of the Chief Justice of the High

   Court for appointment to a statutory post being discretionary and

   based on his subjective satisfaction, the High Court committed a

   serious error in opining that the Chief Justice should have called for

   the records/files leading to Shri Kannadasan's non-appointment as a

   permanent judge.
14
7. The High Court itself having held that the records produced by the

          High Court and/or the State could not have been shown to the writ

          petitioners as the suitability of Shri Kannadasan was not justiciable,

          committed a serious error in arriving at a different conclusion in

          regard to his eligibility in terms of the Constitution of India as also the

          1984 Act relying on or on the basis of the purported records of his

          suitability.
Mr. Anil Diwan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

writ petitioners-respondents, on the other hand, urged :-
i)        The constitutional provisions make a distinction between a

             permanent judge and an additional judge who had not been made

             permanent for one reason or the other.
ii)
Section 16
of the Act while using the terms "is" or "has been a

             judge" could not have included within is purview an advocate who

             has been appointed only for two years and was not found fit for

             appointment as a permanent judge in view of the fact that

             independence and impartiality of the judiciary plays an important

             role in the matter of discharge of judicial functions.
iii)      The State Commission being a judicial body and the eligibility

             criteria having been
laid down in
the Act, the Chief Justice of the
15
High Court was obligated to take into consideration the past

            conduct, as also general reputation of the recommendee.
iv)      Only because a name of a judge has been included in the capacity

            as a retired judge and is entitled to medical benefits the same by

            itself would not be sufficient to answer the description of `has been

            a judge' within the meaning of the provisions of
Section 16
of the

            Act.
v)       While taking an important decision like recommending the name

            of a retired judge who was not found fit to occupy the post of a

            permanent Judge, the Chief Justice was bound to take into

            consideration all relevant factors including the question of honesty

            and integrity of a judge; which being a relevant statutory

            requirement, would determine the eligibility criteria, and thus a

            writ of quo warranto could be issued.
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS :
Chapter V of the Constitution deals with the High Courts in the States.
Article 216
of the Constitution of India provides that every High

Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other judges as the President

may from time to time deem it necessary.
Article 217
states that every
16
judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President in consultation

with the Chief Justice of India and other authorities specified therein who

shall hold office in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in
Article 224
, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty two years.
Indisputably in terms of the proviso, an additional judge, like a permanent

judge, may also resign his office, or be removed therefrom by the President

in the manner as provided in clause (4) of
Article 124
of the Constitution of

India for the removal of the Supreme Court Judge. Clause (2) of
Article 217
of the Constitution of India prescribes the eligibility criterion. Clause (3)

thereof provides for resolution of disputes if any question arises as to the age

of a Judge of the High Court by the President after consultation with the

Chief Justice of India.
Article 219
provides for oath of affirmation by

Judges of the High Courts which is to be affirmed according to form set out

for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
Article 220
restricts practice by a judge after being appointed as a

Permanent Judge. However, no such restriction is imposed in regard to an

Additional Judge.
Article 221
provides for salaries and other emoluments,

which, indisputably, are the same for a permanent judge or an additional

judge.
17
Article 222
provides for a transfer of a judge. Indisputably again an

additional judge can also be transferred from one High Court to another

High Court.
Article 223
provides for appointment of acting Chief Justice.
Article 224
provides for appointment as additional and acting judges

commonly known as ad hoc judges.
Part `D' of the Second Schedule of the Constitution of India provides

for the provision as to the quantity of payment of salary to the Judges of the

Supreme Court and the High Court. Clause 11 thereof refers to the

definitions of `Chief Justice', `Judge' and `actual service'. Definitions have

also been referred to in the
High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of

Service) Act, 1954
(for short "the 1954 Act"). The 1954 Act also provides

for qualification for payment of pension for Judges. An Additional Judge

who holds a tenure post indisputably would not get any pensionary benefit.
THE ACT


      The Act was enacted to provide for better protection of the interests of

consumers and for that purpose to make provision for the establishment of

consumer councils and other authorities for the settlement of consumers'

disputes and for matters connected therewith.
Section 2
thereof defines `State Commission' to mean a Consumer

Disputes Redressal Commission established in a State under clause (b) of
18
Section 9
.
Section 3
provides that the provisions of the Act shall be in

addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law.
Section 16
provides that the State Commission shall consist of a

person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, appointed by the State

Government, who shall be its President. A proviso was inserted threin by

Act No.50 of 1993 which has come into force with effect from 18th June,

1993 providing that no appointment thereunder shall be made except after

consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court. Clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of
Section 16
provides for appointment of members from

amongst the persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate

knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems

relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs

or administration.
Section 17
provides for the jurisdiction of the State Commission. It

has original jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods

or services and compensation, if any, claimed exceeds rupees twenty lakhs

but does not exceed rupees one crore. It entertains appeals against the orders

of District Form within the State. The Commission has the power to transfer

any complaint pending before any District Forum to another District Forum.
19
Appeal against the orders passed by the Commission shall lie only before the

National Commission.
Section 20(1)(a)
provides that the National Commission shall consist

of a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be

appointed by the Central Government, who shall be its President, provided

that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation

with the Chief Justice of India.
INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS IN REGARD
TO THE STATUS OF AN ADDITIONAL JUDGE


      The High Court has taken recourse to the rule of purposive

construction whereas learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants

want us to invoke the rule of literal meaning.
Interpretative tools of constitutional provisions and the statutory

provisions may be different.       Whatever interpretative tool is applied, the

Court must not forget that its job is to find out the intention of the

legislature. It can be gathered from the words used. However, if plain

meaning assigned to the section results in absurdity or anomaly, literal

meaning indisputably would not be applied.
It is also well settled that the Court may have to change the

interpretative tool in the event it is necessary to give effective contextual
20
meaning to the Act. It is one thing to say that an Additional Judge would be

on the same pedestal as a Permanent Judge for all practical purposes, namely
- judicial function; administrative function; pay and remuneration etc. but

would it mean that the same interpretation would be applicable even in a

case where an Additional Judge despite his legitimate expectation to become

a Permanent Judge has not been conferred on the said stating allegations of

lack of probity.
An Additional Judge on the expiry of his tenure has a right to be

considered for re-appointment if he is not appointed as a Permanent Judge.
He may not, however, be reappointed if it is found that he is otherwise

disqualified therefor, namely to satisfy the test of fitness and suitability,

physical, intellectual and moral, before the Central Government can,

consistently with its constitutional obligation and in public interest, decide to

reappoint him as an Additional Judge or appoint him as a Permanent Judge.
SOME PRECEDENT


S.P. GUPTA


      In the context of Central Government's refusal to re-appoint some

additional judges as permanent judges, the Supreme Court in
S.P. Gupta
(supra) had the occasion to consider the said question. Bhagwati, J. (as His
21
Lordship then was) traced the history of appointment of ad hoc or temporary

judges, the provisions of the
Government of India Act, 1915
;
Section 220
of

the Government of India Act, 1935 and the speech of Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru

expressing his firm opposition to the practice of appointing acting or

Additional Judges to note that the drafting committee took the view that "it

was possible to discontinue the system of appointment of temporary and

Additional Judges in the High Courts altogether by increasing, if necessary,

the total number of permanent Judges of such Courts.", to notice that the

Constitution-makers did not assume that an acting or Additional Judge

would necessarily be made permanent and he would have to go back to the

Bar.     The learned Judge furthermore noticed the enactment of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956
, in terms whereof existing
Article 224
was substituted by a new Article and the existing
Article 224
was added as new
Article 224A
thereafter. It was held that the object clearly

was that Additional Judge should be appointed for a short period in order to

dispose of the temporary increase in the business of the High Court and/or to

clear off the arrears of pending cases. The underlying idea was that there

should be an adequate strength of permanent Judges in each High Court to

deal with its normal institutions and so far as the temporary increase in the

work or the arrears of pending cases were concerned, Additional Judges

appointed for a period not exceeding two years should assist in disposing of
22
such work. Additional Judges while entering into the High Court judiciary

had a legitimate expectation that they would not have to go back on the

expiration of their term and that they would be either reappointed as

Additional Judges for a further term or if in the meanwhile, a vacancy in the

post of a permanent Judge became available, they would be confirmed as

permanent Judges. The Government, in view of the constitutional scheme,

could not drop an additional Judge at its sweet will. The expectation has

been raised through a practice followed for almost over a quarter of a

century.   The expression "every Judge" occurring in
Article 217
must

include not only a permanent Judge but also an Additional Judge. The

Additional Judge, on the expiry of his tenure, could not just be dropped

without consideration (be of his re-appointment or made a permanent judge).
As Additional Judge is entitled to be appointed without anything more, the

process of selection in regard to his appointment need not be gone any

further. An Additional Judge is as much a Judge as a permanent Judge with

the same jurisdiction and the same powers and to treat him as he were on

probation, would not only detract from his status and dignity but also affect

his independence by making his continuance as a Judge dependent on the

good opinion of the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Governor of the

State and the Chief Justice of India.       Although factors relevant for

consideration of his appointment as permanent Judge have not been laid
23
down having regard to the object and purpose of
Article 217(1)
, it is obvious

that fitness and suitability, physical, intellectual and moral, would be the

governing considerations to be taken into account in deciding the question of

appointment.
The Central Government, however, in view of the constitutional

obligations, was, therefore, required to consider whether the Additional

Judge is fit and suitable to be reappointed as an Additional Judge or

appointed as a permanent Judge, as the case may be, must consider as to

whether he is physically, intellectually or morall unfit or unsuitable to be

appointed as such.
Justice Fazal Ali, J. in his concurring judgment opined :-
"533. Thus, the position is that even if an
            Additional Judge is not appointed afresh and
            somebody else is appointed, there is no question of
            judicial review nor is there any question of the
            non-appointment of an Additional Judge afresh
            casting any reflection or aspersion on the
            reputation or character of an Additional Judge
            because he was appointed only for a particular
            period and for a particular purpose and is not on
            probation. Both Brother Desai and Brother
            Venkataramiah, JJ. have stressed this aspect of the
            matter in their own way and I agree with their
            views."
SUPREME COURT ADVOCATES-ON-RECORD ASSOCIATION
24
This Court in Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association and

others v. Union of India
, [ (1993) 4 SCC 441 ] adopted a new approach

opining that keeping in view the fact that independence of judiciary is one of

the cardinal principles of constitution, the primacy of appointment shall be

with the Chief Justice of India as also the Chief Justice of the High Court.

However, before making recommendations in terms of
Articles 124(2)
and
217(1)
of the Constitution, they would have to consult two other senior most

Judges who would be the members of the Collegium.
It was opined that
S.P.

Gupta
(supra) should be read with
Ashok Kumar Yadav             v.   State of

Haryana
, [ (1985) 4 SCC 417 ]. As regards justiciability of appointment and

transfer it was laid down :-
"Except on the ground of want of consultation
             with the named constitutional functionaries or lack
             of any condition of eligibility in the case of an
             appointment, or of a transfer being made without
             the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India,
             these matters are not justiciable on any other
             ground, including that of bias, which in any case is
             excluded by the element of plurality in the process
             of decision-making."
SPECIAL REFERENCE
25
In Re - Special Reference No. 1 of 1998, [(1998) 7 SCC 739], in

regard to justiciability of such power this Court held that having a plurality

of judges in the formation of opinion provides sufficient safeguards and that

they are sufficient checks against arbitrariness in the decision making

process relating to Appointment and Transfers, stating :-
"9. The majority judgment ends with a summary
             of its conclusions. Conclusions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9,
             10, 11 and 14 are relevant for our purposes. They
             read thus:
"(1) The process of appointment of Judges to
                the Supreme Court and the High Courts is an
                integrated `participatory consultative process'
                for selecting the best and most suitable persons
                available for appointment; and all the
                constitutional functionaries must perform this
                duty collectively with a view primarily to reach
                an     agreed     decision,   subserving     the
                constitutional purpose, so that the occasion of
                primacy does not arise.
*            *            *             *
                 (5) In exceptional cases alone, for stated strong
                cogent reasons, disclosed to the Chief Justice of
                India, indicating that the recommendee is not
                suitable for appointment, that appointment
                recommended by the Chief Justice of India may
                not be made. However, if the stated reasons are
                not accepted by the Chief Justice of India and
                the other Judges of the Supreme Court who
                have been consulted in the matter, on reiteration
                of the recommendation by the Chief Justice of
                India, the appointment should be made as a
                healthy convention.
*                   *                   *
                 (10) In making all appointments and transfers,
                the norms indicated must be followed.
26
However, the same do not confer any
         justiciable right in anyone.
(11) Only limited judicial review on the
         grounds specified earlier is available in matters
         of appointments and transfers.
*                    *                  *
         (14) The majority opinion in S.P. Gupta v.
Union of India insofar as it takes the contrary
         view relating to primacy of the role of the Chief
         Justice of India in matters of appointments and
         transfers, and the justiciability of these matters
         as well as in relation to Judge-strength, does not
         commend itself to us as being the correct view.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution
         including the constitutional scheme must now
         be construed, understood and implemented in
         the manner indicated herein by us."
(emphasis supplied)

It was furthermore held :-
"44. The questions posed by the Reference are
      now answered, but we should emphasise that the
      answers should be read in conjunction with the
      body of this opinion:
1. The expression "consultation with the
             Chief Justice of India" in
Articles 217(1)
and
222(1)
of the Constitution of India
             requires consultation with a plurality of
             Judges in the formation of the opinion of the
             Chief Justice of India. The sole individual
             opinion of the Chief Justice of India does
             not constitute "consultation" within the
             meaning of the said articles.
*                  *                  *
4. The Chief Justice of India is not entitled
             to act solely in his individual capacity,
             without consultation with other Judges of
             the Supreme Court, in respect of materials
             and information conveyed by the
27
Government of India for non-appointment of
                    a Judge recommended for appointment.
*                *                  *
8. The Chief Justice of India is obliged to
                    comply with the norms and the requirement
                    of the consultation process, as aforestated, in
                    making his recommendations to the
                    Government of India."
INTERPRETATION OF SECTION 16 OF THE ACT


      For this purpose, we will proceed on the basis that save and except for

certain purposes an additional judge and a permanent judge enjoy equal

status. It could be said that for the purpose of appointment as Chairperson

of some Tribunal, the name of an additional judge may also be taken into

consideration but would that mean that an additional judge whose services

were tainted or having regard to his general reputation or lack of integrity,

wherefor he had not been made permanent as opposed to a situation where

having regard to the policy decision of the Central Government or the

purpose for which the additional judges are appointed to clear the back log is

the question which falls for consideration. This Court in T. Fenn Walter

[(2002) 6 SCC 184] laid down some broad guidelines as to the manner in

which the appointment of a sitting Judge of a High Court to a Commission

should be made. In view of
the said decision
, it is expected that a sitting

judge may not be recommended by the Chief Justice of the High Court for

such appointment.
28
The words "is or has been" refer to the person holding the office of a

Judge or who has held the said office. It may be said to have the same

meaning so far as eligibility is concerned.
Suitability of a person to be considered for appointment as a

Chairman of a State Commission having regard to the provisions contained

in
Article 217
of the Constitution of India has been assumed by this Court to

be available for the eligible persons who are retired Judges which would

mean that those Judges who had retired from service without any blemish

whatsoever and not merely a person who "has been a judge". [See Ashish

Handa v. The Hon'ble the Chief Justice of High Court of Punjab and

Haryana and others, (1996) 3 SCC 145].
An Additional Judge holding a tenure post stricto sensu does not

retire. It is one thing to say that having regard to the constitutional embargo,

he would not hold office after he attains the age of 62 years but it is another

thing to say that for all other purposes, he can be equated with a sitting

Judge.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that ordinarily a literal

meaning should be given to the provisions of the Constitution as also a

statute. However, while applying the golden rules of literal interpretation

one must be clear in his mind that same should not defeat the object and
29
purpose for which the Act was enacted. We could advert to this question a

little later.
The jurisdiction of the consumer courts and particularly that of the

State Commission and the National Commission is of great importance.

Various complicated questions of law and facts arise for their consideration.

It must, save and except for very cogent reasons refuse to entertain a claim

application and ask the parties to agitate their grievances before a Civil

Court. Indisputably, the functions of the Commission are judicial. The

State Commission, as noticed hereinbefore, not only exercises original

jurisdiction but also appellate jurisdiction. The guidelines clearly point out

as to why, considering the basic feature of the Constitution, namely the

independence of the judiciary, a sitting Judge must maintain the high

traditions. While a sitting Judge may be appointed to a statutory post or

Tribunal, this Court as pointed out in T. Fenn Walter (supra) that he would

not discharge the duties both as the Presiding Officer of a Judicial Tribunal

and as a sitting Judge of the High Court.
An Additional Judge who has not been confirmed, may for the

purpose of giving effect to the constitutional provisions be considered to be

a former Judge but when it comes to the question of his appointment in the

said capacity, in our opinion, it is possible to take somewhat different view
30
having regard to his present status, viz., an advocate or a district judge, as

the case may be. He despite being a former Judge is entitled to practice in

the same High Court, which other Judges are not permitted to do so. He

may appear before the Tribunal and subordinate courts. A person for the

aforementioned purpose must answer the test of his being qualified to be a

Judge. For the purpose of
Section 16
of the Act, he must be equated with a

sitting Judge of a High Court. In other words, he could, but for the reasons

like reaching the age of superannuation, continue as a Judge.
In
S.P. Gupta
(supra), this Court has categorically held that a person

who has not been confirmed would not be recommended for reappointment.

If that be so, he could not continue to hold the High office of a Judge,

although he was otherwise eligible therefor.
In Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association
(supra), this

Court laid down the qualities of a Judge :-
"Under our constitutional scheme, the judiciary has
             been assigned the onerous task of safeguarding the
             fundamental rights of our citizens and of
             upholding the rule of law. Since the Courts are
             entrusted the duty to uphold the Constitution and
             the laws, it very often comes in conflict with the
             State when it tries to enforce its orders by exacting
             obedience from recalcitrant or indifferent State
             agencies. Therefore, the need for an independent
             and impartial judiciary manned by persons of
             sterling quality and character, undaunting courage
             and determination and resolute impartiality and
             independence who would dispense justice without
             fear or favour, ill will or affection. Justice without
             fear or favour, ill will or affection, is the cardinal
31
creed of our Constitution and a solemn assurance
             of every Judge to the people of this great country.
             There can be no two opinions at the Bar that an
             independent and impartial judiciary is the most
             essential characteristic of a free society. "
A Judge must have these basic qualities and, thus, must be found to

possess the same. A person found to be lacking these qualities would not be

recommended for appointment of a permanent judge.
The system of governance established by the Constitution is based on

distribution of powers and functions amongst the three organs of the State.

It is the prerogative of the Legislature to enact laws; responsibility of the

Executive to enforce the laws and administer the country; and the duty of the

Judiciary to adjudicate upon the disputes that arise between individuals,

between an individual & the State or between different States.          In this

scheme of things, Supreme Court has been assigned the duty of being the

final arbiter, including on the question of interpretation of the Constitution &

the laws. It is the majesty of the institution that has to be maintained and

preserved in the larger interest of the rule of law by which we are governed.

It is the obligation of each organ of the State to support this important

institution. Judiciary holds a central stage in promoting and strengthening

democracy, human rights and rule of law. People's faith is the very

foundation of any judiciary. Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
32
everywhere and therefore the People's faith in the Judiciary cannot be

afforded to be eroded.
Independence of judiciary is a much wider concept. Key note is

judiciary and not the Judge. If a person does not have qualification for

continuing to hold the office of the Judge of a High Court, it is difficult to

conceive as to how despite such deficiency in qualification, he could be

recommended for appointment to a statutory post, the eligibility criteria

wherefor is inter alia a former Judge. A Chief Justice of a High Court, thus,

before making recommendations for his appointment in terms of
Section 16
of the Act must satisfy himself that the recommendee has/had those basic

qualities.
While making recommendations the Chief Justice performs a

constitutional duty. If while discharging his duty, he finds a former judge to

be ineligible, the question of his being considered for appointment would not

arise. If such a person cannot be recommended being unfit or ineligible to

hold the post, it would not be correct to contend that despite the same he

fulfils the eligibility criteria.
Whether the condition `has been a judge' is not necessary to be

construed for the purpose of
Article 217
of the Constitution of India, it is

required for the purpose of interpreting
Section 16
of the Act as to whether
33
he should be recommended for being appointed as a Chairman of the state

commission.
In our constitutional scheme, the judge made law becomes a part of

the Constitution. It has been so held in
M. Nagaraj and Others v. Union of

India and Others
[(2006) 8 SCC 212] in the following terms:
"...The Constitution, according to the
              respondents, is not merely what it says. It is what
              the last interpretation of the relevant provision of
              the Constitution given by the Supreme Court
              which prevails as a law. The interpretation placed
              on the Constitution by the Court becomes part of
              the Constitution and, therefore, it is open to
              amendment under
Article 368.
An interpretation
              placed by the Court on any provision of the
              Constitution gets inbuilt in the provisions
              interpreted. Such articles are capable of
              amendment under
Article 368."
If a person has made himself disqualified to hold the post of a judge,

the Chief Justice should not consider his name at all. If a duty had been cast

on the Chief Justice not to recommend, which is a constitutional duty for all

intent and purpose - he must be held to be disqualified.             If he stands

disqualified following
S.P. Gupta
(supra) and other cases -question of his

candidature being considered does not arise.        It is in that sense - the

principle of purposive construction is to be taken recourse to.
34
If the Collegium of the Supreme Court Judges including the Chief

Justice of India, which is a constitutional authority in the matter of

appointment of Judges and re-appointment of Additional Judges did not find

him eligible, it would be beyond anybody's comprehension as to how Chief

Justice of a High Court could find him eligible/suitable for holding a

statutory post requiring possession of qualification of holder of a

constitutional office.     If no recommendation by the Chief Justice is

constitutionally permissible, the question of the eligibility criteria being not

satisfied certainly is relevant.
Question is not whether he is a former judge or not. Question is

whether he was eligible for appointment, having not been found fit for re-

appointment. If he was ineligible for being recommended, that is the end of

the matter.
PURPOSIVE INTERPRETATION


       A case of this nature is a matter of moment. It concerns public

interest.     Public information about independence and impartiality of a

judiciary would be in question. The duty of all organs of the State is that the

public trust and confidence in the judiciary may not go in vain. Construction
35
of a statute would not necessarily depend upon application of any known

formalism. It must be done having regard to the text and context thereof.
For the aforementioned purpose, it is necessary to take into

consideration the statutory scheme and the purpose and object it seeks to

achieve. A construction of a statute, as is well known, must subserve the

tests of justice and reason. It is a well-settled principle of law that in a given

case with a view to give complete and effective meaning to a statutory

provision, some words can be read into; some words can be subtracted.

Provisions of a statute can be read down (although sparingly and rarely).
In
Carew and Company Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1975) 2 SCC 791],

Krishna Iyer, J. opined:
"21. The law is not "a brooding omnipotence in the
             sky" but a pragmatic instrument of social order. It
             is an operational art controlling economic life, and
             interpretative effort must be imbued with the
             statutory purpose. No doubt, grammar is a good
             guide to meaning but a bad master to dictate.
             Notwithstanding the traditional view that
             grammatical construction is the golden rule,
             Justice Frankfurter used words of practical widom
             when he observed4:
"There is no surer way to misread a document than
             to read it literally.""
Yet Again in
K.P. Varghese v. Income Tax Officer, Ernakulam and

Another
[(1981) 4 SCC 173], the strict literal reading of a statute was
36
avoided as by reason thereof several vital considerations, which must always

be borne in mind, would be ignored, stating:
"...The task of interpretation of a statutory
            enactment is not a mechanical task. It is more than
            a mere reading of mathematical formulae because
            few words possess the precision of mathematical
            symbols. It is an attempt to discover the intent of
            the legislature from the language used by it and it
            must always be remembered that language is at
            best an imperfect instrument for the expression of
            human thought and as pointed out by Lord
            Denning, it would be idle to expect every statutory
            provision to be "drafted with divine prescience and
            perfect clarity". We can do no better than repeat
            the famous words of Judge Learned Hand when he
            laid:
"... it is true that the words used, even in their
            literal sense, are the primary and ordinarily the
            most reliable, source of interpreting the meaning of
            any writing: be it a statute, a contract or anything
            else. But it is one of the surest indexes of a mature
            and developed jurisprudence not to make a fortress
            out of the dictionary; but to remember that statutes
            always have some purpose or object to accomplish,
            whose sympathetic and imaginative discovery is
            the surest guide to their meaning."
"... the meaning of a sentence may be more than
            that of the separate words, as a melody is more
            than the notes, and no degree of particularity can
            ever obviate recourse to the setting in which all
            appear, and which all collectively create."
In the aforementioned case, therefore, some words were read into and

the plain and natural construction was not given.
37
In
Bhudan Singh and Another v. Nabi Bux and Another
[(1969) 2

SCC 481], this Court held:
"The object of every legislation is to advance
             public welfare. In other words as observed by
             Crawford in his book on "Statutory Constructions"
that the entire legislative process is influenced by
             considerations of justice and reason. Justice and
             reason constitute the great general legislative intent
             in every peace of legislation. Consequently where
             the suggested construction operates harshly,
             ridiculously or in any other manner contrary to
             prevailing conceptions of justice and reason, in
             most instance, it would seem that the apparent or
             suggested meaning of the statute, was not the one
             intended by the law makers. In the absence of
             some other indication that the harsh or ridiculous
             effect was actually intended by the legislature,
             there is little reason to believe that it represents the
             legislative intent."
This Court
Atma Ram Mittal v. Ishwar Singh Punia
, [ (1988) 4 SCC

284]:
"9. Judicial time and energy is more often than not
             consumed in finding what is the intention of
             Parliament or in other words, the will of the
             people. Blackstone tells us that the fairest and most
             rational method to interpret the will of the
             legislator is by exploring his intentions at the time
             when the law was made, by signs most natural and
             probable. And these signs are either the words, the
             context, the subject-matter, the effects and
             consequence, or the spirit and reason of the law.
             (emphasis by the court) See Commentaries on the
             Laws of England (facsimile of 1st Edn. Of 1765,
             University of Chicago Press, 1979, Vol. 1, p. 59)."
38
In High Court of
Gujarat and Another v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor

Panchayat and Others
[ (2003) 4 SCC 712 ], this Court noticed:
"33.
In
United Bank of India v. Abhijit Tea Co.
            (P) Ltd.
this Court noticed: (SCC p. 366, paras
            25-26)
               "25. In regard to purposive interpretation,
            Justice Frankfurter observed as follows:
`Legislation has an aim, it seeks to obviate
            some mischief, to supply an inadequacy, to effect a
            change of policy, to formulate a plan of
            Government. That aim, that policy is not drawn,
            like nitrogen, out of the air; it is evidenced in the
            language of the statute, as read in the light of other
            external manifestations of purpose [Some
            Reflections on the Reading of Statutes, 47
            Columbia LR 527, at p. 538 (1947)].'
                  xxx           xxx          xxx
38. In The Interpretation and Application of
            Statutes by Reed Dickerson, the author at p. 135
            has discussed the subject while dealing with the
            importance of context of the statute in the
            following terms:
"... The essence of the language is to reflect,
            express, and perhaps even affect the conceptual
            matrix of established ideas and values that
            identifies the culture to which it belongs. For this
            reason, language has been called `conceptual map
            of human experience'."
In
New India Assurance Company Ltd. v. Nusli Neville Wadia and

Another
[(2008) 3 SCC 279], this Court held:
39
"52. Barak in his exhaustive work on "Purposive
              Construction" explains various meanings attributed
              to the term "purpose". It would be in the fitness of
              discussion to refer to Purposive Construction in
              Barak's words:
"Hart and Sachs also appear to treat `purpose' as a
              subjective concept. I say `appear' because,
              although Hart and Sachs claim that the interpreter
              should imagine himself or herself in the
              legislator's shoes, they introduce two elements of
              objectivity: First, the interpreter should assume
              that the legislature is composed of reasonable
              people seeking to achieve reasonable goals in a
              reasonable manner; and second, the interpreter
              should accept the non-rebuttable presumption that
              members of the legislative body sought to fulfil
              their constitutional duties in good faith. This
              formulation allows the interpreter to inquire not
              into the subjective intent of the author, but rather
              the intent the author would have had, had he or she
              acted reasonably."
(Aharon Barak, Purposive Interpretation in Law,
              (2007) at p.87.)"
In
Union of India v. Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited and Others
[(2008) 7 SCC 502], this Court held that the principles of purposive

construction may be employed for making an exemption notification a

workable one.
We may notice that in
Regina v. Secretary of State
for Health ex

parate Quintavalle [2003] UKHL 13], the House of Lords stated the law as

under:
40
"8. The basic task of the court is to ascertain and
give effect to the true meaning of what Parliament
has said in the enactment to be construed. But that
is not to say that attention should be confined and a
literal interpretation given to the particular
provisions which give rise to difficulty. Such an
approach not only encourages immense prolixity in
drafting, since the draftsman will feel obliged to
provide expressly for every contingency which
may possibly arise. It may also (under the banner
of loyalty to the will of Parliament) lead to the
frustration of that will, because undue
concentration on the minutiae of the enactment
may lead the court to neglect the purpose which
Parliament intended to achieve when it enacted the
statute. Every statute other than a pure
consolidating statute is, after all, enacted to make
some change, or address some problem, or remove
some blemish, or effect some improvement in the
national life. The court's task, within the
permissible bounds of interpretation, is to give
effect to Parliament's purpose. So the controversial
provisions should be read in the context of the
statute as a whole, and the statute as a whole
should be read in the historical context of the
situation which led to its enactment.
***          ***          ***

The pendulum has swung towards purposive
methods of construction. This change was not
initiated by the teleological approach of European
Community jurisprudence, and the influence of
European legal culture generally, but it has been
accelerated by European ideas: see, however, a
classic early statement of the purposive approach
by Lord Blackburn in River Wear Commissioners
v Adamson (1877) 2 App Cas 743, 763. In any
event, nowadays the shift towards purposive
interpretation is not in doubt."
41
Yet again, the Australian High Court in Australian Finance Direct

Limited v. Director of Consumer Affairs Victoria [2007] HCA 57], held :
"40. This explanation of the approach to be taken
            to a problem of construction has been cited,
            restated and applied in this Court so many times
            that it should be uncontroversial. Some judges
            have not been sympathetic to the purposive
            approach[39]. Some have clearly yearned for a
            return to the perceived simplicities of literalism,
            either generally or in particular fields of law. On
            the whole, however, this Court has adhered to the
            doctrinal shift with a fair degree of consistency. In
            my view, there is a need for such consistency. We
            should avoid opportunistic reversions to the old
            approach of literalism which the legal mind
            sometimes finds congenial.
41. Obviously, a balance must be struck between,
            on the one hand, an exclusive focus on the text of
            legislation and, on the other, reference to extrinsic
            information that assists to explain its purpose.
            Those bound by the law will often have no access
            to such information. Cases do arise where the legal
            prescription is relatively clear on the face of the
            written law. To the extent that external inquiries
            are necessary, they obviously add to marginal costs
            and can sometimes occasion disputes and
            uncertainty which the words of the law alone
            would not have produced."
Mr. Venugopal would, however, place strong reliance on
Harbhajan

Singh v. Press Council of India and others
[(2002) 3 SCC 722] to emphasise

that the golden rule is that the words of statute must be prima facie given

their ordinary meaning. In that case, itself, this Court has referred to the
42
`Principles of Statutory Interpretation' by Justice G.P. Singh wherein it has

been stated that the Judges can adopt a purposive interpretation if they can

find in a statute read as a whole or in material to which they are permitted by

law to refer as aids to interpretation an expression of Parliament's purpose or

policy. Although ordinarily, an ordinary meaning cannot be departed from

by the Judges in the light of their own views as to policy.
Eligibility of a Judge of a High Court should not be construed in a

pedantic manner. It in the context of a large number of decisions of this

court including
S.P. Gupta
(supra) must also be held to include suitability of

a person concerned.
For the aforementioned purpose, the principles of

purposive interpretation is required to be resorted to.
Reliance has also been placed on
Sangeeta Singh v. Union of India

and Others
[(2005) 7 SCC 484] wherein also while dealing to principles of

construction, it was clearly stated:
"5. It is a well-settled principle in law that the
             court cannot read anything into a statutory
             provision or a stipulated condition which is plain
             and unambiguous. A statute is an edict of the
             legislature. The language employed in a statute is
             the determinative factor of legislative intent.
             Similar is the position for conditions stipulated in
             advertisements."
43
PRECEDENTS GOVERNING APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN, STATE
COMMISSION.
The question in regard to the appointment of a former Judge of the

High Court as the President of the State Commission has been considered by

this Court in Ashish Handa v. The Hon'ble the Chief Justice of High Court

of
Punjab and Haryana and others
, (supra) wherein it was opined :-
"3. ...The scheme is that these three agencies
            constituted for redressal of consumer disputes at
            different levels have as its President a person who
            is, or has been a Judge at the corresponding level.
            This is so because the function of these agencies is
            primarily the adjudication of consumer disputes
            and, therefore, a person from the judicial branch is
            considered to be suitable for the office of the
            President. The appointment to the office of the
            President of the State Commission is to be made
            "only after consultation with the Chief Justice of
            the High Court" and to the office of the President
            of the National Commission "after consultation
            with the Chief Justice of India". Such a provision
            requiring prior consultation with the Chief Justice
            is obviously for the reason that he is the most
            suitable person to know about the suitability of the
            person to be appointed as the President of the
            Commission.... The expression "after consultation
            with the Chief Justice of the High Court" and
            "after consultation with the Chief Justice of India"
must be construed in the same manner as the
            expression "after consultation with the Chief
            Justice of India, ...the Chief Justice of the High
            Court" in
Article 217
of the Constitution of India
            made in Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record
            Assn. v. Union of India
. Accordingly, the opinion
            of the Chief Justice of the High Court and the
            requirement of consultation with him according to
44
the proviso in
Section 16(1)(a)
must have the same
            status as that of the Chief Justice of the High Court
            in the appointment of a High Court Judge under
Article 217
of the Constitution of India; and the
            process of appointment to the office of the
            President of the State Commission must also be
            similar.
It is unnecessary to restate the same which
            is summarised in the majority opinion in the
            Judges-II case. This is necessary to maintain
            independence of the judiciary and to avoid any
            possibility of a sitting or a retired Judge depending
            on the executive for such an appointment.... The
            requirement of consultation with the Chief Justice
            in the proviso to
Section 16(1)(a)
and
Section
            20(1)(a)
of the Consumer Protection Act being
            similar to that in
Article 217
, the principles
            enunciated in the majority opinion in the Judges-II
            case must apply, as indicated earlier, even for
            initiating the proposal. The executive is expected
            to approach the Chief Justice when the
            appointment is to be made for taking the steps to
            initiate the proposal, and the procedure followed
            should be the same as for appointment of a High
            Court Judge. That would give greater credibility to
            the appointment made.
Yet again in
Ashok Tanwar and another          v.   State of Himachal

Pradesh and others
, [ (2005) 2 SCC 104 ] this Court held :-
"23.... A person to be appointed as President of the
            State Commission has to be necessarily a sitting or
            a retired Judge of a High Court and not that any
            person can be appointed as President of the State
            Commission. This being the position, it does not
            stand to reason as to why again in respect of a
            sitting or retired Judge of a High Court the whole
            process contemplated under
Article 217
of the
            Constitution must be resorted to. To put in clear
45
terms so as to remove any doubt, we state that in
             the matter of appointment of a sitting or retired
             Judge of a High Court as President of the State
             Commission, process must be initiated by the
             Chief Justice under
Section 16
of the Act and
             "consultation" contemplated in the said section is
             "consultation" only with the Chief Justice of the
             High Court and not with the collegium.
(Emphasis added)"
The Constitution Bench in Ashok Tanwar, however, clearly held that

the consultation process in terms of
Article 217
of the of the Constitution of

India, for the purpose of finding out of the suitability or otherwise of the

candidate, namely the members of the Collegium is not necessary. Such a

finding was arrived at inter alia on the premise that an appointment was

required to be made by a sitting or a retired judge whose antecedents are

known to the Chief Justice stating :-
"19. It is thus clear that the expression
             "consultation" used in
Article 217
of the
             Constitution in relation to appointment of High
             Court Judges cannot be read in the same way into
             "consultation" as contemplated under
Section 16
of the Act in the light of what is stated above in
             Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. The
             meaning of the word "consultation" must be given
             in the context of an enactment. If the argument that
             the consultation process in regard to appointment
             of a Judge or retired Judge of the High Court to the
             State Commission under
Section 16
must be in the
             same manner as required under
Article 217
of the
             Constitution is accepted, it will lead to anomalous
             situation. Under
Article 217(1)
of the Constitution,
             consultation contemplated with constitutional
             functionaries mentioned therein is for the purpose
             of appointment of a Judge of a High Court and not
             for appointment of a person as the President of the
             State Commission under
Section 16
of the Act. If
46
the consultation to be made for appointment of a
            person as President of the State Commission, as
            required under
Section 16
of the Act, is to be
            similar as under
Article 217
of the Constitution,
            then, even in case of appointment of a retired
            Judge as President of the State Commission, such
            consultation has to be made with all constitutional
            functionaries, which does not stand to reason.
            Hence, obviously for appointment of a person as
            President of the State Commission, consultation as
            required under
Article 217
of the Constitution as
            against the requirement stated in
Section 16
of the
            Act is not necessary. If that be so, not only the
            opinion of two seniormost Judges of the High
            Court should be obtained but also the consultation
            should be made with other constitutional
            functionaries as contemplated under
Article 217
of
            the Constitution including the Chief Justice of
            India. Hence insistence on "consultation" by the
            Chief Justice of a High Court with his two
            seniormost colleagues in the High Court for the
            purpose of
Section 16
of the Act, in our view, is
            unwarranted."
CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION


      Independence and impartiality of judiciary is a basic feature of the

Constitution.   Constitutionalism envisages that all laws including the

constitutional provisions should be interpreted so as to uphold the basic

feature of the Constitution. A person lacking probity would not be a person

who could be found fit for appointment as a High Court Judge. A case of

this nature where no re-appointment was made or an Additional Judge

despite existence of vacancy was not made a Permanent Judge, in our

opinion, deserves serious consideration.       It is not a case where

reappointment as an Additional Judge or appointment to a Permanent Judge

was not possible for want of vacancy or the purpose for which such
47
appointments had been made was achieved. An Additional Judge may not

be made permanent or re-appointed in the said capacity if:
(a)    If the requirement contemplated under
Article 224
no longer

             exists ;
(b)    He had attained the age of 62 years ;

      (c)    He is not inclined to continue further ;

      (d)    His inability to continue further on account of physical or

             mental capacity ;
In
S.P. Gupta
(supra) a Seven Judge Bench of this Court has clearly

held that every re-appointment should undergo the same processes as

envisaged under
Article 217
of the Constitution of India.
We are although

not oblivious of a decision of the Division Bench of this Court in
Shanti

Bhushan and another v. Union of India and another
, [ (2009) 1 SCC 657 ]

wherein it has been held that extension of the tenure of an Additional Judge

is the prerogative of the Chief Justice of India but therein this Court was not

concerned with a situation of this nature.
In this case the collegium have found him unfit to continue as a Judge.

We have gone through the records produced before us. We are satisfied that

for good and sufficient reasons, he was found not fit to be recommended for

appointment as a Permanent Judge.            We say no more being wholly
48
unnecessary. An Additional Judge who had not been made permanent,

technically, could be appointed as an acting or Additional Judge but then the

question which was required to be asked was: should a person who had not

been found fit be so appointed? The answer to the aforementioned question

clearly would a big emphatic `no'.
Before us both the High Court as also the Union of India have

produced records; in relation whereto the High Court, stated:
"84...The learned counsel sought leave of this
            Court to wade through the entire file containing the
            correspondence and the discussions touching upon
            the question of confirmation of the Respondent
            No. 1. Even though all such papers have been
            made available to us by the Addl. Solicitor General
            appearing for the Central Government and Shri
            Muthukumarasamy, Senior Counsel, for the High
            Court and no privilege has been claimed, we have
            not thought it fit to permit the Counsels for the
            contesting parties to peruse such papers, because,
            in our considered opinion, it would open a
            collateral battle on the question relating to
            confirmation of Respondent No. 1, which is not
            and cannot be an issue. Moreover, it is not for us
            to decide about the suitability of Respondent No. 1
            for the post of President of the Consumer
            Commission as that was a matter for the State
            Government to decide in consultation with the
            Chief Justice. If the appointment of a person is
            otherwise legal, the Judiciary may not be justified
            in interfering with such appointment on the ground
            that it is against public interest. As already
            noticed, the sentiment expressed in
R.K. Jain
case
            is clear on this aspect."
49
We have perused the records ourselves. We are satisfied that it was

necessary for the Chief Justice of the High Court to apprise himself the

reasons with reference to the backdrop of events as to why the collegium of

the Supreme Court of India did not find the appellant to be a fit person for

re-appointment or made a Permanent Judge. Names of eight persons were

recommended together. A large number of vacancies existed. Six of them

were recommended to be appointed as Permanent Judges. In respect of one

name, the Chief Justice of India exercised his prerogative jurisdiction to

extend his term from time to time. He had also been made a Permanent

Judge. [See
Shanti Bhushan
(supra)] Only in relation to the appellant herein

the collegium refused to make a recommendation which was also accepted

by the Chief Justice of India.
We may also place on record that at least in a few decisions, this

Court has held that only a sitting or retired Judge is suitable for appointment.

In our opinion, the same clearly goes to show that Judge whose tenure ended

by way of non extension as a stigma would not come within the purview of

the definition of term `has been a Judge of the High Court'.
We say so for more than one reason.
Section 16(1)(b)(iii)
of the Act in

relation to appointment of a Member of the Commission lays down inter alia

the qualifications of a person of ability, integrity and standing. If in the case
50
of a Member, ability, integrity and standing are essential qualifications, it is

difficult to perceive why the same qualification is not required for

appointment as Chairman of the Commission within the meaning of clause
(a) thereof. The said criteria was not necessary to be expressly stated as the

same could be presumed as recommendation in that behalf, to be made by

the Chief Justice of a High Court.
It is also of some significance to notice that in the matter of

appointment of the Fast Track Court Judges, this Court in
Brij Mohan Lal v.

Union of India
, [ (2002) 5 SCC 1 ], observed as under :-
"6. We find substance in the stand taken by the
             learned counsel who have highlighted the non-
             desirability of appointing judicial officers who did
             not carry good reputation so far as their honesty
             and integrity is concerned. It is to be noted that in
All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India
and in
All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India
this
             Court took note of the non-desirability to grant the
             benefit of two years' extension in service i.e. from
             58 years to 60 years in the case of officers who
             were not found to be of continued utility. In each
             case an evaluation of the service records was
             directed to be undertaken to find out whether the
             officer has or lacks potentiality for getting such
             benefit."
As regards the qualifications of a Fast Track Court Judges, keeping in

view the laudable object with which the Scheme had been conceived and

introduced, inter alia the following directions were issued :-
51
"2. The second preference in appointments to Fast
            Track Courts shall be given to retired judges who
            have good service records with no adverse
            comments in their ACRs, so far as judicial
            acumen, reputation regarding honesty, integrity
            and character are concerned. Those who were not
            given the benefit of two years' extension of the age
            of superannuation, shall not be considered for
            appointment. It should be ensured that they satisfy
            the conditions
laid down in
Articles 233(2)
and
309
of the Constitution. The High Court concerned
            shall take a decision with regard to the minimum-
            maximum age of eligibility to ensure that they are
            physically fit for the work in Fast Track Courts.
3. No judicial officer who was dismissed or
            removed or compulsorily retired or made to seek
            retirement shall be considered for appointment
            under the Scheme. Judicial officers who have
            sought voluntary retirement after initiation of
            departmental proceedings/inquiry shall not be
            considered for appointment."
In
Pareena Swarup v. Union of India
[2008 (13) SCALE 84], this

Court intervened stating legislative amendments are carried out to protect

judicial independence in a case involving the
Prevention of Money

Laundering Act, 2002
.
Qualification to hold the post was found to be necessary also in
B.R.

Kapur v. State of T.N. and Another
[(2001) 7 SCC 231].


CONSULTATION
52
We may consider as to whether the consultative process required to be

gone into for the purpose of appointment of Chairman, State Commission

was complied with.
The word "consultation" may mean differently in different situations

depending on the nature and purport of the statute. Consultation, although in

regard to the appointment of the High Court and the Supreme Court Judges,

having regard to the decision of this Court in Supreme Court
Advocates-on

Record Association
(supra) would mean "concurrence", should it for the

purpose of the provisions of
Section 16
mean differently is the question.
Indisputably, in view of the decisions of this Court in
Ashok Tanwar
(supra)

and Ashish Handa (supra) consultation with the Chief Justice would not

mean the consultation with the Collegium of the High Court. Concedingly

again, proposal for such appointment must be initiated by the Chief Justice.
The manner of initiation of proposal for consultation need not be as laid

down in Ashish Handa (supra) but as laid down in
Ashok Tanwar
(supra)

wherein it was clearly laid down that the manner of initiation of proposal

must remain the same throughout as the law in this behalf is quite well

settled and the Bench was felt bound by the same.
In
State of Haryana and Ors. v. National Consumer Awareness

Group and Ors.
[ (2005) 5 SCC 284 ] this Court did not give a literal
53
meaning to sub-section (1A) of
Section 16
to hold that both sub-
section 1(a)
and (1A) of
Section 16
must be harmoniously construed, stating :-
"19. The learned counsel, alternatively, argued that
            the scheme contemplated by sub-section (1-A) is
            quite workable even in a situation where there
            exists already a President, but the question arises
            of his reappointment which would make him
            unable to act as Chairman of the Selection
            Committee. In such cases, a sitting Judge of the
            High Court could be nominated by the Chief
            Justice of the High Court to act as a Chairman.
            Even this argument does not commend itself to us.
            A literal reading of sub-section (1-A) may prima
            facie suggest that appointments under clauses (a)
            and (b) of sub-section (1) are also governed by the
            procedure contemplated therein, under sub-section
            (1-A), but as rightly held by the High Court the
            two sub-sections have to be harmoniously
            construed. The procedure contemplated under sub-
            section (1-A) can apply only in respect of
            appointment of members falling within the
            contemplation of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 16
. In our view, the High Court has given
            adequate and justifiable reasons for this
            interpretation with which we agree. The
            interpretation given by the circular, and the view
            taken by the Union of India in the matter of
Section 16
(1-A), is incorrect and we hold that the
            procedure contemplated therein applies only to the
            appointments made under clause (b) of sub-section
            (1) of
Section 16
."
While approving Ashish Handa (supra) and
Ashok Tanwar
(supra) it

was observed :-
"14. A careful reading of Ashok Tanwar shows
            that the Constitution Bench differed from Ashish
            Handa only on the issue whether consultation with
            the Chief Justice meant consultation with the
            collegium of the High Court. In other respects,
            Ashish Handa is approved."
54
This Court in
S.P. Gupta
(supra) opined that the principles as regards

consultation for appointment of Judges in terms of
Article 217
of the

Constitution of India would be the same as
laid down in
State of Gujarat v.

Sankalchand Khodidas Patel
, [ (1977) 4 SCC 590 ] and other cases, stating :-
"The word `consult' implies a conference of two or
            more persons or an impact of two or more minds in
            respect of a topic in order to enable them to evolve
            a correct or at least a satisfactory solution" and
            added: "In order that the two minds may be able to
            confer and produce a mutual impact, it is essential
            that each must have for its consideration full and
            identical facts, which can at once constitute both
            the source and foundation of the final decision".
Krishna Iyer, J. speaking on behalf of himself and
            Fazal Ali, J. also pointed out that "all the materials
            in the possession of one who consults must be
            unreservedly placed before the consultee" and
            further "a reasonable opportunity for getting
            information, taking other steps and getting
            prepared for tendering effective and meaningful
            advice must be given to him" and "the consultant
            in turn must take the matter seriously since the
            subject is of grave importance" (SCC p. 267). The
            learned Judge proceeded to add (SCC p. 267):
"Therefore, it follows that the President must
            communicate to the Chief Justice all the material
            he has and the course he proposes. The Chief
            Justice, in turn, must collect necessary information
            through responsible channels or directly, acquaint
            himself with the requisite data, deliberate on the
            information he possesses and proceed in the
            interests of the administration of justice to give the
            President such counsel of action as he thinks will
            further the public interest, especially the cause of
            the justice system." These observations apply with
55
equal force to determine the scope and meaning of
             "consultation" within the meaning of clause (2) of
Article 124
and clause (1) of
Article 217.
Each of
             the constitutional functionaries required to be
             consulted under these two articles must have for
             his consideration full and identical facts bearing
             upon appointment or non-appointment of the
             person concerned as a Judge and the opinion of
             each of them taken on identical material must be
             considered by the Central Government before it
             takes a decision whether or not to appoint the
             person concerned as a Judge."
In regard to the position of the Additional Judges, it was clearly held

that same process must be followed.
Fazal Ali, J. in his concurrent judgment noticed
Union of India v.

Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth
[(1977) 4 SCC 193] wherein it was opined that

for purposeful consideration of a matter, the President while consulting the

Chief Justice must make the relevant data available to him, stating:
"...If the facts necessary to arrive at a proper
             conclusion are not made available to the Chief
             Justice, he must ask for them because, in casting
             on the President the obligation to consult the Chief
             Justice, the Constitution at the same time must be
             taken to have imposed a duty on the Chief Justice
             to express his opinion on nothing less than a full
             consideration of the matter on which he is entitled
             to be consulted. The fulfilment by the President, of
             his constitutional obligation to place full facts
             before the Chief Justice and the performance by
             the latter, of the duty to elicit facts which are
             necessary to arrive at a proper conclusion are parts
56
of the same process and are complementary to
             each other. The faithful observance of these may
             well earn a handsome dividend useful to the
             administration of justice. Consultation within the
             meaning of
Article 222(1)
, therefore, means full
             and effective, not formal or unproductive
             consultation."
It was held that both consultor and consultee must have before them

full and identical facts. The source of foundation therefor must also be the

same. It was opined that if the Chief Justice of India had not been consulted

fully, purposeful, effectively and was not informed about all the relevant

facts, the same would render an order of transfer unconstitutional.
What would be the necessary concomitants of an effective

consultation was stated thus in
SP Gupta
(supra):
"(3) If the consultation with the C.J.I. has not been
             done before transferring a judge, the transfer
             becomes unconstitutional.
***                ***                 ***

             (5) The fulfilment by the President of his
             constitutional obligation and performance of his
             duty by the C.J.I. are parts of the same process and
             after this process is fully complied with, the
             consultation becomes full and effective and not
             formal or unproductive.
***                ***                 ***

             (7) After the data, facts or materials are placed
             before the consulate and the consultee, there
57
should be a full and complete application of minds
             in respect of the subject to enable them to reach a
             satisfactory conclusion. In other words, the two
             minds must be able to confer and produce a mutual
             impact on the identical facts which would
             constitute both the source and the foundation of the
             final decision.
(8) The C.J.I. owes a corresponding duty both to
             the President and to the Judge who is proposed to
             be transferred to consider every relevant fact
             before tendering his opinion to the President."
Appointment to the post of President of a State Commission must

satisfy not only the eligibility criteria of the candidate but also undertaking

of the process of consultation.
Keeping in mind the aforementioned legal scenario the question as to

whether the consultative process had been gone into, must be considered.
Indisputably, the decision by the Chief Justice must be an informed

one with respect to the post of a Chairman of a State Commission, keeping

in view the importance thereof having regard to the fact that the Commission

is required to perform judicial functions, both the Chief Justice as also the

State Government were required to be duly informed about the person who

is going to be appointed.         With a view to fulfill the constitutional

obligations as to whether he is a fit person, it is absolutely essential that all

relevant information should be placed before the consultor as also the
58
consultee. As far as the proviso appended to
Section 16
of the Act is

concerned, keeping in view the constitutional post held by a Chief Justice,

there cannot be an iota of doubt that the recommendations made by him

shall carry great weight. Save and except for very cogent reasons, his

recommendation must be accepted.
The Constitution Bench of this Court in Supreme Court Advocates-

on-Record
Association
(supra) and in the Presidential Reference, Special

Reference No.1 of 1998 (supra) laid down the law that consultation would

mean `concurrence' wherefor the primacy has been shifted to the Collegium

which provision in turn being applicable to the case of appointment of a

Chairman of a State Commission in terms of
Section 16
of the Act, save and

except for the difference that recommendation, instead and in place of the

Collegium, would be that of the Chief Justice alone. We have no doubt in

our mind that he is bound to take into consideration all facts relevant

therefor and must eschew irrelevant facts.
As suitability of a person, in view of
S.P. Gupta
(supra), depends upon

several factors which are necessary to be considered for re-appointment and

or making Additional Judge a permanent one, there does not exist any reason

whatsoever why the same shall not be considered to be a relevant factor for

recommending the name of a person who would hold such a high office. It
59
has not been denied or disputed that for one reason or the other the Chief

Justice of the High Court did not have the occasion to go through the said

file.
The Original record maintained by the High Court as also by the

Central Government had been placed before the High Court as also before

us.
The superior courts must take into consideration as to what is good for

the judiciary as an institution and not for the judge himself. An act of

balancing between public interest and private interest must be made. Thus,

institution as also public interest must be uppermost in the mind of the court.

When such factors are to be taken into consideration, the court may not

insist upon a proof. It would not delve deep into the allegations. The court

must bear in mind the limitations in arriving at a finding in regard to lack of

integrity against the person concerned. As has been noticed in
S.P. Gupta
(supra), the test which must be applied for the purpose of assessing the

suitability of a person for appointment as a Judge must be whether the Chief

Justice of the High Court or for the matter of that, any other constitutional

authority concerned in the appointment is satisfied about the integrity of the

person under consideration and, thus, if he does not enjoy good reputation, it

would not be possible for the Chief Justice of the High Court to say that he

is satisfied about the integrity of such person and in such an event he would
60
be justified in not recommending him for appointment and in fact it would

be his duty not to recommend his name.
We may notice that recently a Division Bench of this Court of which

one of us (Dr. Justice Mukundakam Sharma) was a member in
Shanti

Bhushan and Another v. Union of India and Another
(supra) referring to
S.P.

Gupta
(supra), Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association
(supra)

and other decisions, noticed:
"9.Pathak, J (as the Hon'ble Judge then was) had
             expressed similar opinion by observing that in
             following the procedure of
Article 217(1)
while
             appointing an Additional Judge as a Permanent
             Judge there would be reduced emphasis with
             which the consideration would be exercised though
             the process involves the consideration of all the
             concomitant elements and factors which entered
             into the process of consultation at the time of
             appointment earlier as an additional Judge. The
             position was succinctly stated by observing that
             there is a presumption that a person found suitable
             for appointment as an Additional Judge continues
             to be suitable for appointment as a Permanent
             Judge, except when circumstances or events arise
             which bear adversely on the mental and physical
             capacity, character and integrity or other matters
             rendering it unwise to appoint him as a permanent
             Judge. There must be relevant and pertinent
             material to sufficiently convince a reasonable mind
             that the person is no longer suitable to fill the high
             office of a Judge and has forfeited his right to be
             considered for appointment."
It was furthermore opined:
61
"15.As rightly submitted by learned Counsel for
      the Union of India unless the circumstances or
      events arise subsequent to the appointment as an
      Additional Judge, which bear adversely on the
      mental and physical capacity, character and
      integrity or other matters the appointment as a
      permanent Judge has to be considered in the
      background of what has been stated in S.P. Gupta's
      case (supra). Though there is no right of automatic
      extension or appointment as a permanent Judge,
      the same has to be decided on the touchstone of
      fitness and suitability (physical, intellectual and
      moral). The weightage required to be given cannot
      be lost sight of."
It was observed:
"19. But at the same time we find considerable
      substance in the plea of the petitioners that a
      person who is not found suitable for being
      appointed as a permanent Judge, should not be
      given extension as an Additional Judge unless the
      same is occasioned because of non availability of
      the vacancy. If a person, as rightly contended by
      the petitioners, is unsuitable to be considered for
      appointment as a permanent Judge because of
      circumstances and events which bear adversely on
      the mental and physical capacity, character and
      integrity or other relevant matters rendering it
      unwise for appointing him as a permanent Judge,
      same yardstick has to be followed while
      considering whether any extension is to be given to
      him as an Additional Judge. A person who is
      functioning as an Additional Judge cannot be
      considered in such circumstances for re-
      appointment as an Additional Judge. If the factors
      which render him unsuitable for appointment as a
      permanent Judge exist, it would not only be
62
improper but also undesirable to continue him as
             an Additional Judge."
Mr. Venugopal, however, has drawn our attention to S.P. Gupta

(supra) so far as it while dealing with the case of Shri O.N. Vohra was

concerned to contend that as he had accepted the decision of the President of

India not to extend his term and indeed as a person concerned should not

litigate his claim to this high office which would lower its dignity by making

it subject matter of litigative controversy, even refused to look into the

correspondences exchanged between the Law Minister, the Chief Justice of

Delhi and the Chief Justice of India as being not relevant to the issues

arising for determination in the writ petition holding that the Union of India

could not be required to disclose it.
While saying so, the court while considering the case of S.N. Kumar

who had claimed relief from the court in regard to his continuance as an

Additional Judge not only looked into the files but made a deep probe in the

matter. The court further noticed the opinion of the Chief Justice of India in

that behalf, holding :
"526. At any rate, without going into further
             details as several constitutional functionaries were
             involved, two facts emerge:
63
"(1) That C.J., Delhi who had undoubtedly a better
chance of observing the performance and the
functioning of Justice Kumar, was in a position to
get first hand knowledge of his reputation, has
honestly believed that Kumar's reputation of
integrity was doubtful. He has not revealed the
sources from which he came to know about the
reputation of Justice Kumar. The C.J.I., however,
took a contrary view but he has also not disclosed
the names of the lawyers or Judges who had given
him a contrary version.
In my opinion both of them did not disclose the
names because the Judges or the lawyers
concerned must have given the information in
confidence and they would have been seriously
embarrassed if their names were disclosed.
(2) These views were put before the Central
Government and it was open to the President to
accept one view or the other. The President chose
to accept the view taken by the C.J., Delhi more
particularly because he was in a position to have
firsthand information both regarding the reputation
and working of the Additional Judge."
***                ***                 ***
528. I might just state that even if the documents
were not disclosed, the conclusion would have
been the same because in the affidavits it was not
disputed that the two C.Js. had taken a contrary
view regarding the doubtful reputation of Justice
Kumar, nor was it suggested that C.J., Delhi had
any ill will or animus against Justice Kumar. The
disclosure     of   the     documents,      however,
unfortunately resulted in grave and serious
consequences of far-reaching effect on the future
of not only the judicial institutions but also almost
all the government departments."
64
It is, thus, one thing to say that in the absence of any document, any

reflection or aspersion on the reputation or character of an Additional Judge

shall not be cast but it is another thing to say that the ultimate result, viz.,

that an Additional Judge did not obtain any extension or was not made a

Permanent Judge of the High Court, would totally be ignored. It may be true

that the appellant did not question the decision of the collegium not to re-

appoint him, but, the fact remains that he was not appointed by the

collegium wherefor sufficient material existed.          Arriving at such a

conclusion was an objective opinion on the part of the collegium.
It was contended that if such a consideration is given an importance,

those Chief Justices who had not been elevated to the Supreme Court despite

seniority but were appointed as Chairman of various statutory authorities

may be treated to be incompetent.
Appointment of a Judge of a Supreme Court in effect and substance is

merit based.      Only because for one reason or the other he has been

overlooked, the same, by itself, in our opinion, would not make him unfit for

appointment on any other post. The same has nothing to do with eligibility

or suitability.
We agree with Mr. Venugopal that ordinarily it might not have been

necessary for the Chief Justice of the High Court to call for such a file as the
65
same would be a well-known fact. The Chief Justice of the High Court had

joined sometime in May, 2008. The letter of the State Government was

received in July, 2008. Prior thereto, as noticed hereinbefore, pursuant to a

resolution adopted by a Full Court, the name of the appellant was put on the

register of retired Judges. The materials brought on records before this

Court clearly demonstrate that no other fact was brought to his notice.
S.P. Gupta
(supra), Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association
(supra) and other decisions to which we have adverted to hereinbefore in no

uncertain terms lay down the law that the reason for non-appointment of an

Additional Judge keeping in view the materials on the basis whereof the

constitutional functionary, viz., the Chief Justice of the High Court, the State

Government, the collegium of the Supreme Court as also the Central

Government and ultimately the President of India had arrived at a decision

would be a relevant factor.
We have noticed hereinbefore that the integrity of the holder of a high

office plays an important role. It was, thus, a factor which was required to

be taken into consideration not only by the Chief Justice of the High Court

but also by the State.
The consultative process brings within its ambit a heavy duty so as to

enable the holder of a high office like Chief Justice to know the same. It
66
must be shown that he had access and in fact was aware of the fact that the

appellant had not been made a Permanent Judge. The matter might have

been different if such a fact had been taken into consideration. If a decision

for the purpose of making a recommendation in terms of proviso appended

to
Section 16
of the Act necessitates looking into all relevant materials, non-

consideration of such a vital fact, in our opinion, cannot be ignored as the

opinion is a subjective one and not based on objective criteria. We are more

than sure that had the records been brought to his notice, the Chief Justice

would not have made the recommendation.
JUDICIAL REVIEW


      Judicial review in our constitutional scheme itself is a part of its basic

structure. Decisions whether arrived at by the Executive or the Judiciary are

subject to judicial review.
The Chief Justice of a High Court, while making such

recommendations, exercises statutory functions. While it is incumbent upon

the State Government to consult the Chief Justice, keeping in view a large

number of decisions of this Court we have referred to hereinbefore,

indisputably the Chief Justice of the High Court would have a heavy burden

on his shoulder to recommend the name of a person who would be suitable

therefor. We are not oblivious of the fact that no court howsoever high
67
would have any power of judicial review in relation thereto. Power of

judicial review, although is very restricted, cannot be denied to be exercised

when relevant fact is not considered. It is now a well settled principle of

Administrative Law that the doctrine of error of law apparent on the face of

the record inter alia would take within its umbrage a case where statutory

authority in exercising its discretionary jurisdiction did not take into

consideration a relevant fact or based its decision on wholly irrelevant

factors not germane for passing the order. What is not the subject matter of

judicial review is the opinion of the Chief Justice touching upon the merit of

the decision but the decision making process is subject to judicial review. It

stands conceded that the proviso appended to
Section 16
of the Act is

imperative in nature. An appointment made without consulting the Chief

Justice being wholly without jurisdiction would be void ab initio. If the

State is bound to consult the Chief Justice, we reiterate, such consultation

must be an effective and informed one. Both the State Government as also

the Chief Justice before forming opinion must have access to all relevant

informations. Application of mind on the part of consultant and consulttee

on such relevant information was, in our considered opinion, absolutely

imperative.
Indisputably, a writ petition even at the instance of a busy body for

issuance of a writ of quo warranto questioning the appointment of Chairman
68
of a State Commission made in terms of
Section 16
of the Act would be

maintainable.
For the aforementioned purpose the eligibility criteria as
laid down in
Section 16
of the Act as also the question as to whether in making such an

appointment the State consulted the Chief Justice of High Court as

envisaged under the proviso appended thereto would fall for consideration.

An appointment to a statutory post is an administrative decision. The act of

consultation is an executive act.
In Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association
(supra), it was

opined that the matter of appointment is an Executive Act.            It was

furthermore held:
"...The object of selecting the best men to
             constitute the superior judiciary is achieved by
             requiring consultation with not only the judiciary
             but also the executive to ensure that every relevant
             particular about the candidate is known and duly
             weighed as a result of effective consultation
             between all the consultees before the appointment
             is made. It is the role assigned to the judiciary and
             the executive in the process of appointment of
             Judges which is the true index for deciding the
             question of primacy between them, in case of any
             difference in their opinion. The answer which best
             subserves this constitutional purpose would be the
             correct answer."
69
Section 16
of the Act envisages a limitation on the power of both the

State as also the Chief Justice in the matter of making an appointment. The

facts relevant for such an appointment must be placed before both the

statutory authorities. One of such fact is that an Additional Judge, for one

reason or the other was found not fit to be made permanent or to be given an

extension of his tenure. Indisputably, a person having doubtful integrity

should neither be recommended by the High Court nor appointed by the

State Government.
Opinion of a Chief Justice by itself may not lead to an administrative

decision but it, having regard to his primacy, save and except for cogent

reasons, would lead to an appointment. Indisputably, his opinion is final

and, thus, for all intent and purport, decisive. The recommendations made,

thus, may be arrived at on the basis of his subjective satisfaction, but it must

be based on objective criteria. Such subjective satisfaction must be arrived

at on consideration of all relevant criteria. When recommendation of a

Former Judge of a High Court is made for appointment as Chairman of the

State Commission ordinarily a judicial review shall not lie. It is true that

recommendation would be as a result of due application of mind. He is

required to recommend the name of one of the former Judges of the said

Court. All relevant facts leading to formation of an opinion as regards

suitability of the person would presumably be known to him. But a Chief
70
Justice coming from outside may not know the former judges of the

concerned High Court. He may not consult his brother judges keeping in

view the element of confidentiality attached to such recommendation.
It may be true that the statute does not lay down an objective criterion.

Such objective criteria cannot also be laid down keeping in view the status

of the parties. Such appointment, however, must be made keeping in view

the independence of judiciary; as the incumbent of the post would discharge

judicial functions of grave importance.
Mr. Venugopal submits that the reason for non-reappointment of the

Additional Judge concerned need not be ascertained by the Chief Justice.

But the fact that he was not found fit therefor should have been made known

to him. The High Court noticed that apart from placing the records to which

reference has been made in its judgment, no other material was brought

before the High Court to establish that the Chief Justice was aware of the

said fact.
We are not in a position to persuade ourselves that the opinion of the

Collegium that the appellant was not found fit to be continued as a judge

was not relevant. The opinion of the collegium is based on certain material.

It might have been arrived at without giving an opportunity of hearing to the

Judge concerned. What is relevant is the availability of materials on record
71
to enable the Chief Justice of India vis-`-vis the collegium to make any

recommendation that he was a fit person to be appointed. If the collegium

could not make such a recommendation, a' fortiori ordinarily the Chief

Justice of High Court would also not make such a recommendation.
In Special Reference No. 1 of 1998, RE: (supra), it was concluded :
"44. The questions posed by the Reference are
         now answered, but we should emphasise that the
         answers should be read in conjunction with the body
         of this opinion:
xxx          xxx           xxx
2. The transfer of puisne Judges is judicially
             reviewable only to this extent: that the
             recommendation that has been made by the Chief
             Justice of India in this behalf has not been made in
             consultation with the four seniormost puisne
             Judges of the Supreme Court and/or that the views
             of the Chief Justice of the High Court from which
             the transfer is to be effected and of the Chief
             Justice of the High Court to which the transfer is to
             be effected have not been obtained."
The High Court in a case of this nature could have peeped into

consultative process vis-`-vis eligibility of the candidate through a narrow

hole. Howsoever limited be the field of judicial review, it cannot, in our

opinion, be held to be beyond its pale.
While we say so, we are not oblivious of the fact that the

recommendations are required to be made from amongst the limited
72
category of High Court Judges who were former Judges of that court.

However, the Chief Justice may even recommend the Judge of another High

Court. There is no constitutional bar that only a Judge of the High Court of

that State in which the post has fallen vacant must be recommended.
We have noticed hereinbefore that the Madras High Court maintains a

register of retired Judges. Attention of the Chief Justice was drawn only to

the said register. Names of five Judges were proposed.
Mr. Venugopal has placed strong reliance on a judgment of the Privy

Council in
The Hubli Electricity Co. Ltd. v. The Province of Bombay
[AIR

(36) 1949 PC 136], wherein it was held:
"21. Their Lordships now turn to the question of
            construction of
s.4(1)(a)
. Their Lordships are
            unable to see that there is anything in the language
            of the sub-section or in the subject-matter to which
            it relates upon which to found the suggestion that
            the opinion of the Government is to be subject to
            objective tests. In terms the relevant matter is the
            opinion of the Government - not the grounds on
            which the opinion is based. The language leaves
            no room for the relevance of a judicial examination
            as to the sufficiency of the grounds on which the
            Government acted in forming an opinion."
In that case the question which arose for consideration was as to

whether in view of
Section 4(1)(a)
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the

licence for generation of electricity could be revoked where the licensee in
73
the opinion of the Provincial Government makes willful and unreasonably

prolonged default in doing anything required of him by or under the Act.
Section 4(1)(a)
of the Electricity Act underwent an amendment. Even in
Province of Bombay v. Kusaldas S. Advani and Others
reported in [1950

SCR 621] this Court referred to
The Hubli Electricity Co. Ltd.
(supra) to

opine that objective criteria were, in fact
,
laid down in
the relevant

provisions of the therein. It was, however, observed :
"...It is abundantly clear from the authorities cited
            above that questions of fact such as the existence
            of a public purpose or the interest of the public
            safety or the defence of the realm or the efficient
            prosecution of the war, or the maintenance of
            essential supplies and the like may well be and,
            indeed, are often left to the subjective opinion or
            satisfaction of the executive authority. Merely
            because such a matter involves a question of fact it
            does not follow at all that it must always, and
            irrespective of the language of the particular
            enactment, be determined judicially as an objective
            fact..."
Everything, thus, depends upon the nature of the legal provision.


      Administrative law moreover has much developed since then. The

approach of the Privy Council decision does not commend to us. Where an

opinion was not formed on relevant facts or within the restraints of the

statute as an alternative safeguard to rules of natural justice where the

function is administrative, evidently judicial review shall lie. [See
Barium
74
Chemicals Ltd. and another v. Company Law Board and others
AIR 1967

SC 295]


      In fact
The Hubli Electricity Co. Ltd.
(supra) has been considered by

this Court in
Narayanan Sankaran Mooss v. The State of Kerala and Another
[(1974) 1 SCC 68], stating:
"20. The power to revoke the licence is a drastic
            power. The revocation of licence results in severe
            abridgement of the right to carry on business.
            Having in mind the requirements of
Article
            19(1)(g).
Parliament has, it seems to us, prescribed
            certain conditions to prevent the abuse of power
            and to ensure just exercise of power. Clauses (a) to
(d) of
Section 4
prescribe some of the conditions
            precedent for the exercise of power. The order of
            revocation, in breach of any one of those
            conditions, will undoubtedly be void. The clause
            "if in its opinion the public interest so requires" is
            also a condition precedent. On a successful
            showing that the order of revocation has been
            made without the Government applying its mind to
            the aspect of public interest or without forming an
            honest opinion on that aspect, it will, we have no
            doubt, be void. The phrase "after consulting the
            State Electricity Board" is sandwiched between the
            clause "if in its opinion the public interest so
            requires" and clauses (a) to (d). In this context it
            appears to us that consultation with the Board is
            also a condition precedent for making the order of
            revocation. Accordingly the breach of this
            condition precedent should also entail the same
            consequence as the breach of the other conditions
            referred to earlier. It may be observed that the
            phrase "after consulting the State Electricity
            Board" did not find place in
Section 4
as it stood
            originally. It was introduced in
Section 4
in 1959
75
by an amendment. It seems to us that it was
             introduced in
Section 4
with the object of
             providing an additional safeguard to the
             licensee..."
In
Rohtas Industries v. S.D. Agarwal and Others
[(1969) 1 SCC 325],

it was categorically held that the Judicial Committee was considering a pre-

constitutional provision which was not subject to the mandate of
Article

19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.
While exercising the power of judicial review in a case of this nature,

the court would not be concerned with the merit of the decision but with the

decision making process. If it is found that the decision making process has

not been adhered to, indisputably, judicial review would lie.
Mr. Venugopal would submit that such an interpretation would open a

floodgate. We do not think so. We even wish no occasion like the present

one arises in future before the Superior Courts for their consideration.
Even otherwise, the floodgate argument does not appeal to us.


      In
Coal India Ltd. and Others v. Saroj Kumar Mishra
, [(2007) 9 SCC

625], this Court held:
"19. The floodgate argument also does not appeal
             to us. The same appears to be an argument of
             desperation. Only because there is a possibility of
             floodgate litigation, a valuable right of a citizen
76
cannot be permitted to be taken away. This Court
             is bound to determine the respective rights of the
             parties. [See
Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India
and
Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee
             v. C.K. Rajan
]"
It will also not be correct to contend that as non-appointment of the

appellant did not cast a stigma, such a fact was not necessary to be noticed.

We have noticed
S.P. Gupta
(supra) that where facts are brought to the

notice of the court, whether by way of affidavit by the constitutional

authorities or by placing before the court the entire material, it is permissible

to delve deep into the matter.
Once, thus, decision making process had been undergone in terms of

the constitutional scheme in its correct perspective, judicial review may not

be maintainable.
QUO WARRANTO


      Respondents herein filed the writ petitions inter alia for issuance of a

writ of Quo Warranto. A Writ of Quo Warranto can be issued when the

holder of a public office has been appointed in violation of constitutional or

statutory provisions.
Section 16
of the Act lays down the qualifications inter

alia for appointment of the Chairman of the State Commission. Clause (a)

of sub-section (1) of
Section 16
provides that the candidate must be `is' or
77
`has been a Judge'.      The proviso appended thereto, however, mandates

consultation by the State Government with the Chief Justice of the

concerned High Court.
Concedingly, judicial review for the purpose of issuance of writ of

Quo Warranto in a case of this nature would lie :-
(A)      in the event the holder of a public office was not eligible

                     for appointment ;
(B)      Processual machinery relating to consultation was not

                     fully complied.
The writ of quo warranto proceedings affords a judicial remedy by

which any person who holds an independent substantive public office is

called upon to show by what right he holds the same so that his title to it

may be duly determined and in the event it is found that the holder has no

title he would be directed to be removed from the said office by a judicial

order. The proceedings not only give a weapon to control the executive

from making appointments to public office against law but also tend to

protect the public from being deprived of public office to which it has a

right.
78
It is indisputably a high prerogative writ which was reserved for the

use of Crown.
The width and ambit of the writ, however, in the course of practice,

have widened and it is permissible to pray for issuance of a writ in the nature

of quo warranto.
In Corpus Juris Secundum [74 C.J.S. Quo Warranto ' 14], `Quo

Warranto' is defined as under :
"Quo warranto, or a proceeding in the nature
             thereof, is a proper and appropriate remedy to test
             the right or title to an office, and to remove or oust
             an incumbent.
It is prosecuted by the state against a person who
             unlawfully usurps, intrudes, or holds a public
             office. The relator must establish that the office is
             being unlawfully held and exercised by
             respondent, and that realtor is entitled to the
             office."
In the Law Lexicon by J.J.S. Wharton, Esq., 1987, `Quo Warranto'

has been defined as under:
"QUO WARRANTO, a writ issuable out of the
             Queen's Bench, in the nature of a writ of right, for
             the Crown, against him who claims or usurps any
             office, franchise, or liberty, to enquire by what
             authority he supports his claim, in order to
             determine the right. It lies also in case of non-user,
             or long neglect of a franchise, or mis-user or abuse
             of it; being a writ commanding the defendant to
79
show by what warrant he exercises such a
             franchise having never had any grant of it, or
             having forfeited it be neglect or abuse."
Indisputably a writ of Quo Warranto can be issued inter alia when the

appointment is contrary to the statutory rules as has been held by this Court

in High Court of
Gujarat v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat
, (
supra) and

R.K. Jain v. Union of India
and , [ (1993) 4 SCC 119 ].
See also
Mor

Modern Coop. Transport Society Ltd.          v.   Financial Commr. & Secy.
[(2002) 6 SCC 269].
In
Dr. Duryodhan Sahu and Others v. Jitendra Kumar Mishra and

Others
[(1998) 7 SCC 273], this Court has stated that it is not for the court to

embark upon an investigation of its own to ascertain the qualifications of the

person concerned.
[See also Arun Singh alias
Arun Kr. Singh v. State of

Bihar and Others
(2006) 9 SCC 375]


      We may furthermore notice that while examining if a person holds a

public office under valid authority or not, the court is not concerned with

technical grounds of delay or motive behind the challenge, since it is

necessary to prevent continuance of usurpation of office or perpetuation of

an illegality.
[See
Dr. Kashinath G. Jalmi and Another v. The Speaker and

Others
(1993) 2 SCC 703].
80
Issuance of a writ of quo warranto is a discretionary remedy.

Authority of a person to hold a high public office can be questioned inter

alia in the event an appointment is violative of any statutory provisions.
There concededly exists a distinction in regard to issuance of a writ of

quo warranto and issuance of a writ of certiorari. The scope and ambit of

these two writs are different and distinct. Whereas a writ of quo warranto

can be issued on a limited ground, the considerations for issuance of a writ

of certiorari are wholly different.
In
Dr. Kashinath G. Jalmi
(supra), it was held that even the motive or

conduct of the appellants may be relevant only for denying them the costs

even if their claim succeeds but it cannot be a justification to refuse to

examine the merits of the question raised therein, since that is a matter of

public concern and relates to good governance of the State.
In
Shri Kumar Prasad v. Union of India and Others
[(1992) 2 SCC

428], this Court held:
"22. It is in the above context that we have to
          interpret the meaning of expression "judicial office"
under
Article 217(2)(a)
of the Constitution of India.
          The High Court Judges are appointed from two
          sources, members of the Bar and from amongst the
          persons who have held "judicial office" for not less
          than ten years. Even a subordinate judicial officer
          manning a court inferior to the District Judge can be
          appointed as a Judge of a High Court. The expression
81
"judicial office" in generic sense may include wide
         variety of offices which are connected with the
         administration of justice in one way or the other.
         Under the
Criminal Procedure Code
, 1973 powers of
         judicial Magistrate can be conferred on any person
         who holds or has held any office under the
         Government. Officers holding various posts under the
         executive are often vested with the Magisterial powers
         to meet a particular situation. Did the framers of the
         Constitution have this type of `offices' in mind when
         they provided a source of appointment to the high
         office of a Judge of High Court from amongst the
         holders of a "judicial office". The answer has to be in
         the negative. We are of the view that holder of
         "judicial office" under
Article 217(2)(a)
means the
         person who exercises only judicial functions,
         determines causes inter-partes and renders decisions
         in a judicial capacity. He must belong to the judicial
         service which as a class is free from executive control
         and is disciplined to uphold the dignity, integrity and
         independence of judiciary."
It was held that the Law Secretary although was holder of a judicial

office but being not a judicial officer was not qualified to be appointed as a

Judge of the High Court and, thus, his appointment was quashed.
In
B.R. Kapur v. State of T.N. and Another
(supra), the question

which arose for consideration was as to whether the Chief Minister of a

State, who having been convicted in a criminal case, disqualified herself to

become a member of a Legislative Assembly in terms of
Article 191(1)
of

the Constitution of India could be appointed as the Chief Minister for a

period of six months in terms of
Article 164
thereof. This Court having
82
regard to
Article 164(4)
of the Constitution of India opined that if a person is

disqualified to become a member of the legislative assembly, he cannot be

inducted into the Council of Ministers for a short term which would extend

beyond a period of six months.
It was held that a Writ of Quo Warranto can be issued even when the

President or the Governor had appointed a person to a constitutional office.

It was furthermore held that the qualification of that person to hold that

office can be examined in a quo warranto proceedings and the appointment

can be quashed.
In
R.K. Jain
(supra), consultation by the executive which Chief Justice

having found to be not necessary, it was held that no case for issuance of

writ of quo warranto has been made out, stating:
"73. Judicial review is concerned with whether
             the incumbent possessed of qualification for
             appointment and the manner in which the
             appointment came to be made or the procedure
             adopted whether fair, just and reasonable. Exercise
             of judicial review is to protect the citizen from the
             abuse of the power etc. by an appropriate
             Government or department etc. In our considered
             view granting the compliance of the above power
             of appointment was conferred on the executive and
             confided to be exercised wisely. When a candidate
             was found qualified and eligible and was
             accordingly appointed by the executive to hold an
             office as a Member or Vice-President or President
             of a Tribunal, we cannot sit over the choice of the
83
selection, but it be left to the executive to select the
             personnel as per law or procedure in this behalf..."
In that case, it was held that no case for issuance of a writ of certiorari

had been made out as a third party had no locus standi to canvass the legality

or correctness of the action seeking for issuance of a writ of certiorari. Only

public law declaration would be made at the behest of the appellant who was

a public spirited person.
We may incidentally place on record that a declaratory relief had also

been prayed for in the writ petitions filed by the respondents.
Reliance has also been placed on a decision of this Court in
Union of

India and Others v. Kali Dass Batish and Another
[(2006) 1 SCC 779]

wherein it was held:
"...Even assuming that the Secretary of the
             department concerned of the Government of India
             had not apprised himself of all necessary facts, one
             cannot assume or impute to a high constitutional
             authority, like the Chief Justice of India, such
             procedural or substantive error. The argument
             made at the Bar that the Chief Justice of India
             might not have been supplied with the necessary
             inputs has no merit. If Parliament has reposed faith
             in the Chief Justice of India as the paterfamilias of
             the judicial hierarchy in this country, it is not open
             for anyone to contend that the Chief Justice of
             India might have given his concurrence without
             application of mind or without calling for the
             necessary inputs. The argument, to say the least,
             deserves summary dismissal."
84
(Emphasis supplied)


        The decision
in that case
was rendered in the factual matrix obtaining

therein.   Noticing that where members of the bar were required to be

considered for important judicial posts, their antecedents are verified

through the Intelligence Bureau and a report is obtained from it.
It was noticed that the Secretary (Personnel) had forwarded all

necessary papers including the IB Report and sought for concurrence of the

Chief Justice with regard to the names recommended by the Central

Government. In that case, as concurrence to the proposal of the Chief

Justice of India was obtained after consideration of all the material, it was

held:
"...It must be remembered that a member of an
              Administrative Tribunal like CAT exercises vast
              judicial powers, and such member must be ensured
              absolute judicial independence, free from
              influences of any kind likely to interfere with
              independent judicial functioning or militate
              thereagainst. It is for this reason, that a policy
              decision had been taken by the Government of
              India that while considering members of the Bar
              for appointment to such a post, their antecedents
              have to be verified by IB. The antecedents would
              include various facts, like association with
              antisocial elements, unlawful organisations,
              political affiliations, integrity of conduct and moral
              uprightness. All these factors have necessarily to
              be verified before a decision is taken by the
              appointing authority to appoint a candidate to a
85
sensitive post like member of CAT. In Delhi
            Admn. v. Sushil Kumar1 this Court emphasised
            that even for the appointment of a constable in
            police services, verification of character and
            antecedents is one of the important criteria to test
            whether the selected candidate is suitable for a post
            under the State. Even if such candidate was found
            physically fit, had passed the written test and
            interview and was provisionally selected, if on
            account of his antecedent record, the appointing
            authority found it not desirable to appoint a person
            of such record as a constable, the view taken by
            the appointing authority could not be said to be
            unwarranted, nor could it be interdicted in judicial
            review. These are observations made in the case of
            a constable, they would apply with greater vigour
            in the case of appointment of a judicial member of
            CAT. It is for this precise reason that sub-section
            (7) to
Section 6
of the Act requires that the
            appointment of a member of CAT cannot be made
            "except after consultation with the Chief Justice of
            India"."
We may, however, notice that the Bench itself opined that for

appointment as a member of an Administrative Tribunal like CAT, absolute

judicial independence must be ensured. It was furthermore opined:
"This consultation should, of course, be an
            effective consultation after all necessary papers are
            laid before the Chief Justice of India, and is the
            virtual guarantee for appointment of absolutely
            suitable candidates to the post."
The observations of the Bench, as noticed hereinbefore, must be

understood in the factual backdrop of the case. The argument which was
86
advanced therein, viz., the Chief Justice of India might not have been

supplied with necessary inputs was found to be wholly meritless deserving

summary rejection thereof.
In a case of this nature, there would not be any IB enquiry. It was

necessary for the Chief Justice to apprise himself fully with the background

of the former judge concerned particularly where for one reason or the other

he was not made permanent.
Our attention has furthermore been drawn to a decision of this Court

in High Court of
Gujarat and Another v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat

and Others
(supra) wherein, one of us was a member. Therein the question

which arose for consideration was as to whether without appointing the

members, the President of the Industrial Court, which was to consist of three

or more members out of which one may be a President, could have been

appointed straightway without appointing him as a member.
It has, however, been contended that disqualification cannot be read

into or implied into the wording of a section.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on
Manohar Nathurao Samarth

v. Marotrao and Others
[(1979) 4 SCC 93] wherein it has been held that
Regulation 25
of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations
87
1960 framed under the
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956
and read with
Section 15(g)
of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 provided for

disciplinary action and not disqualificatory, observing:
"11...No ground rooted in public policy compels
             us to magnify the disciplinary prescription into a
             disenfranchising taboo. To revere the word to
             reverse the sense is to do injustice to the art of
             interpretation. Reed Dickerson quotes a passage
             from an American case to highlight the guideline:
"The meaning of some words in a statute
                may be enlarged or restricted in order to
                harmonize them with the legislative intent of
                the entire statute.... It is the spirit ... of the
                statute which should govern over the literal
                meaning".
***                    ***
                      ***
13. It is quite conceivable, if the legislature so
             expresses itself un-equivocally, that even in a law
             dealing with disciplinary control, to enforce
             electoral disqualifications provided the legislature
             has competence. The present provision does not go
             so far.
14. Even assuming that literality in construction
             has tenability in given circumstances, the doctrinal
             development in the nature of judicial interpretation
             takes us to other methods like the teleological, the
             textual, the contextual and the functional. The
             strictly literal may not often be logical if the
             context indicates a contrary legislative intent.
             Courts are not victims of verbalism but are agents
             of the functional success of legislation, given
             flexibility of meaning, if the law will thereby hit
             the target intended by the law-maker. Here the
             emphasis lies on the function, utility, aim and
88
purpose which the provision has to fulfil. A policy-
oriented understanding of a legal provision which
             does not do violence to the text or the context
             gains preference as against a narrow reading of the
             words used. Indeed, this approach is a version of
             the plain meaning rule, and has judicial sanction.
             In Hutton v. Phillips the Supreme Court of
             Delaware said:
"(Interpretation) involves far more than
                 picking out dictionary definitions of words or
                 expressions used. Consideration of the context
                 and the setting is indispensable property to
                 ascertain a meaning. In saying that a verbal
                 expression is plain or unambiguous, we mean
                 little more than that we are convinced that
                 virtually anyone competent to understand it,
                 and desiring fairly and impartially to ascertain
                 its signification, would attribute to the
                 expression in its context a meaning such as the
                 one we derive, rather than any other; and would
                 consider any different meaning, by comparison,
                 strained, or far-fetched, or unusual, or
                 unlikely."
The said decision, thus, is an authority that in a given case, the

disciplinary prescription may be magnified to a disenfranchising taboo, if

any ground rooted in public policy is found therefor. Emphasis has been

laid on policy oriented understanding of a legal profession and not the strict

literal meaning which may not often be logical if the context indicates a

contrary legislative intent.
89
We have found hereinbefore that the appellant was not eligible for

appointment of a public office and in any event the Processual machinery

relating to consultation was not fully complied.


WRIT OF DECLARATION


      In this case, moreover, a writ of declaration was sought for. This

Court in
Shri Kumar Padma Prasad
(supra) issued a writ of declaration

although a writ of quo warranto was sought for. Declaring that the appellant

therein was not qualified to be appointed as a Judge of the High Court, a

consequential order directing him not to appoint was also issued.


PANEL


      The Chief Justice of the High Court forwarded a panel of three Judges

including the appellant herein. Whether
Section 16
of the Act contemplates

such a situation is the question.
Independence of the judiciary as embedded in
Article 50
of the

Constitution of India needs no over-emphasis.
We have noticed hereinbefore that the State of Tamil Nadu in its letter

dated 30th May, 2008 addressed to the Registrar of the Madras High Court

while intimating that a vacancy had arisen in the post of President, State

Commission, made a request to him to send a panel of eligible names of
90
retired High Court Judges after approval by Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the

High Court of Madras for its consideration therefor.
Pursuant thereto or in furtherance thereof, the Chief Justice only

forwarded a panel of three Judges. The Executive Government of the State

made a final choice therefrom.
The process of selection in view of the decisions of this Court in

Ashish Handa (supra) and
Ashok Tanwar
(supra) and
National Consumer

Awareness Group
(supra) must be initiated by the High Court itself. Having

regard to the fact that the Chief Justice has the primacy as regards

recommendations of the name for appointment to the post of Chairman of

the State Commission, the method adopted herein, in our considered view, is

impermissible in law. For the said purpose only one name must emanate

from the Chief Justice ; only one name can be recommended by him and not

a panel of names. Having regard to processual mandate required for the

purpose of appointment to the post of Chairman, State Commission, the

Executive Government of the State cannot have any say whatsoever in the

matter. The process for preparation of a panel requested by the Executive

Government of the State and accepted by the Chief Justice of the High

Court, in our opinion, was impermissible in law. If the State is granted a

choice to make an appointment out of a panel, as has been done in the
91
instant case, the primacy of the Chief Justice, as opined by this Court in the

aforementioned decisions, would stand eroded.
It will bear repetition to

state that even for the said purpose the procedure
laid down by
this Court in

Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association
(supra) as also the Special

Reference, for recommendation of the name of the High Court Judge, as

contained in
Article 217
of the Constitution of India, should be followed. It

is accepted at the Bar that by reason of judicial constitutional interpretation

of
Articles 217
and
124
of the Constitution of India, the procedures laid

down thereunder has undergone a drastic change.            A recommendation

instead and in place of Chief Justice of India must emanate from the

Collegium. However, for the purpose of making recommendation in terms

of
Section 16(1)
the opinion of the Chief Justice alone shall prevail.
It is difficult to accept the submission of Mr. K.K. Venugopal that

such `consultation' would not be `concurrence' as like the Collegium in the

matter of making recommendation for appointment of Judges of the

Supreme Court and the High Courts where the view of he Collegium shall

have the primacy. For appointment as President of the State Commission,

the Chief Justice of the High Court shall have the primacy and thus the term

`consultation' even for the said purpose shall mean `concurrence' only.
92
It is true that if a panel of names is suggested and the State makes an

appointment of one out of the three, the question of meeting of mind

between the Chief Justice and the Executive would not arise but there cannot

be any doubt whatsoever that by reason thereof the ultimate authority to

appoint would be the Executive which in view of the decisions of this Court

would be impermissible.
Mr. Venugopal would contend that for the aforementioned purpose

the principle of purposive interpretation may be resorted to hold that the

Chief Justice by sending a panel of Judges is merely recommending the

names of the Judges, who is his opinion, are independent and fit persons to

be appointed. We are not in a position to accept the same.
For the aforementioned purpose the Court must bear in mind that the

constitutional scheme of independence of the judiciary embodied in
Article

50
of the Constitution of India should by no means be allowed to be eroded.
In
A. Pandurangam Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others
[ AIR 1975 SC 1925 ] this Court has held that the procedure adopted by the

High Court by sending list of all the candidates for appointment to the post

of District Judge so as enable the State to appoint the selectees out of the

said panel is illegal stating :-
93
"9. The recommendation of the High Court for
filling up the six vacancies was contained in its
letter dated July 13, 1973. Government was not
bound to accept all the recommendations but could
tell the High Court its reasons for not accepting the
High Court's recommendations in regard to certain
persons. If the High Court agreed with the reasons
in case of a particular person the recommendation
in his case stood withdrawn and there was no
question of appointing him. Even if the High Court
did not agree the final authority was the
Government in the matter of appointment and for
good reasons it could reject the High Court's
recommendations. In either event it could ask the
High Court to make more recommendations in
place of those who have been rejected. But surely
it was wrong and incompetent for the Government
to write a letter like the one dated July 26, 1973
inviting the High Court's attention to Instruction
12(5) of the Secretariat instructions and on the
basis of that to ask it to send the list of persons
whom the High Court considered to have
reasonable claims to the appointment. On the basis
of the furore created by the two Bar Associations
of Hyderabad and the High Court's letter dated
July 26, 1973 written in reply to the Government's
letter dated July 24, 1973 no person's candidature
recommended by the High Court had been rejected
when the letter dated July 26, 1973 was written by
the Government. Even after rejection the
Government could not ask the High Court to send
the list of all persons whom the High Court
considered to have reasonable claim to the
appointment. We feel distressed to find that instead
of pointing out the correct position of law to the
Government and itself acting according to it, a
letter like the one dated August 1, 1973 was sent
by the High Court in reply to the Government's
letter dated July 26, 1973. It is not clear from this
letter whether it was written under the directions of
Chief Justice and the other Judges of the High
Court as in the case of the letter dated July 13,
1973. But surely it was very much wrong on the
part of the High Court to forward the entire list of
the candidates interviewed with the marks obtained
by them and adding at the same time that the High
Court had no further remarks to offer. We could
not understand the reason for writing such a letter
94
by the High Court. But if we may hazard a surmise
      it seems to have been written in utter disgust at the
      Government's unreasonable attitude displayed in
      its letter dated July 26, 1973. By no means could it
      be, nor was it, a recommendation by the High
      Court of all the 263 candidates interviewed, that all
      of them had a reasonable claim, or in other words,
      were fit to be appointed District Judges. We must
      express our displeasure at and disapproval of all
      that happened between the Government and the
      High Court -- in the former writing the letter
      dated July 26, 1973 and the latter sending the reply
      dated August 1, 1973.
10. Then comes the letter dated November 30,
      1973. After tracing the history of the
      recommendations made by the High Court in its
      letter dated July 13, 1973 and "in the light of
      further information about these candidates as
      required from High Court", Government decided
      to select the six candidates mentioned therein
      including Respondents 3 to 6 as if they were from
      "the list recommended by the High Court". It was
      further stated in this letter "Reasons for not
      selecting candidates placed by the High Court
      higher than those now selected are given in the
      annexure enclosed to this DO letter." The High
      Court, to be more accurate, the Chief Justice to
      whom the letter dated November 30, 1973 was
      addressed seems to have not resented or protested
      against the selection so made by the Government
      in clear violation of
Article 233
of the
      Constitution. We find it intriguing that the letter
      written by the Registrar to the High Court on
      August 1, 1973 was treated as a recommendation
      of all the 263 candidates as having been found fit
      for appointment as District Judges. By no means
      could it be so. It was not so. And yet the High
      Court or the Chief Justice did not object to the
      appointment of Respondents 3 to 6 as District
      Judges. They were not eligible to be so appointed
      as their names had never been recommended."
In
Ashok Tanwar
(supra) it was held :-
95
"6. On 7-3-2000 the Registrar General of the High
      Court addressed a letter to the Financial
      Commissioner-cum-Secretary (F&S) of the State
      Government conveying recommendation of the
      Chief Justice for appointment of Mr Justice
      Surinder Swaroop, a sitting Judge of the High
      Court, as President of the State Commission
      holding additional charge of the post. In the said
      letter it was also stated that steps could be taken
      for appointment of Mr Justice Surinder Swaroop
      (Respondent 3 herein) as President of the State
      Commission in accordance with the law and rules.
      Thereafter, a notification dated 13-3-2000 was
      issued by the Governor, Himachal Pradesh,
      appointing Justice Surinder Swaroop as President
      of the State Commission.
xxx            xxx              xxx
9. The High Court, after consideration of the
      respective contentions advanced on behalf of the
      parties and in the light of the decisions of this
      Court, held that the case of Ashish Handa related
      to the initiation of "process", which was required
      to be followed in making appointment of President
      of the State Commission, and that such process
      should not have been initiated by the Government
      but it ought to have been initiated by the Chief
      Justice. On facts the High Court found that
      although initially the process was started by the
      Government proposing the name of Respondent 3,
      Respondent 2, however, was aware of the legal
      position and it immediately drew the attention of
      Respondent 1 that the procedure adopted by
      Respondent 1 was not in accordance with law.
      Therefore, a second letter was addressed by
      Respondent 1 to Respondent 2. Respondent 2 on
      receipt of the second letter made the
      recommendation to appoint Respondent 3 as
      President of the State Commission. On that issue
      the High Court held that the action taken either by
      Respondent 1 or by Respondent 2 could not be
      said to be contrary to law or the directions issued
      by this Court in the case of Ashish Handa.
      Consequently the writ petition was dismissed.
      Hence, this appeal."
In
National Consumer Awareness Group
(supra) this Court has held :-
96
"7. Justice Amarjeet Chaudhary, the then
incumbent, was to demit his office on 4-9-2003 on
completion of his term as President of the Haryana
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
(hereinafter referred to as "the State
Commission"). On 25-8-2003 the Chief Minister
of Haryana addressed a letter to the Chief Justice
of the Punjab and Haryana High Court drawing his
attention to the vacancy that was likely to arise on
5-9-2003, and expressed his view that Justice R.S.
Mongia, retired Chief Justice of the Gauhati High
Court, would be a befitting incumbent to be
appointed to the said post and requested for
communication of the views of the Chief Justice of
the Punjab and Haryana High Court. By a
communication dated 26-8-2003, the Chief Justice
of the Punjab and Haryana High Court drew the
attention of the Chief Minister to the decision of
this Court in
Ashish Handa v. Chief Justice of
High
Court of Punjab & Haryana1 and took the
stand: (SCC p.      148, para 3)
      ... even for initiation of the proposal ... the
   executive is expected to approach the Chief
   Justice when the appointment is to be made for
   taking the steps to initiate the proposal, and the
   procedure followed should be the same as for
   appointment of a High Court Judge. That would
   give greater credibility to the appointment
   made.
He, however, postponed a decision, as the
seniormost Judge of the collegium was out of
station. By a confidential communication dated 27-
8-2003, the Chief Justice informed the Chief
Minister that the collegium of the High Court had
met and considered the names of several persons,
and unanimously decided to recommend Justice
R.C. Kathuria (retired) of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court as most suitable and fit for
appointment as President of the State Commission.
A copy of the relevant resolution was forwarded
for information. The resolution took note of the
credentials of the three retired Judges, whose
suitability was considered, and decided to
recommend Mr Justice R.C. Kathuria as most
suitable and fit for appointment. Justice R.S.
97
Mongia was also one of the three retired Judges,
whose suitability was considered by the said
resolution.
8. By a letter dated 29-10-2003 the Chief
Minister, Haryana, raised certain objections to the
proposal made by the Chief Justice. The collegium
of the High Court considered the letter dated 29-
10-2003 of the Chief Minister, Haryana and
reiterated its earlier recommendation. By a letter of
1-12-2003 the Chief Minister drew the attention of
the Chief Justice to what he considered were the
deficiencies in the candidature of the learned
Judge, whose name was proposed by the High
Court. Once again, the High Court after calling for
several records and considering various other
aspects of the matter reiterated its stand that there
was no reason to recall the earlier
recommendations to appoint Justice R.C. Kathuria
(retired) as the President of the State Commission.
By another letter dated 7-1-2004, the Chief
Minister of Haryana drew the attention of the
Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court to the newly introduced
Section 16
(1-A),
vide (Amendment) Act 62 of 2002, and stated that
since the post of the President of the State
Commission was vacant at the moment, an
Hon'ble sitting Judge of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court was required to be nominated to act as
Chairman of the Selection Committee to be
constituted under
Section 16
(1-A). There was
certain other correspondence about certain
representations made, which is not material.
xxx                 xxx          xxx
18. We are unable to accept this contention of the
learned counsel for the Union of India. It is
inconceivable that sub-section (1-A) is intended
for appointment of the President of the State
Commission itself. In the first place, we cannot
accede to the contention that the Chairman of the
State Commission, who is or has been a Judge of
the High Court, can be selected by a Selection
Committee comprising two Secretaries of the State
Government. Nothing could be more erosive of
judicial independence than such interpretation of
sub-section (1-A). This conclusion of ours is
driven home by the proviso to sub-section (1-A).
This proviso is intended to take care of a
98
contingency where there exists a President of the
            State Commission, who is unable to chair the
            Selection Committee meeting because of absence
            or other similar reasons. It is only in such a
            situation, that the State Government may request
            the Chief Justice of the High Court to nominate a
            sitting Judge to act as Chairman of the Selection
            Committee. If the argument of the learned counsel
            of the Union of India and the construction
            canvassed by him is admitted, it would mean that
            even where the President of the State Commission
            is appointed for the first time, the procedure would
            be that he would be appointed by a Committee of
            which two Secretaries would be members. That
            would be obviously destructive of judicial
            independence.
Even in
Union of India v. Kali Dass Batish
, (supra) whereupon strong

reliance has been placed by Mr. Venugopal, this Court held :-
"....Consequently, Parliament has taken great care
            to enact, vide
Sections 6
and
7
of the Act, that no
            appointment of a person possessing the
            qualifications prescribed in the Act as a member
            shall be made, except after consultation with the
            Chief Justice of India. The consultation with the
            Chief Justice of India is neither a routine matter,
            nor an idle formality. It must be remembered that a
            member of an Administrative Tribunal like CAT
            exercises vast judicial powers, and such member
            must be ensured absolute judicial independence,
            free from influences of any kind likely to interfere
            with independent judicial functioning or militate
            thereagainst."
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that the process adopted

by the High Court and the Chief Justice in asking for a panel of name and

sending the same was not legally permissible.
CONCLUSION
99
The summary of our aforementioned discussions is as under:
(i)     Judicial review although has a limited application but is not beyond

        the pale of the superior judiciary in a case of this nature.
(ii)    The superior courts may not only issue a writ of quo warranto but also

        a writ in the nature of quo warranto. It is also entitled to issue a writ

        of declaration which would achieve the same purpose.
(iii)   For the purpose of interpretation of Constitution in regard to the status

        of an Additional Judge, the word "has been" would ordinarily mean a

        retired Judge and for the purpose of examining the question of

        eligibility, not only his being an Additional judge but also a

        qualification as to whether he could continue in the said post or he be

        appointed as an acting or adhoc judge, his suitability may also be

        taken into consideration.
(iv)
Section 16
of the Act must also be given a contextual meaning. In a

        case of this nature, the court having regard to the wider public policy

        as also the basic feature of the Constitution, viz., independence and

        impartiality of the judiciary, would adopt a rule of purposive

        interpretation instead of literal interpretation.
100
(v)    Due consultative process as adumbrated by this Court in various

       decisions in this case having not been complied with, appointment of

       Shri Kannadasan was vitiated in law.
(vi)   The Government of the State of Tamil Nadu neither could have asked

       the High Court to send a panel of names of eligible candidates nor the

       Chief Justice of the High Court could have sent a panel of names of

       three Judges for appointment to the post of Chairman, State

       Commission.
Before parting, however, we would place on record that Mr.

Ramamurthy, learned counsel on 5.5.2009 filed a memorandum before us

stating that the appellant Shri N. Kannadasan has submitted his resignation.

It is, however, not stated that the said offer of resignation has been accepted

by the State of Tamil Nadu. Moreover, there is no prayer for withdrawal of

the special leave petition.
We, in the aforementioned situation, are proceeding to pronounce our

judgment.
We must also place on record our deep appreciation for the learned

counsel for the parties and in particular Shri G.E. Vahanvati, the learned

Solicitor General of India for rendering valuable assistance to us.
101
For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in these

appeals, which are dismissed accordingly. No costs.
...............................J.
                                           [S.B. Sinha]


                                           ................................J.
                                           [Dr. Mukundakam Sharma]
New Delhi;
March 06, 2009
102
