Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 57

of 1988
Citation: citation of the decision in Kailash
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/18187525/

[Cites
31
, Cited by
30
]
Delhi High Court
Shri Ram Pistons & Rings Ltd. vs M/S. C.B.Agarwal Huf & Ors. on 11 December, 2008
Author:
Pradeep Nandrajog
Bench:
Pradeep Nandrajog
,
J.R. Midha
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+                         RFA 389/1999


        SHRI RAM PISTONS & RINGS LTD.      ..... Appellant
                 Through: Mr.T.K.Ganju, Sr.Adv. with
                           Mr.A.K.Thakur, Adv. and
                           Mr.R.K.Mishra, Adv.

                              versus

        M/s. C.B.AGARWAL HUF & ORS.         ...... Respondents
                   Through: Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
                            Mr.V.K.Sharma, Mr.Arvind Nigam,
                            Mr.Bhagabati Prasad and
                            Mr.Amit Goel, Advs.


                              RESERVED ON:
                               11.11.2008

                              DATE OF DECISION:
%                                  11.12.2008

Coram:
*   Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
    Hon'ble Mr.Justice J.R. Midha


1.      Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
        to see the judgment?

2.      To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.      Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?


PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.      The predecessor-in-interest of the appellant Shriram

Pistons & Rings Ltd.; namely Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd.,

New Delhi was inducted as a tenant in flat bearing No.31-A,

Himalaya House, 23 Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi in the

early    1970s.     The    landlord    was   M/s.C.B.Agarwal    HUF.
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 1 of 47
Mr.C.B.Agarwal,       Karta   of   M/s.C.B.Agarwal   HUF   died       on

13.6.1973.        There was a partial partition of the HUF.    2 co-

parceners; namely Mr.Satish Chandra and Mr.Vinod Chandra

separated and constituted their own Hindu undivided family. A

letter dated 23.6.1973, Ex.PW-1/17, was addressed to Delhi

Cloth and General Mills Ltd. on behalf of Mr.Satish Chandra

HUF, Mr.Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF and Dr.C.B.Agarwala

HUF, requesting that the rent payable be bifurcated with one-

sixth rent being paid in the name of Mr.Satish Chandra HUF;

one-sixth rent being paid in the name of Mr.Vinod Chandra

Agarwala HUF and the remaining 4/6th rent being paid in the

name of Dr.C.B.Agarwala HUF.
2.    The letter reads as under:-
"The above referred flat is owned by Dr.C.B.Agarwala
      HUF. Shri C.B.Agarwala died on 13th June, 1973.
      There has been a partial partition in the HUF. Shri
      Satish Chandra and Shri Vinod Chandra two of the
      coparceners have separated. The members of the
      HUF namely:
1. Shri Pramod Chandra, 2. Shri Ashok Chandra, 3. Shri
      Sudhir Chandra, all sons of late Shri C.B.Agarwala and
4. Smt.Chandra Kala, wife of late Shri C.B.Agarwala,
      continue joint and now constitute Dr.C.B.Agarwala,
      HUF with Shri Pramod Chandra Agarwala as the Karta.
Effective from 13th June, 1973, the rent in respect of
      the above flat may please be apportioned as under:-
1.     Shri Satish Chandra HUF 1/6 (one sixth share)
2.   Shri Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF 1/6 (one sixth
      share).
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 2 of 47
3.   Shri Pramod Chandra Aggarwala Karta                of
      Dr.C.B.Aggarwala HUF 4/6 (four sixth) share.
Rent cheques made out as above may please be sent
      respectively to the following addressed until change of
      address, is communicated:-
1.     Mr.Justice Satish Chandra,
             25A, Kanpur Road, Allahabad.
2.     Mr.Vinod Chandra Aggarwala,
             82 Jorbagh, New Delhi.
3.     Mr.Pramod Chandra Aggarwala,
             Flat No.10,
             233 Lower Circular Road,
             Calcutta."
3.    By the year 1975 the appellant became the successor of

the Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. and took over the

possessory rights of Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. qua the

flat in question. The tenancy period was coming to an end. 3

nearly identically worded letters dated 1.10.1975, 24.11.1975

and 28.11.1975 were addressed to Satish Chandra HUF, Vinod

Chandra Agarwala HUF and Mr.C.B.Aggarwal HUF respectively;

being Ex.PW-1/D-2, Ex.PW-1/D-1 and Ex.PW-1/14.
4.    The letters confirmed that increased rent would be paid

as before and period of lease would be extended from 1 st July

1975 till 30th June 1978. It was recorded in the letters that the

rent would be paid one-sixth each to Satish Chandra HUF and

Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF and balance four-sixth rent

would be paid to C.B.Agarwal HUF.          The three letters are

lengthy and hence need not be extracted in toto. The relevant
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 3 of 47
contents of the three letters on which reliance was placed by

the respondent may be noted. The same reads as under:-
"Ex. PW-1/D-2

      Messrs. Satish Chandra HUF
      8 Hastings Road,
      Allahabad.
Dear Sir,

                Space in Himalya House - Flat No.A
      With regard to renting of the premises we herein after
      spell out the terms and conditions on which we take
      on lease your office premises No.Flat-A on the 3rd floor
      of Himalaya House, 23, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
      Delhi.
1.    We will be paying you Rs.930/- (Rupees Nine
      hundred and thirty only) per month in respect of your
      one sixth share as rent. The rent will be payable by us
      to you or to your Bankers before the 5th day of every
      English Calendar month.
2.    The tenancy of the aforesaid premises is for the
      fixed period of three years commencing from July 1,
      1975.    Further extension will be strictly with the
      consent of both the parties and on the terms and
      conditions to be mutually agreed upon for which three
      calendar months‟ notice, in writing, will be given by us
      for fresh signing of the lease before the expiry of this
      lease. If the parties do not come to any agreed terms
      and conditions, we undertake to give you peaceful
      vacant possession of the premises by June 30, 1978."
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

      Ex.PW-1/D-1

      Mr. Vinod Chandra Agarwal, HUF
      82 Jog Bagh,
      New Delhi.
Dear Sir,

                Space in Himalya House - Flat No.A
      With regard to renting of the premises we herein after
      spell out the terms and conditions on which we take
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 4 of 47
on lease your office premises No.Flat-A on the 3rd floor
      of Himalaya House, 23, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
      Delhi.
1.    We will be paying you Rs.930/- (Rupees Nine
      hundred and thirty only) per month in respect of your
      one sixth share as rent. The rent will be payable by us
      to you or to your Bankers before the 5th day of every
      English Calendar month.
2.    The tenancy of the aforesaid premises is for the
      fixed period of three years commencing from July 1,
      1975.    Further extension will be strictly with the
      consent of both the parties and on the terms and
      conditions to be mutually agreed upon for which three
      calendar months‟ notice, in writing, will be given by us
      for fresh signing of the lease before the expiry of this
      lease. If the parties do not come to any agreed terms
      and conditions, we undertake to give you peaceful
      vacant possession of the premises by June 30, 1978."


      xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx


      Ex.PW-1/14



      Mr.P.C.Agarwal, Karta of
      Shri C.B.Agarwala, HUF
      Flat No.10,
      233, Lower Court Road,
      Calcutta-20

      Dear Sir,

                  Space in Himalya House - Flat No.A

      With regard to renting of the premises we herein after
      spell out the terms and conditions on which we take
      on lease your office premises No.Flat-A on the 3rd floor
      of Himalaya House, 23, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New
      Delhi.
1.   We will be paying you Rs.3720/- (Rupees Three
      thousand seven hundred twenty only) per month in
      respect of your four-sixth share as rent. The rent will
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 5 of 47
be payable by us to you or to your Bankers before the
      5th day of every English Calendar month.
2.    The tenancy of the aforesaid premises is for the
      fixed period of three years commencing from July 1,
      1975.    Further extension will be strictly with the
      consent of both the parties and on the terms and
      conditions to be mutually agreed upon for which three
      calendar months‟ notice, in writing, will be given by us
      for fresh signing of the lease before the expiry of this
      lease. If the parties do not come to any agreed terms
      and conditions, we undertake to give you peaceful
      vacant possession of the premises by June 30, 1978."


      xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx"
5.           The lease continued for another period of 3 years,

as recorded in Ex.PW-1/D-2, Ex.PW-1/D-1 and Ex.PW-1/14, till

30th June 1978.     Post 30th June 1978 the rent was increased

and the appellant continued to remain in possession of the

tenanted premises.
6.           Share of C.B.Agarwal HUF towards 4/6th rent as

enhanced came to Rs.4340/-. On 10th April 1980 a letter,

Ex.PW-1/D-3, was addressed by the Karta of C.B.Aggarwal HUF

to the appellant informing that there was a further partition of

C.B.Agarwal       HUF   with    one   co-parcener,    Ashok    Chandra

Aggarwal branching out and forming his own HUF. Following

was communicated:-
Shri C.B.Agarwala HUF
                                                               Flat No.7,
                                                233, Lower Circular Road,
                                                        Calcutta-700020

                                                           April 10, 1980

                               REGISTERED A/D
RFA No.389/1999                                            Page 6 of 47
Shriram pistons & Rings Ltd.,
23, Kasturba Gandhi Marg,
New Delhi-110001.
Dear Sirs,
                        2/3 Share in Flat No.31A in
                        Himalaya House, Calcutta.
Upto 31.3.1980, 2/3 share in the above flat was owned by Shri
C.B.Agarwala H.U.F. From 1.4.1980 there has been a partial partition of
the said H.U.F. pursuant to which ¼ of 2/3 share in the said flat is owned
by Shri Ashok Chandra Agarwala H.U.F. and ¾ of 2/3 share in the said flat
is continued to be owned by Shri C.B. Agarwala HUF.
This is to request you that accordingly rent Rs.4340/= per month
for 2/3 share of above flat hitherto paid to Shri C.B.Agarwala HUF may
please be paid, for the period 1.4.1980 onwards, as under:
1/4 (of 2/3) to Ashok Chandra Agarwala HUF of 82
              Jorbagh, New Delhi-110003                  ....Rs.1085/-
3/4 (of 2/3) to Shri C.B. Agarwala HUF of Flat No.7, 233,
             Lower Circular Road, Calcutta-700020       ...Rs.3255/-
Kindly acknowledge and confirm.
       Thanking you,

                                                      Yours faithfully,

                                             For Shri C.B.Agarwala H.U.F.
                                                      Sd/-
Karta."
7.           Accordingly the appellant started paying 1/4th of the

4/6th rent to Ashok Chandra Agarwal HUF and the balance 3/4 th

of 4/6th to C.B.Agarwal HUF.
8.           In this manner 4 different entities became the

landlord of the flat in question.
9.
The Delhi Rent Control Act
1958 was in force when

the tenancy commenced. In view of the provisions of the said

Act,   no    tenant    could    be    evicted     by     a    Civil       Court.

Notwithstanding any contract or law to the contrary, no tenant
RFA No.389/1999                                                Page 7 of 47
could be ejected, save and except on a ground available to a

landlord under
Section 14
of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958.

With effect from 1.12.1988, by virtue of the promulgation of

the
Delhi Rent Control Amendment Act
1988, being Act No.57

of 1988, the
Delhi Rent Control Act
1958 stood amended

resulting in the Act being made inapplicable to premises

whose monthly rent exceeded Rs.3,500/-.
10.          The landlords claimed to have issued a letter

terminating the tenancy on 27.4.1989, Ex.PW-1/2.        The four

kartas of the four HUFs namely C.B.Agarwal HUF, Satish

Chandra HUF, Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF and Ashok

Chandra HUF are the stated signatories.       Following are the

contents of the letter:-
"We write to notify as under:
1.    That you are in occupation of the above office
      flat as monthly tenants, at a rent of Rs.8370/- every
      month. The month of tenancy commences on the first
      and ends on the last day of each succeeding English
      calendar month.
2.   Vide our notice dated 27th December 1988 we
      terminated your tenany from 31st January 1989.
However without prejudice to that notice we once
      again give you this notice of termination of your
      tenancy on the expiry of next month i.e. 31st May 1989
      or on such other day as according to you the month of
      tenancy would have ended and call upon you to quit
      and vacate and handover peaceful and vacant
      possession of the said premises to us.
3.   We further notify you that in the event of your
      not handing over the vacant and peaceful possession
      as aforesaid, you will be liable to pay mesne profits
      and/or damages and/or compensation at the rate of
      Rs.3,500/- per day plus the interest at the rate of 21%.
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 8 of 47
We state that by unauthorized occupation, you are
      deriving benefit and/or depriving us of the benefit of at
      least Rs.3,500/- per day, and whilst claiming this sum
      of money, we reserve our right to claim such other
      enhanced amount as we may be entitled in law.
4.    Please note that after receiving the rent for the
      month of May 1989 we will be unable to accept any
      amount as rent. If after termination of your tenancy
      from 31st May as above you wrongfully do not vacate
      and continue to make any payments, the same will be
      adjusted by us in part payment of damages, or mesne
      profits or compensation for unauthorized occupation
      as notified above, which will be without prejudice to
      our right and we will proceed to file legal proceedings
      against you for recovery of possession, profits,
      damages, compensation as stated above and hold you
      further liable for all costs and consequences thereof.
5.   Please further note that all correspondence in
      this behalf should be addressed and possession
      handed over to Shri Satish Chandra of D-5, Sector 14,
      Noida, Dist.Ghaziabad.
6.   Needless to add that under the
Rent Control Act,
      1958
, as amended by the
Delhi Rent Control
      (Amendment) Act, 1988
, the said Act i.e. the
Delhi
      Rent Control Act, 1958
, does not apply inter alia to
      premises where monthly rent exceeds Rs.3,500/-.

      Please take notice."
11.          The notice terminating the tenancy was purported

to be sent by Regd.A.D.Post vide receipt No.1968 dated

29.4.1989 from the post office at Noida, District Ghaziabad,

UP, Ex.PW-1/3. Since the AD card was not produced, alleging

that the same was not returned, a certificate issued by the

post master, Noida Post Office, Ex.PW-1/5, was relied upon

which certified that the postal envelope posted vide postal

receipt No.1968 was duly delivered to the addressee.
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 9 of 47
12.          Needless to state, the respondents, landlords sued

for ejectment of the appellant and sought recovery of

possession of the tenanted premises being Flat No.31-A,

Himalya House, 23 Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi as also

claimed mesne profits/damages on account of the stated

unauthorized use and occupation of their flat by the appellant.

It was stated in the plaint that the current rate of rent is

Rs.25/- per sq.feet.
13.          While making pleadings in the plaint, in para 10, it

was pleaded that the Court should determine the quantum of

damages in terms of
Order 20 Rule 12 CPC
till the defendant

i.e. the appellant delivered vacant and peaceful possession

and that the plaintiffs would pay the Court fee payable on the

determination of the quantum of damages payable to them by

the appellant.
14.          The suit was resisted on the plea that the appellant

was a tenant under four landlords and each tenancy was a

separate tenancy and thus the claim for ejectment could not

be clubbed in a single suit. It was brought to the notice of the

Court in the written statement that in respect of the three

tenancies under Satish Chandra HUF, Vinod Chandra HUF, and

Ashok Chandra HUF, rent payable was far below Rs.3,500/- per

month. On said count it was pleaded that the Civil Court had

no jurisdiction to entertain the plaint on behalf of the said

three plaintiffs. Receipt of the notice determining the tenancy,
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 10 of 47
Ex.PW-1/2 was denied.      Ownership of the respondents was

denied. It was pleaded that if notice determining the tenancy

stood proved, the landlords waived the same evidenced by the

fact that subsequent to the date of the notice they accepted

the rent which was tendered by the appellant.       Pleas were

raised regarding misjoinder and non-joinder of necessary

parties, details whereof we ignore for the reason at the

hearing of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant Shri

T.K.Ganju, Senior Advocate, restricted submissions on four

counts; being tenancies being separate; three out of four being

with a rent of less than Rs.3,500/- per month.      A common

action could not be maintained for ejectment. Plea urged was

that the notice determining the lease has not been proved to

be served upon the appellant. The third plea urged was that if

it is held that the notice determining the lease stood proved to

be served, by accepting the rent for subsequent months, the

landlords waived notice and lastly that the mesne profits

granted by the learned Trial Judge at the rate of Rs.70/- per

sq.feet per month were excessive and in any case without any

evidence and lastly; could not exceed Rs.25/- per sq.feet per

month since this was the amount stated to be recoverable in

the plaint.
15.           Vide   impugned   judgment   and   decree     dated

24.2.1999, the learned Trial Judge has negated all defences

and has held that the tenancy was a single tenancy. That the
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 11 of 47
notice determining the tenancy has been proved. That there

was no waiver of the notice.              Mesne profits have been

determined @Rs.70/- per sq.feet per month.
16.          On the issue whether tenancy was a single tenancy

or whether there were four tenancies, the findings of the

learned Trial Judge are predicated on the evidence of DW-1,

the witness of the appellant, who stated that there was no

structural partition of the flat which was taken on rent and that

there were no separate municipal numbers. The relevant part

of the testimony noted by the learned Trial Judge of DW-1 is as

under:-
"........................................................... There were no
           structural partition of different portion of the third floor
           and we had made out own wooden partition. There are
           no municipal number of different partition of the third
           floor. We were told by the DCM Limited and the landlords
           the area owned by different persons/landlords on the third
           floor and we had agreed to pay rent at the rate of Rs.3/-
           per sq. ft. in the year 1975 and accordingly rent was paid
           to different landlords after signing of lease deed with
           them of the area owned by them multiplied by 3 and even
           the landlords were not able to identify the specific portion
           owned by each of them on the third floor at that time. I
           know Mr.C.B.Aggarwal HUF as they own 930 sq. ft. area,
           now on the third floor and we are paying them rent at the
           rate of Rs.4.50 paise per sq. ft. per month total Rs.4185/-
           per month. Earlier they were owning a bigger area of
           1240 sq. ft. and in the year 1980 there was a partition
           between C.B.Aggarwal HUF and Mr.Ashok Chandra and
           after which C.B.Aggarwal HUF became the owner of 930
           sq. ft. and Mr.Ashok Chandra became the owner of 310
           sq. ft. and Mr.Ashok Chander became the owner of 310
           sq. ft. each on the third floor and we are paying rent of
           Rs.1395/- P.M. separately to each one of them, by account
           payee cheques. The flat No. of all these persons is
           referred to A and I do not know why there is one flat
           number only but must be as per convenience of the
           landlords and because they belong to the same
           family................................."
RFA No.389/1999                                              Page 12 of 47
17.           The conclusion drawn by the learned Trial Judge is

as under:-
"13.     The defendant itself divided the area of the flat according
      to their suitability, but at the same times, he also referred in his
      statement abovenoted, "The flat Number of all these persons is
      referred to A and I do not know why there is one flat number only,
      but must be as per convenience of the landlords and because
      they belong to the same family." It clearly goes to show that
      there is one property and not many. It is also admitted in cross-
      examination, recorded on 15.10.98 by DW1, ".................. It is
      correct that at the third floor of Himalaya House, there is only one
      company by the name of M/s. Sri Ram Pistons and Rings Limited.
      It is correct that Himalaya House is located on 23, Kasturba
      Gandhi Marg, New Delhi." And the DW1 tried to prove that the
      tenancies are more than one, but in his own statement, it proved
      otherwise i.e. against the defendant and the argument of the
      Counsel for the defendant Shri R.S. Endlow that there are four
      tenancies and not one, cannot be accepted and the same is
      turned down."
18.           With reference to Ex.PW-1/2, the postal receipt

Ex.PW-1/3, and the certificate issued by the post master, Noida

post office, Ex.PW-1/5, learned Trial Judge has held that the

same, together with the testimony of PW-1 Shri Vinod Chandra

Aggarwal established that the notice Ex.PW-1/2, sent by

Regd.A.D.Post, was duly received by the appellant.
19.           Noting that the suit for recovery of possession was

filed in the month of August 1989 and that Ex.PW-1/2 was

issued on 27th April 1989; there being not much time lag

between the determination of the tenancy and filing of the

suit, the learned Trial Judge held that the same evidences no

waiver on account of acceptance of the rent.                Learned Trial

Judge has opined that merely because the landlords accepted

the tender of rent after determining the tenancy is no proof of
RFA No.389/1999                                                Page 13 of 47
waiver. For so holding, the learned Trial Judge has noted two

decisions reported as 1979 (RCR) 291 Hiralal & Ors. vs.

Banarasi Das and VII-1994 (2) 82, Kailash Kumar & Ors. vs.

Dr.R.K.Kapur (It is apparent that the learned Trial Judge has

failed to correctly list out the citation of the decision in Kailash

Kapur‟s case because the name of the journal/publication is

not mentioned in the judgment).
20.           The finding pertaining to the award of mesne profits

@Rs.70/- per sq.feet per month is a little cryptic. Be that as it

may, the learned Trial Judge has returned the finding as

under:-
"46.    The property in dispute is in the heart of the City and
      most flourishing business place and most important place of the
      City. As such, under these circumstances, I allow Rs.70/- per sq.
      ft. per month as damages/mesne profits from 1.6.1989 till the
      possession of the suit premises is handed over by the defendant
      to the plaintiffs. However, it is made clear that the plaintiffs shall
      pay additional court fee on the amount of mesne profits so
      accrued to the plaintiffs."
21.           At the hearing held on 11.11.2008 Shri T.K.Ganju,

learned senior counsel for the appellant agitated four points

briefly noted in para 14 above.
22.           Pertaining to the plea that there were four separate

and independent tenancies, learned senior counsel urged that

partial partition of C.B.Agarwal HUF resulting in two co-

parceners branching out and constitution of Satish Chandra

HUF and Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF in the year 1975 and

thereafter further partition in the year 1980 resulting in the

formation of Ashok Chandra HUF resulted in partition of the flat
RFA No.389/1999                                                 Page 14 of 47
in question inasmuch as title was severed and four different

entities became owners thereof.       With reference to the

decision of the Supreme Court reported as 1980 (Supp.) SCC

298 Kalyani (since deceased through LRs) vs. Narayanan &

Ors., learned counsel urged that the result was that the four

HUFs became separate owners as title was dissipated and

status became that of tenant in common.        Hence, counsel

urged that there were four separate tenancies. Elaborating on

the submission, learned counsel urged that Ex.PW-1/14,

Ex.PW-1/D-1 and Ex.PW-1/D-2 established that his clients were

interacting separately with each landlord and that each

landlord, acting individually, consented to the continuation of

the lease which evidences that there was no jointness in action

by the landlords when tenancy commenced or was continued

from time to time.
23.          With respect to the plea that the evidence on

record does not establish that Ex.PW-1/2 was served upon the

appellant, learned senior counsel drew attention to the fact

that the notice in question was posted at 23 Kasturba Gandhi

Marg, New Delhi, a multi storey building having numerous flats

on different floors. Counsel urged that by not mentioning the

flat number the notice could not have been received by his

client. The legal aspect of the plea was that in the absence of

the postal envelope being received back unserved, the

presumption of service when a notice is sent by Regd.A.D.Post,
RFA No.389/1999                                    Page 15 of 47
is available only if it is established that the same was sent at

the correct address. Counsel referred to the testimony of the

sole witness of the plaintiff i.e. Vinod Chadra Agarwala who

was    examined    as   PW-1   who,    during   cross-examination

admitted that the letter Ex.PW-1/2 was sent from the address

mentioned on the right corner above the letter and that he did

not remember who posted the letter. Drawing attention of the

Court to the fact that the address mentioned on the right

corner of the notice Ex.PW-1/2 was:-
Flat No.7,
            233 Lower Circular Road,
            Calcutta-700020

             counsel urged that if the letter was sent from the

address mentioned as above, where was the question of the

receipt of posting, Ex.PW-1/3, emanating from Noida. On proof

of service of the postal envelope sent vide postal receipt

No.1968, Ex.PW-1/3, through the medium of Ex.PW-1/5 i.e. the

certificate issued by the post master Noida, counsel urged that

neither the post master concerned nor any officer from the

post office was summoned and that the certificate could not be

proved by the testimony of PW-1.          Learned counsel drew

attention of the Court to the fact that the mode of proof of the

notice was objected to, as recorded by the learned Trial Judge

while recording the testimony of PW-1 on 22.1.1997. Counsel

urged that by not examining the post master, the appellant
RFA No.389/1999                                       Page 16 of 47
has been denied the opportunity to cross-examine the post

master on the contents of the certificate.
24.          On the issue of notice not being proved, learned

counsel cited the following authorities:-
(a)    85 (2000) DLT 478 (DB) Surinder Bala & Anr. Vs.

             Sandeep Foam Industries Pvt. Ltd.
(
b)    2002 (5) SCC 15 Tarak Nath Shah vs. Bhutoria Bros
.
Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
(
c)    1975 RLR 523 Jagat Ram Khullar vs. Battu Mal
.
25.          In sum and substance, learned senior counsel urged

that the ratio of the three decisions was that the law relating

to presumption of service by registered post is that a mere

presumption arises that a notice sent by registered post at the

correct address, if not returned unserved, is presumed to be

served upon the addressee and that once the addressee steps

into the witness box and disputes the receipt of the notice, the

presumption stands nullified; with onus shifting on the sender

to establish by cogent, reliable and unimpeachable evidence,

that the same was served upon the addressee.
26.          The plea pertaining to waiver of notice was urged

very meekly by learned counsel for the appellant who stated

that by accepting the rent which was tendered in the months

of May, June and July, the landlords are deemed to have

waived the notice.
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 17 of 47
27.          Arguing forcefully on the quantification of the

mesne profits, the learned senior counsel urged that the

presumptive finding by the learned Trial Judge that the rents

have risen, without there being any evidence of quantum of

rise, was insufficient to hold that the landlords would be

entitled to the rent @Rs.70/- per sq.feet per month. Counsel

urged that even otherwise, since claim was made in the plaint

to be awarded mesne profits @Rs.25/- per sq.ft. per month, no

claim in excess thereof could be allowed.
28.   The adjudication of the matter involves consideration of

the following four aspects:-
I     Nature of tenancy.


II    Service of notice to quit.


III   Waiver of notice to quit.


IV    Determination of mesne profits.


Nature of Tenancy
29.   As already noted in the preceding paragraphs, the

learned senior counsel for the appellant had placed strong

reliance upon the decision of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court

reported     as   Kalyani   (since   deceased   through   LR's    vs.

Narayanan & Ors. 1980 (Supp.) SCC 298 in support of the plea

that there were four separate and independent tenancies qua

the flat in question and that since three out of four tenancies
RFA No.389/1999                                       Page 18 of 47
pertained to a monthly rent less than Rs.3,500/- per month,

the civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit qua

three plaintiffs and hence, even qua the fourth where rent was

more than Rs.3,500/- per month, the suit had to be dismissed.
30.   To appreciate the submission advanced by the learned

senior counsel in its correct perspective it would be apposite to

refer to the following observations of the Hon‟ble Supreme

Court in Kalyani‟s case (supra):-
"The next stage in the unfolding of the case is whether
      Ext. P-l is effective as a partition. Partition is a word of
      technical import in Hindu law. Partition in one sense is a
      severance of joint status and coparcener of a
      coparcenary is entitled to claim it as a matter of his
      individual volition. In this narrow sense all that is
      necessary to constitute partition is a definite and
      unequivocal indication of his intention by a member of a
      joint family to separate himself from the family and enjoy
      his share in severally. Such an unequivocal intention to
      separate brings about a disruption of joint family status,
      at any rate, in respect of separating member or members
      and thereby puts an end to the coparcenary with right of
      survivorship and such separated member holds from the
      time of disruption of joint family as tenant-in-common.
      Such partition has an impact on devolution of shares of
      such members. It goes to his heirs displacing
      survivorship. Such partition irrespective of whether it is
      accompanied or followed by division of properties by
      metes and bounds covers both a division of right and
      division of property (see Approviar v. Rama Subha Aiyar
      (1886) 11 M. I. A. 75 quoted with approval in
Smt.
      Krishnabai Bhritar Ganpatrao Deshmukh v. Appasaheb
      Tuljaramarao Nimbalkar and Ors.
(1979) 4 SCC 60. A
      disruption of joint family status by a definite and
      unequivocal indication to separate implies separation in
      interest and in right, although not immediately followed
      by a de facto actual division of the subject-matter.
This
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 19 of 47
may at any time, be claimed by virtue of the separate
      right (see
Girja Bai v. Sadashiv
41 I. A. 151. A physical
      and actual division of property by metes and bounds
      follows from disruption of status and would be termed
      partition in a broader sense.
XXX

      One thing is crystal clear that Ext. P-l is not a deed of
      partition in the sense it does not purport to divide the
      property amongst various coparceners by metes and
      bounds. However, in Hindu law qua joint family and joint
      family property the word 'partition' is understood in a
      special sense. If severance of joint status is brought
      about by a deed, a writing or an unequivocal declaration
      of intention to bring about such disruption, qua the joint
      family, it constitutes partition, (see
Raghavamma v.
      Chenchamma
) AIR 1964 SC 136. To constitute a partition
      all that is necessary is a definite and unequivocal
      indication of intention by a member of a joint family to
      separate himself from the family. What form such
      intimation, indication or representation of such interest
      should take would depend upon the circumstances of
      each case. A further requirement is that this unequivocal
      indication of intention to separate must be to the
      knowledge of the persons affected by such declaration. A
      review of the decisions shows that this intention to
      separate may be manifested in diverse ways. It may be
      by notice or by filing a suit. Undoubtedly, indication or
      intimation must be to members of the joint family likely
      to be affected by such a declaration.
XXX

      Partition can be partial qua person and property but a
      partition which follows disruption of a joint family status
      will be amongst those who are entitled to a share on
      partition. On death of Karappan, Kesavan, the son of the
      second wife obtained a physical partition of the property,
      took his own share and left the family. There was first a
      disruption of the joint family by specifying the shares in
      Ext.P-1. Till disruption of joint family status takes place
      no coparcener can claim what is his exact share in
      coparcenary property. It is liable to increase and
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 20 of 47
decrease depending upon the addition to the number or
      departure of a male member and inheritance by
      survivorship. But once a disruption of joint family status
      takes place, coparceners cease to hold the property as
      joint tenants but they hold as tenants-in-common.
      Looking to the terms of Ext.P-1 there was a disruption of
      joint family status, the shares were specified and vested,
      liabilities and obligations towards the family members
      were defined and imbalance out of unequal division was
      corrected. This certainly has effect of bringing about
      disruption of joint family status and even if there was no
      partition by metes and bounds and the coparceners
      continued to remain under the same roof or enjoyed the
      property without division by metes and bounds, they did
      not hold as joint tenants unless re-union is pleaded and
      proved."
31.   The learned senior counsel had argued that the legal

norm which emerges from the afore-noted observations of the

Hon‟ble Supreme Court is that the severance in the status of

joint family leads to partition of the joint properties of said

family irrespective of the fact whether or not there was an

actual division of the said properties by metes and bounds and

that the said properties are held by the separated members as

„tenants-in-common‟ and not as joint owners, from the date of

the severance of status. He had further sought to impress

upon this Court that when the said legal norm is applied to the

facts of the present case, the irresistible conclusion which

would result is that the act of some of the co-parceners of

C.B.Agarwala HUF of branching out of the said HUF and

constituting their separate HUF has resulted in partition of the
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 21 of 47
joint properties of C.B.Agarwala HUF, particularly of the flat in

question, which is further strengthened by the fact that the

rent in respect of the said flat was being apportioned as per

the respective shares of said HUFs and being received

separately by the members of the said HUFs.
32.   The legal norm culled out by the learned senior counsel

from the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kalyani's

case (supra) that the severance of joint family status ipso facto

results in partition of the joint properties of the said family is

not correct in the light of observations made by the Hon'ble

Supreme      Court   in   a   recent   decision   reported   as
M.

Venkataramana Hebbar (D) by LR's vs. M. Rajagopal Hebbar
(2007) 6 SCC 401:-
"Any co-owner can cause a severance in the status of
      joint family by expressing his unequivocal intention to
      separate. Such intention can be expressed even by filing
      a suit for partition. But, despite such separation in joint
      status, parties may continue to possess the lands jointly
      unless a partition of the joint family properties takes
      place by metes and bounds". (Emphasis supplied)
33.   The legal position with regard to partition of joint family

property needs to be noted.
34.   The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the

decision reported as
Palani Ammal vs. Muthuvenkatacharla

Monigar & Ors
L.R. 52 I.A. 83 had observed as under:-
"In coming to a conclusion that the members of a
      Mitakshara joint family have or have not separated, there
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 22 of 47
are some principles of law which should be borne in mind
      when the fact of a separation is denied. A Mitakshara
      family is presumed in law to be a joint family until it is
      proved that the members have separated. That the
      coparceners in a joint family can by agreement amongst
      themselves separate and cease to be a joint family, and
      on separation are entitled to partition the joint family
      property amongst themselves, is now well-established
      law..... But the mere fact that the shares of the
      coparceners have been ascertained does not by itself
      necessarily lead to an inference that the family had
      separated. There may be reasons other than a
      contemplated immediate separation for ascertaining
      what the shares of the coparceners on a separation
      would be." (Emphasis supplied)
35.   The afore-noted observations of the Privy Council in
Palani Ammal
's case (supra) were noted with approval by

      the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as
Girja Nandini Devi v Bijendra Narain Choudhary
AIR 1967

      SC 124. In
the said decision
, it was observed as under:-
"In a Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara
      law, no individual member of that family, while it remains
      undivided, can predicate that he has a certain definite
      share in the property of the family. The rights of the
      coparceners are defined when there is partition. Partition
      consists in defining the shares of the coparceners in the
      joint property; actual division of the property by metes
      and bounds is not necessary to constitute partition. Once
      the shares are defined, whether by agreement between
      the parties or otherwise, partition is complete. The
      parties may thereafter choose to divide the property by
      metes and bounds, or may continue to live together and
      enjoy the property in common as before. If they live
      together, the mode of enjoyment alone remains joint, but
      not the tenure of the property.
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 23 of 47
Partition may ordinarily be effected by institution of a
      suit, by submitting the dispute as to division of the
      properties to arbitrators, by a demand for a share in the
      properties, or by conduct which evinces an intention to
      sever the joint family : it may also be effected by
      agreement to divide the property. But in each case the
      conduct must evidence unequivocally intention to sever
      the joint family status. Merely because one member of a
      family severs his relation, there is no presumption that
      there is severance between the other members; the
      question whether there is severance between the other
      members is one of fact to be determined on a review of
      all the attendant circumstances." (Emphasis supplied)
36.   After noting the afore-noted judgments of the Hon'ble

      Supreme Court and the Privy Council, the Chattisgarh

      High Court, in the decision reported as
Krishna Kumar

      Soni & Ors v Rajulal Soni & Ors
2007 (4) MPHT 39 (CG)

      summarized the law relating to partition of joint family

      properties as under:-
"Thus, in order to constitute the partition of the joint
      family property severance of joint status and a definite
      and unequivocal indication of the intention by the
      members of the Joint Hindu Family to separate
      themselves and to enjoy their respective shares in
      severality is required to be established by the party, who
      pleads that under the family arrangement, there was a
      disruption of status under a definite and unequivocal
      indication of the intention by the members of the joint
      family to separate and to enjoy their shares in severality.
      Only such an unequivocal intention to separate brings
      about the disruption of joint family status.
In
Pata Sahu
      and Anr. v. Hiru Sahu and Ors.
(supra), it was held that
      mere fact of separate mess and separate residence by
      themselves are not conclusive proof of partition."
(Emphasis supplied)
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 24 of 47
37.   From the afore-noted decisions, the legal norm which can

safely be culled out is that in order to constitute partition of

joint family property, the conduct of the coparceners must

evidence unequivocally the intention to sever the joint family

status and to enjoy their respective shares separately.
38.   In such circumstances, the conduct of the members of

C.B.Agarwala HUF and the members who had separated

therefrom and constituted their separate HUFs assumes

central importance in adjudication of the question as to

whether there was a partition of the flat in question.
39.   The first document which throws light upon the said

aspect of the matter is the letter dated 23.06.1973, Ex.PW-

1/17, addressed to the predecessor-in-interest of the appellant

on behalf of respective Kartas of Mr.Satish Chandra HUF,

Mr.Vinod Chandra Agarwala HUF and Dr.C.B.Agarwala HUF, the

contents whereof have already been reproduced in paragraph

2 above.
40.   The said letter records the factum of separation of some

members-coparceners        from    C.B.Agarwala   HUF      and     the

constitution of separate HUFs by such separated members.

The letter clearly records that 'Effective from 13th June, 1973,

the rent in respect of the above flat may please be

apportioned as under:-.........'
RFA No.389/1999                                         Page 25 of 47
41.   It is most pertinent to note that the flat in question has

been referred to as one single unit in the said letter. The unity

of possession of the flat has been kept intact.           The only

request made is to apportion the rent as per the letter.
42.   The next relevant documents are the three identically

worded letters dated 01.10.1975 Ex.PW-1/D-2, 24.11.1975

Ex.PW-1/D-1 and 28.11.1975 Ex.PW-1/14, issued by the

appellant and addressed to Mr.Satish Chandra HUF, Mr.Vinod

Chandra      Agarwala   HUF   and   Mr.P.C.Agarwala,      Karta        of

Mr.C.B.Agarwala HUF respectively, the contents whereof have

already been reproduced in paragraph 4 above.
43.   The said letters record the factum of apportionment of

the rent in respect of the flat between the said three HUFs. The

letters record that 'With regard to renting of the premises we

herein after spell out the terms and conditions on which we

take on lease your office premises No.Flat-A on the 3rd floor of

Himalaya House, 23, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi.'
44.   It is most relevant to note that the appellant has also

referred to the flat in question as one single unit even in the

individual letters addressed to the members of said three

HUFs.
45.   The next document is the letter dated 10.04.1980,

Ex.PW-1/D-3, written by the Karta of C.B.Agarwala HUF and

addressed to the appellant informing it of the factum of
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 26 of 47
separation of another member from C.B.Agarwala HUF and

constitution of a separate HUF by said member, the contents

whereof have been reproduced in paragraph 6 above. The said

letter records that 'This is to request you that accordingly rent

Rs.4340/- per month for 2/3 share of above flat hitherto paid to

Shri C.B.Agarwala HUF may please be paid, for the period

1.4.1980 onwards, as under."
46.     It is again pertinent to note that the flat in question has

been referred to as one single unit in the said letter.
47.     The last document is a letter dated 27.04.1989, Ex.PW-

1/2, written by the kartas of the four HUFs, namely,

C.B.Agarwala      HUF, Satish    Chandra   HUF,   Vinod    Chandra

Agarwala HUF and Ashok Chandra HUF, terminating the

tenancy of the appellant in the flat in question, the contents

whereof have been reproduced in paragraph 10 above. The

letter records that 'That you are in occupation of the above

office flat as monthly tenants, at a rent of Rs.8370/- every

month (Note : As would be dealt with hereinafter and findings

recorded, service of said letter has not been proved, but the

intent of the authors of the letter, even if not delivered to the

appellant is important qua the issue of tenancy being single or

not.'
48.     Even the testimony of the witness of the appellant,

Mr.Pawan Anand, DW-1, is to the effect that there was no
RFA No.389/1999                                        Page 27 of 47
structural partition of the flat in question, meaning thereby,

the flat was a single entity flat with unity of possession and

enjoyment.
49.   The afore-noted letters and testimony of the witness of

the appellant unerringly points to the fact that there was

community of interest and unity of possession between the

members of the said four HUFs in the flat in question. The

severance in title of the flat in question was only with respect

to apportionment of the rent of the flat between the said four

HUFs.
50.
In the light of the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in
Girja Nandini Devi
's case (supra) as explained by the

Chattisgarh High Court in
Krishna Kumar Soni
's case (supra)

and the conduct of the members of the said four HUFs and

even that of the appellant evidencing that they were treating

the flat in question as one single unit, it cannot be held that

there was partition of the flat in question resulting in four

independent and separate tenancies being created in respect

thereto.
51.   The conclusion which results from the above discussion

and the attendant circumstances of the case is that the four

HUFs were the joint landlords of the flat in question and thus

the suit instituted by them for ejection of the appellant from

the flat in question was maintainable.
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 28 of 47
Service of notice to quit
52.   The essence of the submission advanced by the learned

senior counsel for the appellant under this head was that since

neither the post master who had issued the certificate Ex.PW-

1/5 nor any other officer from the post office was summoned

to prove the service of the notice Ex.PW-1/2 upon the

appellant, it must be held that the respondents have failed to

establish the service of notice to quit, Ex.PW-1/2, upon the

appellant. More so, for the reason PW-1, the sole witness of

the appellants stated in cross-examination that he did not

remember as to who posted the letter and that it was correct

that the letter was sent from the address mentioned on the

right corner of Ex.PW-1/2, which we note is: Flat No.7, 233,

Lower Circular Road, Calcutta-700020. Counsel urged that the

receipt of posting pertained to the post office at Noida. It was

urged that to avail the benefit of the presumption under
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act 1897, the sine qua non

was the proof that the letter in question was put inside the

postal envelope dispatched vide postal receipt in question.

Counsel urged that the noticee could do no more to discharge

the burden other than to step into the witness box and deny

the receipt of the letter.
53.   Per contra, it was argued on behalf of the respondents

that it has been held in a plethora of judicial decisions that

when presumption arising under
Section 27
of the General
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 29 of 47
Clauses Act
1897 regarding service of a document is available

to a party, then examination of officials of postal authorities to

prove the said service is not necessary.
In support of the said

submission, strong reliance was placed by the respondents

upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as
Puwada Venkateswara Rao v Chidamana Venkata Ramana
(1976) 2 SCC 409.
54.   Before adjudicating upon the correctness of the legal

proposition advanced on behalf of the respondents, the

primary question which needs consideration is; whether the

presumption arising under
Section 27
of the General Clauses

Act 1897 is available to the respondents.
55.
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act 1897 reads as

under:-
"27. Meaning of service by post - Where any Central
      Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this
      Act authorizes or requires any document to be served by
      post, whether the expression "serve" or either of the
      expressions "give" or "send" or any other expression is
      used, then, unless a different intention appears, the
      service shall be deemed to be effected by properly
      addressing, pre-paying and posting by registered post, a
      letter containing the document, and, unless the contrary
      is proved, to have been effected at the time at which the
      letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post."
56.   A bare perusal of
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act

1897 reveals that it is divisible into two parts. The first part

deals with the mode of service and the second part deals with
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 30 of 47
the time of the service. On proof of the facts that a letter for

which postal charges are pre-paid and is properly addressed to

the noticee and which contains the document sent, a two-fold

presumption arises under the Section; namely, (i) that the

service shall be deemed to have been effected and (ii) deemed

to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be

delivered in the ordinary course of post.
57.   The tenor of
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act, 1897,

in the light of
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882

was explained by the Calcutta High Court in the decision

reported as
Sushil Kumar Chakravarty v Ganesh Chandra Mitra
AIR 1958 Cal 251 in following terms:-
"Under this section, the service of the notice to quit,
      which is required by the
Transfer of Property Act
, shall be
      deemed to be effected by properly addressing, prepaying
      and posting by registered post a letter containing the
      notice to quit. As soon, therefore, it is proved that the
      letter containing the notice to quit was properly
      addressed, prepaid and posted by registered post,
      service shall be deemed to be effected. This "deeming"
has been held to amount to a presumption, which, unless
      rebutted, would prove the fact of service. Even if,
      therefore, the actual refusal by the addressee is not
      proved, service of notice may well be held to be proved."
58.   In the backdrop of afore-noted legal position, the

testimony of the sole witness of the respondents i.e. Mr.Vinod

Chandra Agarwala, PW-1 needs to be examined.
59.   The relevant portion of the testimony of Mr.Vinod

Chandra Agarwala, PW-1 reads as under:-
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 31 of 47
".........before the institution of the suit all the 4 plaintiffs
      through their Karta have served the notice of termination
      of the tenancy upon the defendants being dt. 27 th of april
      1989 carbon copy of the same is Ex.PW1/2. (Objected to
      on the ground of lot being primary evidence and being
      carbon copy of the respondent by the parties themselves
      and no notice U/o 12 rule 8 having been given). The
      postal receipt of the same is Ex.PW1/3. AD card with
      regard to the said notice was not recd. back therefore
      letter was written to the post master concerned copy of
      the same is Ex.PW1/4. (Objected to on the ground of not
      being primary document and original not having been
      summoned this objection as well as earlier objection get
      open for decision at the time of the hearing). Also
      objected as the witness is not the signatory to the letter.
      The confirmation of the delivery of the registry notice
      recd. in response in Ex.PW1/4 from the department of
      Posts is Ex.PW1/5. (objected to not the ground of not
      being approved objection kept open)...........
      X X X X by Shri R.S.Andlaw Counsel for the defendant.
      ........It is correct that letter Ex.PW1/2 was sent from the
      address mentioned on the right corner above and circled
      in ink. The address which is encircled mentioned above
      belongs to my brother. I also sometimes go there. I do
      not remember whether I was there in Calcutta on 27-4-
89. I do not remember who posted this letter.
Q.     Who posted this letter?
Ans. The answer has already been given.
I do not remember who wrote the addresses on the
      envelop.
Q.  Did you see the envelop in which letter Ex.PW2/1
      was posted.
Ans. Question is irrelevant and disallowed.
XXX
      Q.     Did you see the envelop with the address written on
      it in Ex.PW1/2 is stated to have been sent?
      Ans. I do not remember.
It is correct that letter Ex.PW2/1 was not posted by
      me. My brother Pramod Chandra wrote this letter. I did
      not make inquiry personally from the post office
      regarding the delivery of this letter. I do not identify the
      sig. On Ex.PW1/5. I did not see any material on basis of
RFA No.389/1999                                          Page 32 of 47
which the letter Ex.PW1/5 was written. (Ex.PW1/5 was
       marked on a black accomplished paper and the same has
       been marked on the letter itself which be read dt. 21-2-
97. It is incorrect to suggest that Ex.PW1/5 does not
       pertain to Ex.PW1/2. It is correct that 23-Kasturba Gandhi
       is the plot on which multi-storeyed building constructed
       which is known as Himalaya House. I do not know how
       many floods is digging. I cannot say whether it 10 floors
       or more than 10 floors or below 10 floors. This building is
       occupied by other occupants also. The deft. Is occupying
       Flat no.31 in this building. Flat no. is not written in the
       notice Ex.PW1/2 or Ex.PW1/3. Floor is also not
       mentioned. I do not know to whom the letter was
       delivered." (Emphasis supplied)
60.    The learned senior counsel for the appellant had

strenuously argued that the notice Ex.PW1/2 was not sent at

the correct address inasmuch as municipal number of the flat

in question was not mentioned either on the notice Ex.PW1/2

or    on   the    postal   receipt    Ex.PW1/3     and   therefore    the

presumption under
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act,

1897 was not available to the respondents.
61.    This argument of the learned senior counsel for the

appellant has no legs to stand in view of the testimony of the

Mr.Pawan Anand, DW-1, witness of the appellant to the effect

that a letter addressed in the name of appellant whereupon

the municipal number of the flat in question is not mentioned

is delivered at the flat in question.
62.      But, the question of whether the notice to quit was put

inside     the    postal   envelope   needs   to    be   independently

examined being an essential requisite of
Section 27
of the
RFA No.389/1999                                            Page 33 of 47
General     Clauses   Act,   1897
.    The     evidence     on     record

establishes that the same has not been proved by the witness

of the respondents. The witness of the respondents nowhere

in his examination-in-chief has deposed that the postal

envelope purportedly sent by registered post to the appellant

contained     the   notice   Ex.PW1/2.   In   fact,   in   his    cross-

examination the said witness has stated that he did not

remember seeing the postal envelope which was purportedly

sent to the appellant.
63.   It is further relevant to note that the witness of the

respondents had no personal knowledge about the posting of

the notice Ex.PW1/2, inasmuch as he had deposed that he had

neither posted the said notice nor he has any knowledge as to

who had posted the said notice.
64.   At this stage, we note a decision of a Division Bench of

this Court reported as Mrs. Surender Bala & Anr v M/s Sandeep

Foam Industries Pvt Ltd      85 (2000) DLT 478. In said case, the

daughter and attorney of one of the two landlords had sought

to prove the notice to quit given by the landlords to the tenant;

postal receipt vide which the said notice was sent and

certificate/letter from the Post Office regarding the service of

the notice. Mode of proof of said documents was objected to

by the tenant. The trial court had come to the conclusion that

the landlords had failed to establish the service of notice to
RFA No.389/1999                                            Page 34 of 47
quit upon the tenant. In appeal, the Division Bench of this

Court affirmed the decision of the trial court. Relevant

discussion contained therein is being reproduced herein

under:-
"However, in the present case the facts are quite
      different. No evidence was adduced to the effect that the
      notice, Ex.PW1/7 was actually sent through registered
      post; nobody was examined from the office of the lawyer
      and even PW-1 did not state that the notice dated 9th
      December, 1993 was sent by her or in her presence
      through registered post. Admittedly PW-1, Mrs.Rita Roy,
      became attorney of the plaintiffs only on 30.6.97. There
      fore she could not possibly say anything about the notice
      sent on 9th December, 1993. Her evidence in this regard
      has to be treated as hearsay; no person from the post
      office was examined to state that notice was delivered at
      the address of the respondent; no acknowledgment due
      has been produced on record. Above all even the
      duplicate copy of the certificate issued by the postal
      authorities with regard to the alleged delivery of the
      notice stated to have been sent vide postal receipt
      No.4564, marked as PW-1/9 was not proved on record. It
      was sought to be proved through PW-1, Mrs.Roy. Method
      and manner of proof of the same was objected to on
      behalf of the respondent. Despite such objection
      appellant did not make any effort at any stage of the trial
      of the suit to get the said document proved in
      accordance with law by summoning appropriate witness.
      In fact, during the course of arguments it was conceded
      by learned counsel for the appellant that document
      marked as Ex.PW-1/9 has not proved in accordance with
      law and, therefore, it can be ignored from consideration.
      If Ex.PW-1/9 is ignored, in our considered view, there is
      hardly any evidence to prove that notice copy of which is
      Ex.PW-1/7 was in fact ever sent through registered post
      or was delivered to the respondent more so when it was
      addressed in the wrong name. Admittedly, the correct
      name of the respondent is "M/s Sandeep Foam Industries
      Private Limited". The notice is purported to have been
      sent in the name of "M/s Sandeep Foam Private Limited".
It is true on postal receipts complete addresses are
      rarely mentioned. The receipt issued by the postal
      authorities only carry the name of the addressee and the
      post office of the destination. However, on request in
      writing postal authorities normally issue a certificate
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 35 of 47
certifying that whether the document sent through
      registered post was or was not delivered to the
      addressee. In this case, such a certificate marked as PW-
      1/9 was not proved in accordance with law, in this case.
XXX
      As observed earlier we would like to reiterate that in the
      present case presumption under
section 27
of the
      General Clauses Act, 1897 could have been raised, had
      any person from the office of the Advocate been
      examined to prove copy of the notice, Ex.PW-1/7 which
      was sent through registered post and was not received
      back and that the acknowledgment due was also not
      received back. Otherwise, the plaintiffs could have led
      some other evidence in this regard to show that the
      notice was sent by registered post and same was not
      received back. In this case the evidence adduced is only
      hearsay. PW-1 was not the attorney of the plaintiffs when
      the notice was sent. None of the plaintiffs appeared in
      witness box. Certificate of the postal authorities
      regarding delivery of the notice was also not proved in
      accordance with law. If the said certificate is excluded
      from certificate there is no proof that any notice or letter
      was actually sent and if sent that the same was not
      returned undelivered.
Presumption under
Section 114(f)
of the Evidence Act is
      on the same footing, as a presumption under
section 27
of the General Clauses Act. Presumption under section
      114(f) arises on proof of the facts of posting of a letter in
      the ordinary post, whereas presumption under
Section 27
of the Act is with regard to the letter sent through
      registered post. There is no evidence of the notice having
      been sent through courier also, therefore, the question of
      raising any presumption under
Section 114(f)
of the
      Evidence Act does not arise."
65.   We thus hold that the respondents have failed to

establish that the notice determining the tenancy was served.
66.   However, there is yet another aspect of the matter. It

was submitted on behalf of the respondents that no notice

determining the tenancy of the appellant in the flat in question
RFA No.389/1999                                       Page 36 of 47
was required to be served upon the appellant before the

institution of the present suit in view of the following

observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a recent

decision reported as
Nopany Investments (P) Ltd v Santokh

Singh (HUF
) (2008) 2 SCC 728:-
".........In any view of the matter, it is well settled that
      filing of an eviction suit under general law itself is a
      notice to quit upon the tenant. Therefore, we have no
      hesitation in holding that no notice to quit was necessary
      under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act in order
      to enable the respondent to get a decree of eviction
      against the appellant. This view has also been expressed
      in the decision of this court in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar v
      Yesodai Ammal
(1979) 4 SCC 214."
67.   Learned counsel for the appellant urged that the

aforesaid view of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court ran contrary to

the plethora of decisions that to determine a tenancy a notice

to quit being served upon the tenant by the landlord is a pre-

requisite for ejectment of the tenant and that it was incorrectly

stated by their Lordships that it was settled law that in a suit to

evict a tenant under General Law there is no requirement to

issue a notice to quit and that the filing of the suit itself was a

notice to quit.
68.   We note that in
Nopany Investments‟
case (supra) the

Hon‟ble    Supreme   Court   has   noted    and   relied   upon       a

Constitution Bench decision in
V.Dhanapal Chettiar
's case

(supra).
RFA No.389/1999                                       Page 37 of 47
69.   The     question   which   required    adjudication     by    the

Constitutional Bench in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar
's case (supra)

was 'whether in order to get a decree or order of eviction

against a tenant under any State Rent Control Act is it

necessary to give a notice under
Section 106
of the Transfer of

Property Act' and in said context the Constitutional Bench had

concluded as under:-
"......That being so, making out a case under the
Rent Act
for eviction of the tenant by itself is sufficient and it is not
      obligatory to found the proceeding on the basis of the
      determination of the lease by issue of notice in
      accordance with
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property
      Act."
70.   While discussing the law relating to the requirement of

service of notice envisaged under
Section 106
of the Transfer

of Property Act, in actions initiated under the State Rent

Control Acts, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
V. Dhanapal

Chettiar
's case (supra) observed that where a lease of an

immovable property does not stand expired by any of the

modes prescribed under Clauses (a) to (g) of
Section 111
of

the Transfer of Property Act, the notice for determination of

lease as required under Section 106 is necessary to be served

upon the tenant but not otherwise.
It appears that these

observations of the Constitutional Bench have escaped the

notice of their Lordships of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in
Napony Investments
' case (supra).
RFA No.389/1999                                          Page 38 of 47
71.   But, the decision in
V.Dhanapal Chettiar
's case (supra)

guides us in a very interesting direction.
72.   It is no longer res integra that there is no requirement of

service of notice to determine a tenancy as envisaged under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act in case where a

lease of immovable property is determined by any one of the

modes prescribed under Clauses (a) to (g) of Section 111

therein. (See the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

reported as
Firm Sardarilal Vishwanath v Pritam Singh
AIR

1978 SC 1518 and       V. Dhanapal Chettiar v Yesodai Ammal

(1979) 4 SCC 214).
73.
In the decision reported as
Shanti Devi v Amal Kumar

Banerjee
(1981) 2 SCC 199, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has

held that where tenancy expires by an efflux of time, notice

under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act is not

necessary.
74.   The creation of every lease has its origin in a bilateral

contract between the lessor and the lessee which necessarily

includes the period for which the lessee is authorized to

possess the tenanted premises.        The moment this agreed

period is over the tenancy expires by efflux of time.           The

obligation of the tenant to restore possession to the landlord

comes into play. If he does not do so, the landlord gets a right

to approach a civil court to seek recovery of possession. But,
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 39 of 47
with the enactment of Rent Control Legislations, the contracts

of tenancy as also all laws to the contrary were superseded by

statutory enactments which gave right to a landlord to evict

the tenant on grounds available under the Rent Control Law

and none more.       Special Tribunals of Rent Controllers were

constituted       under   the   Rent     Control   Legislations.

Notwithstanding the lease having expired by efflux of time,

these landlords, whose premises were covered by the Rent

Control Legislations, were by the force of law compelled to

receive rents from the tenants whose continued possession

was not under a contract, but under a statute. Law treated

such tenants to be statutory tenants and not contractual

tenants. Thus, merely because the landlords received under

compulsion of law rent from the tenants, same did not result in

the continuation of the landlord tenant relationship due to the

free volition of the landlord. Such tenants cannot claim to be

tenants holding over because a tenancy holding over requires

that the acceptance of rent by the landlord is with a consent

for the tenancy to be continued.       This flows out of a bare

perusal of
Section 116
of the Transfer of Property Act 1882

which reads as under:-
"116.        Effect of holding over-If a lessee or under-
      lessee of property remains in possession thereof after the
      determination of the lease granted to the lessee, and the
      lessor or his legal representative accepts rent from the
      lessee or under-lessee, or otherwise assents to his
      continuing in possession, the lease is, in the absence of
      an agreement to the contrary, renewed from year to
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 40 of 47
year, or from month to month, according to the purpose
      for which the property is leased, as specified in section
106."
75.   The mandate of clause (q) of
Section 108
of the Transfer

of Property Act 1882 is that on the expiry of the lease, the

lessee is bound to hand over possession of the leased

premises to the lessor and therefore the lessor would be

entitled to maintain an action to compel the lessees to abide

by the mandate of clause (q) of
Section 108
of the Transfer of

Property Act 1882.
76.   What is the nature of possession of this lessee who

continues to retain possession without complying with his legal

obligation to restore possession?
77.   A person who enters upon the property of another

without authority of law is a trespasser.     It could be argued

that the very next moment after the period of lease stands

expired the act of entering upon property by the tenant is an

act of trespass. But law says no. A lessee who continues in

possession after expiry of the lease, without the consent of the

lessor or without any agreement between the parties or in

disagreement with the lessor, is treated in law as a tenant by

sufferance.       But where the lessor consents to the continued

possession of lessee on the same terms and conditions as per

the original lease a tenancy by holding over comes into

operation.
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 41 of 47
78.
Section 116
of the Transfer of Property Act has to be

understood in this context, with reference to the words

"accepts rent or otherwise assents to his continuing in

possession". Said words contemplate that from the side of the

lessee, there should be an offer to take a new lease and on the

side of the lessor there must be a definite consent to the

continuation of possession.      In other words there must be a

bilateral contract.
79.   Such a bilateral contract could be express or implied.

Thus, mere continuance of possession after the expiry or

determination of the lease is not enough to entitle the tenant

to establish tenancy by holding over.
80.   In the instant case it has to be noted that the
Delhi Rent

Control Act
1958 was amended in December 1988 and till then

the respondents could do nothing except to reconcile to their

fate because of the protection available to the tenanted

premises under the
Delhi Rent Control Act
1958.                  Thus,

acceptance of rent after tenancy expired by efflux of time

cannot be treated as evidence of acceptance of rent with

consent to continue the contractual tenancy or to create a new

tenancy.
81.   We hold that the principles of law
laid down by
the

Constitution      Bench   of   the   Hon‟ble   Supreme     Court         in
V.Dhanapal Chettiar
's case (supra) are capable of being
RFA No.389/1999                                          Page 42 of 47
extended to cases where due to the application of a Rent

Control Legislation a landlord could not evict his tenant and

thus under compulsion of law continued to accept the rent

even after tenancy expired by efflux of time; requiring no

notice to determine the tenancy because the status of the

tenant was not that of a tenant holding over.
82.          We note that the suit for ejectment was filed soon

after the embargo of the Delhi Rent Control Legislation was

removed when tenancies, rent whereof was above Rs.3,500/-

per month, were taken out from the purview of the
Delhi Rent

Control Act
1958.
83.   The issue of waiver of the notice to quit thus becomes

irrelevant    because   we   have   held   that   there   was     no

requirement to serve any notice to quit and because we have

held that in the facts and circumstances of the case the status

of the appellant was not that of a tenant holding over and that

the tenancy expired by efflux of time but right could not be

enforced to evict the tenant due to the embargo created by

the Rent Control Law; on removal of which embargo the suit

could be filed to seek recovery of possession on the allegation

that after the tenancy expired by efflux of time the appellant

could not occupy the subject premises.
Determination of Mesne Profits
RFA No.389/1999                                       Page 43 of 47
84.   Standard of evidence required to prove mesne profits in

a given case was succinctly stated by the Division Bench of

this court in the decision reported as
National Radio &

Electronic Co Ltd v Motions Pictures Association
122 (2005)

DLT 629. Para 34 of
the said decision
which is relevant for the

said purpose is being reproduced hereinbelow:-
"34. Judicial notice is taken of only such facts of which
      there can be only one view. In the light of the aforesaid
      position in law, there can be no manner of doubt that so
      far as the increase of rent is concerned, judicial notice
      can be taken of a fact that over a certain period rents
      generally have arisen. However, so far as quantification
      of the rate at which the increase has actually taken
      place, a finding can be arrived at only on the basis of
      legal evidence and material establishing the actual rates
      at which properties have been let over the period and
      comparison of such properties with the property which is
      the subject matter of the lis. Rents may vary based on
      location of properties, nature of construction, period of
      construction, purpose/user for which the premises are let,
      variation between demand for tenanted premises and
      availability of premises and even factors relating to the
      position of the economy. Therefore, while a learned trial
      Judge may be justified in taking judicial notice of the fact
      that rents have risen over a certain period of time in the
      area in question, it would be incumbent upon a person
      laying a claim of entitlement to mesne profits to prove
      the same by cogent and reliable evidence in accordance
      with law."(emphasis supplied)
85.   The learned Trial Judge has granted mesne profits

@Rs.70/- per month with effect from 1.6.1989 till possession is

handed over. The reasoning of the learned Trial Judge is as

per para 46 of the impugned judgment, contents whereof have

been noted in para 20 above.
RFA No.389/1999                                      Page 44 of 47
86.   The reasoning is weak.    But, we note that the learned

Trial Judge has ignored evidence on record being Ex.PW-1/19,

Ex.PW-1/20, Ex.PW-1/21 and Ex.PW-1/22.          The same are

decrees and compromise applications in Suit No.298/1990 and

Suit No.2553/1989 decided, on a compromise, between the

landlords and the tenants of the said suits; evidencing that

pertaining to flats in a similar multi-storeyed commercial

building on 18, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi and 15,

Barakhamba Road, New Delhi agreed rents were Rs.20/- per

sq.ft. per month as on 1.4.1990; increased to Rs.24/- per sq.ft.

per month as of 1.4.1993 and Rs.28.80 per sq.ft. with effect

from 1.4.1996 in respect of property No.18, Barakhamba Road,

New Delhi and Rs.100/- per sq.ft. per month w.e.f. 15.11.1993

for property No.15, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi. It has to be

noted that pertaining to the property at 18, Barakhamba Road

an existing tenancy was extended.
87.   The aforesaid evidence is good evidence to show that the

rate of rent has increased in the area.
88.   The impugned decree is dated 24.2.1999.
89.   The contention that in the suit mesne profits were asked

for @Rs.25/- per sq.ft. per month and hence nothing more

could be awarded has to be noted and rejected for the reason,

in the plaint, the respondents had prayed to the court that an

inquiry be held as contemplated by Order 20 Rule 12 of the
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 45 of 47
Code of Civil Procedure
1908 and damages be awarded to

them at said rate.    The respondents undertook to pay the

requisite court fee on the amount determined, which they

have so done after a decree was passed in their favour.
90.   The period for which mesne profits has to be determined

is 1.6.1989 till the date of decree. A mean average would be a

good basis to determine mesne profits for the said period of

nearly ten years rather than to determine the same every

three years. Inherent in the determination of market rent of a

given premises with reference to other premises in the vicinity

is an element of some guess work.      It is difficult to achieve

exactness in this exercise. But taking a help from Ex.PW-1/19

to Ex.PW-1/22, we are of the opinion that the mean average

rent of Rs.50/- per sq.ft. per month would be a figure which

would approximate to reality.      Since the appeal is being

disposed of in the year 2008 and the appellant has continued

to occupy the subject premises under interim orders passed by

this Court on the reasoning of the decision reported as
Atma

Ram Properties (P) Ltd. vs. Federal Motors Pvt. Ltd.
(2005) 1

SCC 705 the appellant is liable to pay damages at a higher

rate which we fix @Rs.80/- per sq.ft. per month for the period

24.2.1999 till possession is handed over.
RFA No.389/1999                                     Page 46 of 47
91.          The appeal stands disposed of affirming the decree

of ejectment but modifying the mesne profits awarded by

decreeing as per para 90 above.
92.          The respondents shall be entitled to costs against

the appellants.
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
J.R. MIDHA, J.
December 11, 2008
Dharmender
RFA No.389/1999                                    Page 47 of 47
