Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 34 Rajeev Chaudhary Vs. State
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/195898415/

[Cites
33
, Cited by
1
]
Delhi High Court
Santosh Kumar Mandal vs State on 28 September, 2016
Author:
Mukta Gupta
Bench:
Mukta Gupta
*        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                             Reserved on: 7th September, 2016
                                              Decided on: 28th September, 2016
+                    BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016
         SANTOSH KUMAR MANDAL                              ..... Petitioner
                     Represented by:            Mr. Vikas Malik and Mr.
                                                Nishant Gautam, Advocates.

                            versus

         STATE                                               ..... Respondent
Represented by:     Mr. Ravi Nayak, APP for the
                                                State with SI Pradeep Rawa, PS
                                                Vasant Kunj, North.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
1.       By the present petition, the petitioner seeks regular bail in case FIR
No.320/2016 under
Sections 354(D)
/
342
/
363
/
506
IPC and
Section 12
of
Protection of Children from Sexual Offence Act, 2012 (in short „the
POCSO
Act
‟).
2.       The submissions of leaned counsel for the petitioner are twofold,
firstly that as per the allegations in the FIR, ingredients for offences as
alleged have not been made out including the one punishable under
Section
12
of the POCSO Act and even if made out, the same being bailable
offences, the petitioner is required to be released on bail on his furnishing
surety bond. To press the first contention, learned counsel for the petitioner
contends that even as per the allegations of the prosecutrix, the petitioner had
blocked phone number of the prosecutrix, thus it was the prosecutrix who
was after the petitioner and not vice-versa.          Further even taking the
allegations on the face of it, no act has been attributed to the petitioner with
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                       Page 1 of 13
sexual overtones which is an essential ingredient for the offences alleged.
With regard to the second contention, referring to the decisions of the
Supreme Court reported as (
2001) 5 SCC 34 Rajeev Chaudhary Vs. State
(NCT) of Delhi
and (2007) 14 SCC 325 Avinash Bhosale Vs. Union of India
& Anr. and of the High Courts reported as 2005 (
2) KLJ 115 C.K. Boban Vs.
The Union of India
, 2007 Crl.L.J. 2025 Amarnath Vyas Vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh and 2013(
56) PTC 282 (Del) State Govt. of NCT of Delhi Vs.
Naresh Kumar Garg
it is stated that rest of the offences invoked against the
petitioner are bailable and as per the law laid by the Supreme Court and
various High Courts, since for the offence punishable under
Section 12
of
the POCSO Act, the sentence provided is imprisonment upto 3 years, it is a
bailable offence. Therefore, bail was required to be granted as of right to the
petitioner.
3.    Learned APP for the State on the other hand contends that no doubt as
per statement of the prosecutrix, the petitioner blocked her number however
the call details of the petitioner‟s mobile phone call reveal that he had made
number of calls to the prosecutrix on her mobile phone and on the
intervening night of 8th and 9th June, 2016 he made repeated calls to the
prosecutrix from nearly 11 O‟clock in the night till he took her to the
institute in the midnight and was apprehended at 1.00 AM when the parents
of the prosecutrix reached the institute with the police. Relying upon the
decisions reported as (
2006) 6 SCC 277 Bhupinder Singh & Ors. Vs. Jarnail
Singh & Anr.
, 118 (
2005) DLT 194 Inderjeet Nagpal Vs. Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence (DRI
), and 2006 (91) DRJ 384 Pradeep Mehta Vs.
State and Anr. it is stated that the offence punishable under
Section 12
of the
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 2 of 13
POCSO Act
is a non-bailable offence and thus the petitioner cannot claim
bail as a matter of right.
4.    The above-noted FIR was registered on the complaint of the
prosecutrix who stated that she was a student of 11 th standard. The petitioner
used to come to her house to give tuitions at around 6-7 pm and was teaching
her for the last two years.   The petitioner used to talk to her on the phone
occasionally. For the last 2-3 days, the petitioner wanted to meet her and
was calling her on the roof at night however she refused to do so. On 8 th
June, 2016 the petitioner put her phone on the rejected list and did not take
up. The prosecutrix tried to make a number of calls and finally when she
made a call at night, he picked it up. The petitioner called her outside her
house at the night itself and the prosecutrix went out of the house without
telling anybody as everybody was sleeping. When she reached outside the
house, the petitioner caught hold of her hand and asked her to come along
with him as he wanted to talk to her. When the prosecutrix refused to go, the
petitioner threatened that he would kill her parents.      Frightened by this
threat, the prosecutrix went away with him. At 1.30 AM at night, the
petitioner took her to his institute at Kishangarh and after making her sit
stated that he liked her and continued talking to her. He was not permitting
the prosecutrix to leave the place. In the meantime, her parents along with
police reached there and caught the petitioner. The prosecutrix clarified that
the petitioner did not do any wrong act with her however for the last few
days he was repeatedly calling her and troubling her to meet him. Thus,
invoking
Sections 354D
/
342
/
363
/
506
IPC besides
Section 12
of POCSO
Act, the above-noted FIR was registered.
Sections 354D
/
342
/
363
/
506
IPC
are cognizable and bailable offences as per first schedule to the
Cr.P.C
. The
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 3 of 13
first schedule of
Cr.P.C
. also provides for classification of offences in other
    laws as under:-
"II- CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS
            Offence                   Cognizable or   Bailable or non-       By what Court
                                     non-cognizable       bailable               triable
If punishable with death,              Cognizable      Non-bailable        Court of Session.
imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for more than 7
years,
If punishable with imprisonment        Cognizable      Non-bailable        Magistrate of the
for 3 years, and upwards but not                                           first class
more than 7 years
If punishable with imprisonment      Non-cognizable      Bailable          Any Magistrate
for less than 3 years or with fine
only
5.      The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that since the
    offence punishable under
Section 12
of POCSO Act provides for a
    punishment of imprisonment of either description for a term which may
    extend to three years and fine, the same will not fall in category 2 but in
    category 3 and would be thus a bailable offence.
6.      In Avinash Bhosale (supra) the Supreme Court while dealing with
    amended
Section 135(1)(ii)
of the Customs Act, 1962 held that the said
    offence is a bailable offence and the Magistrate rightly granted bail to the
    appellant therein.       The offence punishable under
Section 135(1)(ii)
of the
    Customs Act, 1962 is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
    extend to three years or with fine or with both.
Relying on the decision in
    Avinash Bhosale, this Court in
Naresh Kumar Garg
(supra) held that an
    offence punishable under
Section 63
of the Copyright Act 1967 for which
    the punishment prescribed was imprisonment which may extend to three
    years and with fine which may extend to `2 lakhs was a bailable offence.
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                                Page 4 of 13
7.
In
Bhupinder Singh
(supra) the Supreme Court after considering its
earlier judgment in
Rajeev Chaudhary
(supra) held:
11. A bare reading of
Section 304-B
IPC shows that whoever
      commits "dowry death" in terms of
Section 304-B
IPC shall be
      punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
      than 7 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life. In
      other words, the minimum sentence is 7 years but in a given
      case sentence of imprisonment for life can be awarded. Put
      differently, sentence of imprisonment for life can be awarded in
      respect of an offence punishable under
Section 304-B
IPC. The
      proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 167 consists of three parts.
The first part relates to power of the Magistrate to authorise
      detention of the accused person. This part consists of two sub-
      parts. In positive terms it prescribes that no Magistrate shall
      authorise detention of the accused in custody, under this
      paragraph [meaning sub-section (2)(a)] for a total period
      exceeding (i) 90 days where the investigation relates to an
      offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
      imprisonment for a term of not less than 10 years, and (ii) 60
      days where the investigation relates to any other offences. The
      period of 90 days is applicable to cases where the investigation
      relates to the three categories of offences which are punishable
      with (i) death, (ii) imprisonment for life, or (iii) imprisonment
      for a term of not less than ten years. The question is whether
      Section 304-B is an offence "punishable" with imprisonment
      for life. Strong reliance was placed by Mr D.K. Garg, learned
      counsel      appearing     for     the    appellant     on
Rajeev
      Chaudhary v. State (NCT) of Delhi
[(2001) 5 SCC 34 : 2001
      SCC (Cri) 819 : AIR 2001 SC 2369] .
A reference is also made
      to the decisions of the Jharkhand, the Delhi and the Karnataka
      High Courts where the ratio in
Rajeev Chaudhary
case [(2001)
      5 SCC 34 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 819 : AIR 2001 SC 2369] has been
      made applicable to cases involving offence punishable under
Section 304-B
IPC.
The Jharkhand High Court's decision
      is
Sunil Kumar v. State of Jharkhand
[(2003) 2 Rec Cri R 135 :
2002 Cri LJ 2507 (Jhar)] . Contrary views appear to have been
      taken by the Rajasthan and the Himachal Pradesh High Courts
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                     Page 5 of 13
in Keshav Dev v.State of Rajasthan [2005 Cri LJ 3306 (Raj)]
     and State of H.P. v. Lal Singh [2003 Cri LJ 1668 (HP)] . The
     Punjab and Haryana High Court appears to have taken a
     somewhat different view in two different cases.
In
Kuldeep
     Singh v. State of Punjab
[(2005) 3 RCR 599 (P&H)] it was held
     that the period is 90 days, as has been held in the case at hand.
     But a different view (though in relation to some other offences)
     was taken in Abdul Hamid (Crl. Misc. No. 40599 M of 2005
     disposed of on 21-9-2005).
A bare reading of
Rajeev
     Chaudhary
case [(2001) 5 SCC 34 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 819 : AIR
     2001 SC 2369] shows that the same related to an offence
     punishable under
Section 386
IPC and the sentence in respect
     of the said offence is not less than 10 years. This Court held
     that the expression "not less than" means that the
     imprisonment should be 10 years or more to attract 90 days'
     period. In that context it was said that for the purpose of clause
(i) of proviso (a) of
Section 167(2)
CrPC the imprisonment
     should be for a clear period of 10 years or more. The position
     is different in respect of the offence punishable under
Section
     304-B
IPC. In the case of Section 304-B the range varies
     between 7 years and imprisonment for life. What should be the
     adequate punishment in a given case has to be decided by the
     court on the basis of the facts and circumstances involved in the
     particular case. The stage of imposing a sentence comes only
     after recording the order of conviction of the accused person.
The significant word in the proviso is "punishable". The word
     "punishable" as used in statutes which declare that certain
     offences are punishable in a certain way means liable to be
     punished in the way designated. It is ordinarily defined as
     deserving of or capable or liable to punishment, capable of
     being punished by law or right, may be punished or liable to be
     punished, and not must be punished.
12. In Bouvier's Law Dictionary meaning of the word
     "punishable" has been given as "liable to punishment".
     In Words and Phrases (Permanent Edn.) the following meaning
     is given:
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                    Page 6 of 13
"The word „punishable‟ in a statute stating that a crime is
      punishable by a designated penalty or term of years in the State
      prison limits the penalty or term of years to the amount or term
      of years stated in the statute."
13.   Corpus Juris Secundum gives the meaning as:
"Deserving of, or liable to, punishment; capable of being
      punished by law or right; said of persons or offences. The
      meaning of the term is not „must be punished‟, but „may be
      punished‟, or „liable to be punished‟."
14. While dealing with a case relating to the
Punjab Borstal
      Act, 1926
, this Court held that a person convicted under
Section 302
IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment is not
      entitled to the benefit of
Section 5
of the said Act as the offence
      of murder is punishable with death. (See
Sube Singh v. State of
      Haryana
[(1989) 1 SCC 235 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 101] .)
15. Where minimum and maximum sentences are prescribed,
      both are imposable depending on the facts of the cases. It is for
      the court, after recording conviction, to impose appropriate
      sentence. It cannot, therefore, be accepted that only the
      minimum sentence is imposable and not the maximum sentence.
      Merely because minimum sentence is provided that does not
      mean that the sentence imposable is only the minimum
      sentence. The High Court's view in the impugned order that
      permissible period of filing of challan is 90 days is the correct
      view. Contrary view expressed by the Jharkhand, the Delhi and
      the Karnataka High Courts is not correct. The Himachal
      Pradesh, the Rajasthan and the Punjab and Haryana High
      Courts taking the view that 90 days is the period, have
      expressed the correct view. Therefore, on that ground alone the
      appeal fails."
8.    From the perusal of the decisions in
Rajeev Chaudhary and Bhupinder
Singh
(supra), it is evident that in
Rajeev Chaudhary
(supra) the Supreme
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 7 of 13
Court was dealing with provision of
Section 167
Cr.P.C. which provided that
no Magistrate shall authorize the detention of the accused person in custody
for a total period exceeding ninety days where the investigation relates to an
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a
term of not less than ten years. Thus, the thrust of the Supreme Court
decision was on the interpretation of the words "not less than".
As held in
Bhupinder Singh
(supra) word „punishable‟ means „may be punished‟, or
„liable to be punished‟ and is not „must be punished‟ which is stage which
comes at the end of trial after a judgment of conviction is passed. Thus to
ascertain the category in which the offence falls the maximum punishment
that can be provided by the statute is to be seen even though the discretion of
the Court may be to award minimum sentence or fine or both as well.
9.    A three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the decision reported as
(2011) 14 SCC 1 Om Prakash and Anr. Vs. UOI & Anr. considering the
distinction between offences punishable under the
IPC
and that under
Central Excise Act
1944 and
Customs Act
1962 held-
"16. As has been indicated hereinbefore in this judgment,
Section 2(a)
of the Code defines "bailable offence" to be an
     offence shown as bailable in the First Schedule to the Code or
     which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in
     force. The First Schedule to the Code which deals with
     classification of offences is in two parts. The first part deals with
     offences under the Penal Code, while the second part deals with
     classification of offences in respect of other laws. Inasmuch as, the
     offences relate to the offences under the 1944 Act, it is the second
     part of the First Schedule which will have application to the cases
     in hand. The last item in the list of offences provides that if the
     offence is punishable with imprisonment for less than three years
     or with fine only, the offence will be non-cognizable and bailable.
     Accordingly, if the offences come under the said category, they
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 8 of 13
would be both non-cognizable as well as bailable offences.
    However, in the case of the 1944 Act, in view of Section 9-A, all
    offences under the Act have been made non-cognizable and having
    regard to the provisions of Section 155, neither could any
    investigation be commenced in such cases, nor could a person be
    arrested in respect of such offence, without a warrant for such
    arrest.
34.     Mr Parasaran's next submission was with regard to the
    provisions of Part II of the First Schedule to the
Code of Criminal
    Procedure
and it was submitted that the same has to be given a
    meaningful interpretation. It was urged that merely because a
    discretion had been given to the Magistrate to award punishment
    of less than three years, it must fall under the third head of the
    said Schedule and, therefore, be non-cognizable and bailable. On
    the other hand, as long as the Magistrate had the power to
    sentence a person for imprisonment of three years or more,
    notwithstanding the fact that he has discretion to provide a
    sentence of less than three years, the same will make the offence
    fall under the second head thereby making such offence non-
    bailable. It was submitted that in essence it is the maximum
    punishment which has to determine the head under which the
    offence falls in Part II of the First Schedule to the Code and not
    the use of discretion by the Magistrate to award a lesser sentence.
35.
In support of his submissions, Mr Parasaran referred to
    the decisions of this Court in
CBI v. Tapan Kumar Singh
[(2003) 6
    SCC 175 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1305] and Bhupinder Singh v. Jarnail
    Singh [(2006) 6 SCC 277 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 101] , to which
    reference will be made, if necessary.
36.     As we have indicated in the first paragraph of this
    judgment, the question which we are required to answer in this
    batch of matters relating to the
Central Excise Act, 1944
, is
    whether all offences under the said Act are non-cognizable and, if
    so, whether such offences are bailable? In order to answer the
    said question, it would be necessary to first of all look into the
    provisions of the said Act on the said question.
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                   Page 9 of 13
37.     Sub-section (1) of Section 9-A, which has been extracted
      hereinbefore, states in completely unambiguous terms that
      notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal
      Procedure
, offences under
Section 9
shall be deemed to be non-
      cognizable within the meaning of that Code. There is, therefore, no
      scope to hold otherwise. It is in the said context that we will have
      to consider the submissions made by Mr Rohatgi that since all
      offences under
Section 9
are to be deemed to be non-cognizable
      within the meaning of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, such
      offences must also be held to be bailable.
38.     The expression "bailable offence" has been defined in
Section 2(a)
of the Code and set out hereinabove in para 6 of the
      judgment, to mean an offence which is either shown to be bailable
      in the First Schedule to the Code or which is made bailable by any
      other law for the time being in force. As noticed earlier, the First
      Schedule to the Code consists of Part I and Part II. While Part I
      deals with offences under the Penal Code, Part II deals with
      offences under other laws. Accordingly, if the provisions of Part II
      of the First Schedule are to be applied, an offence in order to be
      cognizable (sic non-cognizable) and bailable would have to be an
      offence which is punishable with imprisonment for less than three
      years or with fine only, being the third item under the category of
      offences indicated in the said Part. An offence punishable with
      imprisonment for three years and upwards, but not more than
      seven years, has been shown to be cognizable and non-bailable. If,
      however, all offences under
Section 9
of the 1944 Act are deemed
      to be non-cognizable, then, in such event, even the second item of
      offences in Part II could be attracted for the purpose of granting
      bail since, as indicated above, all offences under
Section 9
of the
      1944 Act are deemed to be non-cognizable."
10.    It is thus evident that the main thrust of the decision to ascertain
whether the offence was bailable or non-bailable was on the point that the
offence being non-cognizable it had to be bailable.
Section 19
POCSO Act
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 10 of 13
notes that the offences punishable under
POCSO Act
are cognizable in
nature and provides a special mechanism to deal with crimes effecting the
children.
Section 19
POCSO Act reads as under:-
"19. Reporting of offences.-(1) Notwithstanding anything
    contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973, any person
    (including the child), who has apprehension that an offence under
    this Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an
    offence has been committed, he shall provide such information to,-
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or
(b) the local police.
(2) Every report given under sub-section (1) shall be--
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;
(b) be read over to the informant;
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police Unit.
   (3) Where the report under sub-section (1) is given by a child, the
  same shall be recorded under sub-section (2) in a simple language so
  that the child understands contents being recorded.
    (4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not
  understood by the child or wherever it is deemed necessary, a
  translator or an interpreter, having such qualifications, experience
  and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, shall be provided
  to the child if he fails to understand the same.
    (5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is
  satisfied that the child against whom an offence has been committed
  is in need of care and protection, then, it shall, after recording the
  reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such
  care and protection including admitting the child into shelter home
  or to the nearest hospital within twenty-four hours of the report, as
  may be prescribed.
(6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without
  unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty-four hours, report
  the matter to the Child Welfare Committee and the Special Court or
  where no Special Court has been designated, to the Court of Session,
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 11 of 13
including need of the child for care and protection and steps taken in
  this regard.
(7) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or criminal,
  for giving the information in good faith for the purpose of sub-section
  (1)."
11.   Thus, the decisions of Supreme Court in case of
Rajeev Chaudhary
and Avinash Bhosale
(supra) have no application to the facts of the case as
discussed in detail by three Judge Bench in Om Prakash (supra) holding that
the offences under
Section 9
of Central Excise Act 1944 and
Section
135(1)(ii)
of the Customs Act 1962 were non-cognizable and thus bailable
offences. Considering the gravity of the offences and the special mechanism
provided under
POCSO Act
to hold that the offences are bailable though
cognizable and would fall in category 3 would be rendering an interpretation
to the classification provided in second part of First Schedule of
Cr.P.C
contrary to the object of the special enactment. Thus offences punishable
under
POCSO Act
including
Section 12
are cognizable and non-bailable
offences.
12.   The allegations against the petitioner in the above-noted FIR are that
while he was working as a home tutor to the prosecutrix he called her outside
her house in the midst of night and took her to the institute. All this was on
the threat that he would kill her parents. The prosecutrix was wrongly
confined by the petitioner at a lonely place, when the parents of the
prosecutrix along with the Police reached the institute and apprehended the
petitioner at the spot. Though the prosecutrix states that she had been calling
the petitioner however a perusal of the call detail record of the mobile phone
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                      Page 12 of 13
of the petitioner reveals that on the intervening night of 8th and 9th June, 2016
from 22.52 hours he had been continuously calling the prosecutrix.
13.   Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and that the
prosecutrix is yet to be examined I do not find it to be a fit case for grant of
bail to the petitioner. Petition is dismissed.
(MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                              JUDGE
SEPTEMBER 28, 2016
'v mittal'
BAIL APPLN. 1763/2016                                       Page 13 of 13
