Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 70 of 2020
Citation: SCC

         263 to submit that the prosecution failed to adopt due
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/197925869/

[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Patna High Court
Santosh Kumar Singh @ Santosh Yadav vs The State Of Bihar on 29 November, 2022
Bench:
Chakradhari Sharan Singh
,
Khatim Reza
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No.70 of 2020
      Arising Out of PS. Case No.-49 Year-2018 Thana- DHANGAI District- Bhojpur
======================================================
Santosh Kumar Singh @ Santosh Yadav S/o Chhotelal Singh R/o village-
Basauri, P.S.- Sikarahata, Distt.- Bhojpur

                                                                   ... ... Appellant
                                      Versus
The State of Bihar

                                           ... ... Respondent
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant        :       Mr. Baxi S.R.P. Sinha, Sr. Advocate
                                 Mr. Brajesh Prasad Gupta, Advocate
                                 Mr. Sri Krishna Ranjan, Advocate
For the Respondent       :       Mr. Sujit Kumar Singh, APP
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHAKRADHARI SHARAN
SINGH
        and
        HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE KHATIM REZA
                    ORAL JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHAKRADHARI SHARAN
SINGH)

 Date : 29-11-2022

                    We have heard Mr. Baxi S.R.P. Singh, learned

 Senior Counsel for the appellant and Mr. Sujit Kumar Singh,

 learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State.

                    2. This appeal has been preferred by the appellant

 under
Section 374(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

 (
Cr.P.C
. for brevity) assailing the judgment of conviction dated

 21.11.2019
and order of sentence dated 28.11.2019 passed by

 the learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge,

 POCSO, Bhojpur, Ara in POCSO Case No. 34 of 2018, whereby

 the appellant has been convicted and sentenced as under:
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
2/24
Conviction under                                 Sentence
               Section             Imprisonment        Fine (Rs.)      In default of fine
            376 of the Indian          For life         5,000/-         Six months R.I.
              Penal Code
          4 of the Protection of R.I. for 7 years       5,000/-        Three months R.I.
          Children from Sexual
              Offences Act
3. The victim is the informant, whose name has been

         concealed in the present judgment and order to protect her

         prestige and dignity.
4. A written report submitted to the Officer-in-Chief of

         Dhangia police station in the District of Bhojpur under the

         signature of the informant is the basis for registration of First

         Information Report (F.I.R. for brevity) disclosing commission of

         the offence punishable under
Section 4
of the Protection of

         Children from Sexual Offences Act ('
POCSO Act
' for short) and
Section 376
of the Indian Penal Code (
I.P.C
. for brevity).
5. According to the F.I.R., the occurrence is of 24.05.2018

         at 10:00 am for which the information was given on the same

         day at 07:10 pm, immediately whereafter the F.I.R was

         registered. It is the prosecution's case that the victim, aged

         nearly 14 years, was in her house when her parents had gone

         outside for some private work. At about 10 am, when she was

         all alone, sleeping in her house, the appellant entered into her

         room, gagged her with her dupatta, committed rape on her, and
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
3/24
he fled away. At 12:00 noon when her brother (P.W. 4) came,

         she narrated to him the entire occurrence and subsequently to

         her parents when they returned at 4:00 pm in the evening. The

         statement of the victim (P.W.-1) was recorded under
Section 164
of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 25.05.2018. She

         supported the prosecution's case as was disclosed by her in her

         written report. She stated that the appellant had come to his

         maternal uncle, a co-villager of the victim, where he was

         residing for the last few days. She did not know him from

         before nor she had any association with him. The victim was

         subjected to medical examination. The Doctor who conducted

         the medical examination recorded his findings as under:-
" i) Medical Examination:-
Secondary Sexual character well developed.
ii) P/E Examination:-
Blood stain around vagina.
iii) P/V Examination:-
Hymen Rupture. Gloves stained with blood.
iv) Microscopical of Vaginal Swab - Negative.
v) USG (Ultra Sonography) of Lower abdomen :-
Normal utras, no sign of pregnancy.
vi) X-ray report:-
Pelvis-Iliac apophysis not fused.
Elbow - All epiphysis fused.
Wrist - Saw epiphysis in the prosses of fusal.
                                          According to above finding and Radiologist
                                  her probable age is between 14-17 years. Report is
                                  written and signed by me. Marked as Ext. 6."
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
4/24
6. Apparently in the assessment of the Doctor, the age of

         the victim was found to be between 14-17 years. The police,

         upon completion of investigation, submitted charge-sheet on

         30.06.2018 for the offences punishable under Section 376 and
Section 4
of the POCSO Act against the appellant.
Subsequently, congnizance was taken by the Special Court on

         24.08.2018. The Special Court, thereafter, framed charge for

         commission of the offences punishable under
Section 376
of the

         I.P.C and
Section 4
of the POCSO Act on 26.11.2018. As the

         appellant denied the charges, he was put to trial. At the trial

         altogether 6 witnesses were examined including Investigating

         Officer (P.W. 5) and Doctor (P.W.6) who had examined the

         victim. The victims' father, her mother and her brother were

         examined as PWs 2, 3 and 4 respectively. The written report was

         marked Exhibit-1, seizure list as Exhibit-2, statement of the

         victim recorded under
Section 164
of the Cr.P.C. as Exhibit-3.

         The signature of the witness on the written report was marked as

         Exhibit-4. The medical report and the charge-sheet were marked

         as Exhibit-6 and 7 respectively.
7. The victim (P.W. 1) in her deposition at the trial,

         reiterated the same facts which she had disclosed in the F.I.R..

         She clearly described the way she was sexually assaulted by the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
5/24
appellant who is said to have pressed her breast and bitten her

         cheeks and kissed her. She also deposed that the appellant

         caused penetration of his penis into her vagina and, thus, raped

         her. On return of her parents, who had gone out at the time of

         occurrence, she had explained to them about the occurrence.

         She, further deposed that the police had come to her house and

         had seized her clothes in relation to which a seizure list was

         prepared which bore her signature. In her cross-examination,

         she further deposed that the door of her house was broken from

         before. The house of the appellant's maternal uncle was 30 steps

         away from her house. The victim learnt about the identity of the

         appellant after the occurrence had taken place, from her parents.

         She further, deposed that she had gone to the police station in

         the evening at 05:00 pm. She denied the suggestion during the

         cross-examination of any animosity between her family and the

         family of the appellant.
8. The victim's father (P.W.-2), in his testimony, deposed

         that he had learnt about the occurrence from the victim,

         whereafter a written report was submitted by the victim on

         which, he (P.W.2) had also put his signature. The S.H.O of the

         police station had come to his house and seized the clothes of

         his daughter and had prepared a seizure list. In his cross-
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
6/24
examination, he further deposed that he had gone to the police at

         about 06:00 pm with one Ajay Tiwari and the victim had

         returned at 07:00 pm. He reiterated that the Police Officer had

         taken the victim's clothes while inspecting the place of

         occurrence. He specifically denied the suggestion that the

         clothes were handed over at the police station.
9. The victim's mother (P.W. 3), in her evidence,

         supported the prosecution's case. She disclosed that she was an

         Asha Worker and at the time of occurrence she had gone to

         Jagdishpur to attend a meeting which had concluded at 3:00 pm.

         In paragraph 7 of her cross-examination, she deposed that they

         had gone to the police station at 6:00 pm. The information about

         the occurrence was not given to the village chaukidar. She

         denied any suggestion of any love affair between the victim and

         the appellant.
10. The appellant's brother (P.W. 4) also supported the

         prosecution's case and the fact that the entire occurrence was

         narrated to him by the victim. He expressed ignorance about the

         clothes of the victim having been shown to the police. He also

         deposed that the frock which the victim was wearing was seized

         by the police from the house of the victim.
11. The Investigating Officer (P.W.-5) disclosed that the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
7/24
statement of the victim was recorded by him at the police station

         itself. Father of the victim (P.W.-2) and mother of the victim

         (P.W.3) were also examined at the police station by him. He had

         prepared the production-cum-seizure list of the clothes which

         were brought by the victim which was sealed by him at the

         police station. The said clothes were not produced nor exhibited

         at the trial. He further deposed that on 21.06.2018, he had

         obtained an order from the Court to send the seized articles to

         Forensic Science Laboratory for forensic examination.
12. The Doctor (P.W.-6) in her deposition, while proving

         the earlier medical report dated 25.05.2018, deposed that she did

         not find any spermatozoa in the vaginal swab of the victim nor

         did she notice any injury on any part of the victim's body. Swab

         test report was not with her and apparently thus, the same was

         not proved at the trial. In paragraph 6 of her deposition, she

         evidenced that she could not claim as to whether any occurrence

         of rape had taken place. She further deposed that the blood

         stains found around the vagina of the victim could be because of

         menstrual discharge also.
13. After completion of the evidence of the prosecution's

         witnesses, explanation of the appellant was sought by the court

         below by referring to the circumstances emerging against him,
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
8/24
at the trial, in accordance with the requirement of
Section 313
of

         the Cr.P.C.. The statement recorded under
Section 313
of the

         Cr.P.C. reads as under:-
"प्रश्न - आपकके वविरुद्ध आररोप हहै विरो ससाक्ष्य हहै वक वदिनसानांक 24.05.18
                                   करो जब पपीवड़ितसा घर मम अककेलपी सरोइ थपी तरो उसकके कमरके मम
                                   घघुसकर ओढ़नपी कके मघुमुँह बसानांधकर जबरदिस्तपी बलसात्कसार वकयसा?
                          उत्तर - जपी नहहीं
                          प्रश्न - सफसाई मम क्यसा कहनसा हहै?
उत्तर - मम वनदिर्दोष हह मुँ और अपनसा सफसाई ससाक्ष्य दिगनां द सा।"
14. No defense witness was examined at the trial. Upon

         analyzing evidence adduced at the trial, which have been briefly

         noted hereinabove, the trial court came to a definite conclusion

         that the victim was a minor as on the date of occurrence.

         Accordingly, after having analyzed, evaluated and screened the

         evidences of the witnesses held the victim to be a minor and,

         accordingly, based on such analysis and scrutiny held the

         appellant guilty of the offences punishable under
Section 376
of

         the I.P.C. and
Section 4
of the POCSO Act.
15. Mr. Baxi S.R.P. Sinha, learned Senior Counsel

         appearing for the appellant has submitted that the prosecution

         completely failed to discharge its onus of proving beyond all

         reasonable doubts that the victim was minor within the meaning

         of the provisions of
POCSO Act
as on the date of occurrence.

         He has relied on the Supreme Court's decision in case of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
9/24
Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana
reported in (2013) 7 SCC

         263 to submit that the prosecution failed to adopt due

         recognized procedure to establish minority of the victim. He has

         submitted that there would be no question of application of the

         provisions under the
POCSO Act
unless it is established beyond

         all reasonable doubts that the victim was a minor as on the date

         of occurrence. He has accordingly submitted that Trial Court's

         finding of conviction of the offence punishable under
Section 4
of the POCSO Act is vulnerable and not at all sustainable. He

         has further submitted that the prosecution failed to establish its

         case at the trial, in view of the major lacunae, which the Court

         must take into account. He has also drawn our attention to

         contradictions in the statement of the witnesses particularly the

         depositions of the victim and her family members and that of

         the Investigating Officer. He has submitted that it is clearly

         visible on reading of the written report that the same was not

         prepared by the informant though it bears her signature. The

         victim's father (P.W.-2) in his deposition at the trial made an

         incorrect statement that the said written report was prepared by

         the victim/informant in her own handwriting. He has

         accordingly submitted that the existence of F.I.R. itself has

         become doubtful and on this sole ground, the prosecution's case
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
10/24
falls flat.
He has also submitted that all relevant questions

         emerging from the evidence were not put to the appellant while

         seeking his explanation under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C.. He has

         placed reliance on a Division Bench decision of this Court in

         case of
Jagat Prasad v. State of Bihar
, reported in 2022 SCC

         OnLine Pat 123 to submit that the Trial Court ought not to have

         taken into account such materials from the evidence adduced at

         the trial for the purpose of recording his conviction which were

         not brought to the notice of the appellant by way of putting

         questions requisite under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C.. He Further

         submits that it is evident from the statement of the appellant

         under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C. that no question was put to the

         appellant. Based on the evidence of the prosecution's witnesses,

         it emerged that the victim was a minor. In such view of the

         matter, it was impermissible for the Trial Court to have recorded

         a finding that the victim was a minor as on the date of

         occurrence and accordingly the provisions of the
POCSO Act
were not attracted.
16. He has also argued that the failure on the part of the

         police to prove at the trial the F.S.L. report, contradictions in the

         evidence of the witnesses as regards the place and manner or

         seizure of the victim's clothes and patent contradiction in the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
11/24
evidence of the witnesses are other reasons why the finding of

         conviction is untenable. He has further submitted that the victim

         does not appear to be so trustworthy as to base finding of

         conviction of the appellant on her sole evidence, without any

         corroboration by medical evidence or any other evidence.
17. Mr. Sujit Kumar Singh, learned Additional Public

         Prosecutor representing the State has, on the other hand,

         submitted that the victim has been found by the Doctor to be

         between 14 to 17 years of age based on the examination done by

         the dentist and the radiologist. He further submits that her father

         and mother, P.W.-2 and P.W.-3 have also supported at the trial,

         the prosecution's case that she was a minor as on the date of

         occurrence. He has accordingly submitted with the contention

         that the prosecution could not establish the minority of the

         victim at the trial which is untenable. He has further submitted

         that the victim has been consistent in her statement made in the

         written report, the one recorded under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C.

         and that recorded under
Section 164
of the Cr.P.C.. Further she

         fully supported the sexual misconduct committed by the

         appellant at the trial. He accordingly, submits that the impugned

         judgment does not require any interference by this Court which

         is just and proper based on due appreciation of the evidence
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
12/24
adduced at the trial.
18. We have perused the impugned judgment and

         order of the Trial Court and the lower court records, we have

         given our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions

         made on behalf of the parties as noted above.
19. Based on the scrutiny of evidence adduced at the

         trial, we find substance in submission made on behalf of the

         appellant that the prosecution failed to prove, beyond all

         reasonable doubt, the fact that the victim was below 18 years of

         age (a minor) as on the date of occurrence. The Supreme Court

         has held in case of
Jarnail Singh
(supra) that though Rule 12 of

         the Juvenile Justice (Care And Protection Of Children) Rules,

         2007 have been framed under the provisions of the
Juvenile

         Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
(hereinafter

         referred to as the 'Act of 2000') is applicable to determine the

         age of child in conflict with law, the aforesaid provision should

         be the basis for determination of age even of a child who is a

         victim of crime. The Court remarked that there was hardly any

         difference insofar as the issue of minority was concerned,

         between a child in conflict with law, and a child who is a victim

         of crime.
Paragraph 22 and 23 of
the said decision
in case of
Jarnail Singh
(supra)can be usefully referred to for clarity:-
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
13/24
"22. On the issue of determination of age of a
                 minor, one only needs to make a reference to Rule 12 of the
                 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007
                 (hereinafter referred to as "the 2007 Rules"). The aforestated
                 2007 Rules have been framed under
Section 68(1)
of the
                 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
                 Rule 12 referred to hereinabove reads as under:
"12.Procedure to be followed in determination of
                         age.--(1) In every case concerning a child or a juvenile
                         in conflict with law, the court or the Board or as the
                         case may be, the Committee referred to in Rule 19 of
                         these Rules shall determine the age of such juvenile or
                         child or a juvenile in conflict with law within a period
                         of thirty days from the date of making of the application
                         for that purpose.
(2) The court or the Board or as the case may be
                         the Committee shall decide the juvenility or otherwise
                         of the juvenile or the child or as the case may be the
                         juvenile in conflict with law, prima facie on the basis of
                         physical appearance or documents, if available, and
                         send him to the observation home or in jail.
                             (3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in
                         conflict with law, the age determination inquiry shall
                         be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the case
                         may be, the Committee by seeking evidence by
                         obtaining--
(a)(i)   the   matriculation   or   equivalent
                                  certificates, if available; and in the absence
                                  whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the
                                  school (other than a play school) first attended;
                                  and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a
                                  corporation or a municipal authority or a
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
14/24
panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii)
                                  or (iii) of clause (a) above, the medical opinion
                                  will be sought from a duly constituted Medical
                                  Board, which will declare the age of the
                                  juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of
                                  the age cannot be done, the court or the Board
                                  or, as the case may be, the Committee, for the
                                  reasons to be recorded by them, may, if
                                  considered necessary, give benefit to the child
                                  or juvenile by considering his/her age on lower
                                  side within the margin of one year,
                         and, while passing orders in such case shall, after
                         taking into consideration such evidence as may be
                         available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be,
                         record a finding in respect of his age and either of the
                         evidence specified in any of the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii)
                         or in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the
                         conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or the
                         juvenile in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the juvenile in
                         conflict with law is found to be below 18 years on the
                         date of offence, on the basis of any of the conclusive
                         proof specified in sub-rule (3), the court or the Board
                         or as the case may be the Committee shall in writing
                         pass an order stating the age and declaring the status
                         of juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose of the Act
                         and these Rules and a copy of the order shall be given
                         to such juvenile or the person concerned.
                             (5) Save and except where, further inquiry or
                         otherwise is required, inter alia, in terms of
Section 7-
A,
Section 64
of the Act and these Rules, no further
                         inquiry shall be conducted by the court or the Board
                         after examining and obtaining the certificate or any
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
15/24
other documentary proof referred to in sub-rule (3) of
                         this Rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this Rule shall also
                         apply to those disposed of cases, where the status of
                         juvenility has not been determined in accordance with
                         the provisions contained in sub-rule (3) and the Act,
                         requiring dispensation of the sentence under the Act for
                         passing appropriate order in the interest of the juvenile
                         in conflict with law."
23. Even though Rule 12 is strictly applicable only to
                         determine the age of a child in conflict with law, we are
                         of the view that the aforesaid statutory provision should
                         be the basis for determining age, even of a child who is
                         a victim of crime. For, in our view, there is hardly any
                         difference insofar as the issue of minority is concerned,
                         between a child in conflict with law, and a child who is
                         a victim of crime. Therefore, in our considered opinion,
                         it would be just and appropriate to apply Rule 12 of the
                         2007 Rules, to determine the age of the prosecutrix VW,
                         PW 6. The manner of determining age conclusively has
                         been expressed in sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 extracted
                         above. Under the aforesaid provision, the age of a child
                         is ascertained by adopting the first available basis out
                         of a number of options postulated in Rule 12(3). If, in
                         the scheme of options under Rule 12(3), an option is
                         expressed in a preceding clause, it has overriding effect
                         over an option expressed in a subsequent clause. The
                         highest rated option available would conclusively
                         determine the age of a minor. In the scheme of Rule
                         12(3), matriculation (or equivalent) certificate of the
                         child concerned is the highest rated option. In case, the
                         said certificate is available, no other evidence can be
                         relied upon. Only in the absence of the said certificate,
                         Rule 12(3) envisages consideration of the date of birth
                         entered in the school first attended by the child. In case
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
16/24
such an entry of date of birth is available, the date of
                         birth depicted therein is liable to be treated as final and
                         conclusive, and no other material is to be relied upon.
                         Only in the absence of such entry, Rule 12(3) postulates
                         reliance on a birth certificate issued by a corporation
                         or a municipal authority or a panchayat. Yet again, if
                         such a certificate is available, then no other material
                         whatsoever is to be taken into consideration for
                         determining the age of the child concerned, as the said
                         certificate would conclusively determine the age of the
                         child. It is only in the absence of any of the aforesaid,
                         that Rule 12(3) postulates the determination of age of
                         the child concerned, on the basis of medical opinion. "
20. The date of occurrence in the present case is
24.05.2018. It is pertinent to note that Act of 2007 has been

         repealed by the
Juvenile Justice (Care And Protection Of

         Children) Act, 2015
, ('
The Act
of 2015' for short)
Section 94
of

         the Act of 2015 lays down the procedure for determining

         juvenility. Relevant part of sub-section (2) of Section 94, which

         provides substantially similar procedure as was prescribed under

         2007 Rules, reads as under:-
" (i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the
                         matriculation or equivalent certificate from the
                         concerned examination Board, if available; and in the
                         absence thereof;
(ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a
                         municipal authority or a panchayat;
(iii) and only in the absence of (i) and (ii) above, age
                         shall be determined by an ossification test or any other
                         latest medical age determination test conducted on the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
17/24
orders of the Committee or the Board:
Provided such age determination test
                         conducted on the order of the Committee or the Board
                         shall be completed within fifteen days from the date of
                         such order."
21. Apparently, no exercise was carried out by the

         prosecution to establish that the victim was a minor as on the

         date of the occurrence by following the procedure prescribed

         under the Act in the light of reasoning put forth by the Supreme

         Court in case of
Jarnail Singh
(supra).
Further, in case of
Rajak Mohammad v. State of H.P.
reported in (2018) 9 SCC

         248 the Supreme Court has noted that the age determined on the

         basis of a radiological examination may not be an accurate

         determination and sufficient margin either way has to be

         allowed. The Supreme Court, taking into account the facts and

         circumstances of that case opined in the said case that the report

         of the radiological examination left room for ample doubt with

         regard to the correct age of the prosecutrix. In such case, the

         benefit of aforesaid doubt, naturally, must go in favour of the

         accused.
22. We have quoted hereinabove the finding recorded

         by the Doctor in the Medical Report which has determined the

         victim's age to be between 14 to 17 years based on the

         radiological examination. Opinion of dentist is not available in
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
18/24
the medical report. The said finding, in the Court's opinion,

         cannot be treated to be accurate for the purpose of applying the

         provisions of the
POCSO Act
. As a matter of fact, no effort was

         made by the prosecution to establish the age of the victim in

         accordance with the statutory provisions.
23. The aforesaid finding leaves us to examine the

         legality of the appellant's conviction for the offence punishable

         under
Section 376
of the I.P.C.. As has been noted hereinabove,

         the appellant is said to have entered into the victim's house and

         taking advantage of her solitude, he committed rape on her. The

         description of sexual assault caused by the appellant has been

         explicitly mentioned in her deposition at the trial. The

         investigation officer (PW-5), in his examination-in-chief,

         deposed that the clothes, which the victim was wearing, were

         seized by him and a seizure list was prepared. However, in the

         cross-examination, in paragraph 7, the I.O. has disclosed that

         after recording of the statement of the victim at the police

         station, he had prepared a production-cum-seizure list and the

         clothes which the victim was wearing were brought to the police

         station in a polythene bag which she had handed over to the

         police officer. Thereafter, orders were obtained from the Court

         for sending the seized clothes to the Forensic Science
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
19/24
Laboratory on 22.6.2018.
24. Unfortunately, the prosecution didn't bother to

         obtain the result of the test of the Forensic Science Laboratory.

         Absence of the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory,

         despite the fact that the victim's clothes were seized and sent to

         the laboratory for examination, in our opinion, was a major flaw

         on the part of the prosecution in establishing its case before the

         Court. Further, the fact that though the appellant was arrested

         the very next date of the occurrence, he was not subjected to any

         medical examination as stipulated under
Section 53A
of the

         Cr.P.C.. We are conscious of the legal position that the

         requirement under
Section 53A
of the Cr.P.C. is not mandatory

         in nature and non-fulfilment of requirement of
Section 53A
of

         the Cr.P.C., per se, shall not vitiate the trial when there is

         accusation of commission of offence punishable under
Section

         376
of the I.P.C.. However, the said requirement cannot be

         treated to be a waste paper and cannot be completely ignored for

         the reason that it is the duty of the prosecution to prove its case

         beyond all reasonable doubts and medical examination of a

         person accused of rape may lead to a more accurate conclusion.

         As regards seizure of the clothes which the victim was wearing,

         the deposition of the victim's mother (PW-2) is materially
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
20/24
different. In her examination-in-chief (paragraph 4) she deposed

         that the Officer-Incharge had come to their house and seized the

         clothes which the victim was wearing at the time of occurrence.

         He had prepared a seizure list, on which PW-2 had put her

         signature (Exhibit-5). During the course of cross-examination

         PW-2 denied, contrary to the evidence of the victim (PW-1), that

         the said clothes were received by the police officer at the police

         station. In Paragraph 11 of her cross-examinations she (PW-2)

         stated that the police had not received the clothes at the police

         station rather, they had told that they would receive the clothes

         after spot verification.
25. Though, it is well accepted legal principle in

         the context of the Indian society that statement of a victim of

         rape doesn't require any other corroboration and, if she is found

         to be truthful and her evidence is of stellar quality, conviction

         can be recorded without any corroboration based on her oral

         evidence for an offence punishable under
Section 376
of the

         I.P.C.. The said principle, however, doesn't absolve the

         prosecution of its duty to establish its case beyond all reasonable

         doubts in the absence of any legal presumption in the present

         case. The medical report, based on medical examination

         conducted on the very next day of the alleged commission of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
21/24
sexual assault doesn't corroborate the accusation of commission

         of rape. There are contradictory evidences of the prosecution

         witnesses on the point of seizure of the clothes which the victim

         was wearing at the time of occurrence.
26. As has been noted above, failure on the part of

         the prosecution to bring on record the result of the test

         conducted by the Forensic Science Laboratory on the clothes

         sent for such examination casts doubt on the prosecution's case,

         in the Court's opinion, though, the Court fails to appreciate the

         circumstance, why the prosecution didn't produce the result on

         examination of the clothes of the victim, conducted by the

         Forensic Science Laboratory.
27. Conviction of a person of a crime, that too of a

         serious crime of the nature of rape is a serious matter which has

         grave consequences, not only in terms of serving sentence of

         imprisonment. Such conviction has cascading effects on the

         future of a person convicted of such offence. In the said

         background, it has been repeatedly held by the Courts that only

         if the evidence of a victim of rape is found to be trustworthy and

         of stellar quality without any embellishment, conviction can be

         recorded without any corroborative evidence. A proper and

         deeper scientific investigation by the police after having seized
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
22/24
the clothes, which the victim was wearing at the time of

         occurrence, possibly could have led to a definite, more accurate

         conclusion either in favour of the prosecution or it would have

         favoured the appellant who was facing trial.
28. The purpose of investigation, or, for that matter,

         prosecution of a person accused of an offence is not confined for

         ensuring conviction of the person facing prosecution either

         during the course of investigation or at the trial. There being

         presumption of innocence of an accused of crime, it is the duty

         of the prosecuting agency to ensure that all relevant materials

         worth evidence are collected during the course of investigation

         to establish its case at the trial beyond all reasonable doubt. In

         the process of investigation, the investigating agency cannot

         completely overlook the interest of an accused from the

         perspective of his prosecution. As in the present case, it cannot

         be stated with certainty as to whether the report of the F.S.L., if

         received, coupled with the examination of the appellant in

         accordance with
Section 53A
of the Cr.P.C. would have led

         investigation to which direction. A circumstance, emerging on

         the comparison of the scientific result, if obtained, that

         investigating agency itself could have decided not to proceed

         against the appellant cannot be completely ruled out. There
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
23/24
could also be a circumstance that, based on the result of the test

         conducted by Forensic Science Laboratory, and the examination

         of accused under
Section 53A
of the Cr.P.C., the prosecution

         could have developed and established a foolproof case before

         the Court to establish the charge of commission of rape of the

         victim against the appellant. The benefit of the failure on the

         part of the prosecution to prove its case beyond all reasonable

         doubts will surely go to the appellant, in the absence of any

         statutory presumption.
29. Noticing the conflicting statements of the

         prosecution's witnesses, cumulative effect of absence of any

         sign of rape found by the Doctor, non-production of the report

         of the Forensic Science Laboratory, non-examination of the

         appellant in accordance with the requirement under Section 53A

         of the Cr. P.C., is that the prosecution, in the Court's opinion,

         failed to establish the charge under Section 376 of the I.P.C.
30. In the facts and circumstances as noted above,

         in our opinion, it is not safe for this Court to uphold the

         conviction of the appellant based on sole testimony of the

         victim.
31. For the foregoing reasons, the conviction of the

         appellant for commission of the offence punishable under
              Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.70 of 2020 dt.29-11-2022
24/24
Section 4
of the POCSO Act and
Section 376
of the I.P.C.

                      cannot be upheld. Accordingly, the impugned judgment of

                      conviction dated 21.11.2019 and the order of sentence dated

                      28.11.2019 passed by Learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge-

                      cum-Special Judge, POCSO, Bhojpur, Ara in POCSO Case No.

                      34 of 2018, are hereby set aside.
32. The appeal is allowed.
33. The appellant is in jail. Let him be released

                      forthwith, if he is not required in any other case.
(Chakradhari Sharan Singh, J)


                                                    ( Khatim Reza, J)

K.K.RAO/Annpurna/
Prabhat-
AFR/NAFR                NAFR
CAV DATE                NA
Uploading Date          15.12.2022
Transmission Date       15.12.2022
