Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 335, after discussing various
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/197930312/

[Cites
76
, Cited by
0
]
Gauhati High Court
Tulumoni Duarah vs The State Of Assam And 2 Ors on 26 March, 2021
Author:
Sanjay Kumar Medhi
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar Medhi
Page No.# 1/59

GAHC010116552016




                              THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)

                               Case No. : Crl.Pet./607/2016

            TULUMONI DUARAH
            S/O HEMA DUARAH R/O NAMTI LI P.S. HALOWATING DIST. SIVASAGAR,
            ASSAM.



            VERSUS

            THE STATE OF ASSAM AND 2 ORS
            REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, ASSAM.

            2:THE SECRETARY

             TO THE GOVT. OF ASSAM
             HOME DEPARTMENT
             SACHIVALAYA
             DISPUR
             GUWAHATI-6.

            3:TAJUDDIN
             S/OLT. JAHUR UDDIN R/O VILL- MOURIPAM P.S. BAGHBOR DIST.
            BARPETA
            ASSAM

Advocate for the Petitioner   : MR.S BORTHAKUR

Advocate for the Respondent : GA, ASSAMR2
                                                                                    Page No.# 2/59


                                     BEFORE
                    HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR MEDHI

                                         JUDGMENT
Date : 26-03-2021

      The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the celebrated case of
State of Haryana & Ors. Vs.
Bhajan Lal & Ors.
, reported in 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, after discussing various
interpretation of the relevant provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (
Cr.P.C
)
under Chapter-XIV and the principles of law
laid down in
a catena of decisions qua the
exercise of the inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C as well as
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India had laid down certain categories of cases by way of illustrations with a
caveat that it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently
channelized and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad
kinds of cases wherein such powers should be exercised. The said illustrations are extracted
hereinbelow:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant
                     provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law
                     enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the
                     exercise of the extraordinary power under
Article 226
or the inherent
                     powers under
Section 482
of the Code which we have extracted and
                     reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way
                     of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to
                     prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
                     ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any
                     precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
                     guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad
                     kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
1. Where the allegations made in the First Information Report
                            or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
                                                        Page No.# 3/59

accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused.
2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the F. I. R. do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under
Section 156 (1)
of the Code except under
an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
Section 155(2)
of the Code.
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same
do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
4. Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2)
of the Code.
5. Where the allegations made in the F.I.R. or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/ or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing
efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
Page No.# 4/59
7. Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with
                            mala fide and / or where the proceeding is maliciously
                            instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on
                            the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and
                            personal grudge."
2.     What is to be noted that immediately after the said paragraph, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court had also put a note of caution regarding sparring exercise of such powers in the
following manner:
"103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of
                     quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very sparingly
                     and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases; that
                     the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the
                     reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the
                     FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or inherent powers
                     do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to
                     its whim or caprice."
3.     In the backdrop of the aforesaid guidelines which have also been reiterated in a
number of subsequent decisions, the facts of the case as well as the issue which require
consideration from this Court are narrated below.
4.     The present petition has been filed invoking the inherent jurisdiction of this Court
conferred by
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C for quashing of the CR Case No.528 / 2012 under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter
IPC
), pending before the Addl. Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Barpeta. The petitioner herein is a Police Officer and at the relevant time,
he was posted at the Kayakuchi Police Out-Post under the Barpeta Police Station. The
projected case of the petitioner is that on 03.06.2012, while he was on duty in the said Out-
Page No.# 5/59

Post, at about 08.10 pm, he got a tip-off that a group of criminals were travelling in a white
Ford Figo car from Bhabanipur towards Kayakuchi. The petitioner had immediately asked a
police party to come to the road and within a short time such a car had reached the place
which the petitioner had somehow could stop. Soon thereafter the police party had reached
the spot and on finding the behaviour of the occupants of the vehicle to be suspicious, they
were taken to the Out-Post. When the vehicle was searched, one blood stained shirt was
found inside the same and blood stains were also found on the cloths of the suspects. In
course of interrogation, one of the suspects had confessed that the vehicle in question was
stolen after murdering the driver and thereafter thrown his body in an open field near the
Pathsala Railway Gate.
5.    The further case of the petitioner is that the matter being reported to higher officials
and as per directions from such officials, the petitioner along with other police personnel had
gone to the spot as one of the suspects Jahangir Alom had agreed to take the party to the
spot. On reaching the area, the same was searched by a dragon light as it was in the mid of
the night and also drizzling. After search for about 4 kms., the body of the driver could not be
found. The suspect, Jahangir Alom then requested to allow him to go to pass urine and
accordingly, one of his handcuff was loosened and the petitioner had held him from back
side. At that moment, suddenly the said Jahangir Alom gave a strong jerk, as a result of
which, the petitioner fell down in the muddy soil when the said Jahangir Alom tried to snatch
the pistol from the petitioner when he had raised a hue and cry and shouted 'pistol is taken
away'. As the said Jahangir Alom had started to run, the police personnel who were nearby
had opened fire in which the said Jahangir Alom was shot, as a result of which he died. The
matter was reported to other senior officers who had reached there with additional police
force and the entire area was searched again taking the lead given by the four other suspects
and finally, the body of the murdered driver of the vehicle was also found about 2 kms. away.
Accordingly, an FIR dated 04.06.2012 was lodged and registered as Barpeta PS Case
No.739/2012 under
Sections 382
/
302
/
120 (B)
/
224
/
34
of the IPC. After investigation,
charge-sheet has been submitted and the matter is at the stage of trial which is undergoing.
Page No.# 6/59
6.     It is the case of the petitioner that after about six months from the date of incident, on
01.12.2012, the father of the deceased, Jahangir Alom, filed CR Case No.528 / 2012 before
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Barpeta. It was alleged that the deceased Jahangir
Alom was a car driver and on 03.06.2012, the petitioner had arrested his son along with
other persons and detained them in the lock-up where they were badly assaulted. It has been
alleged in the complaint that as a result of unbearable torture, the arrested persons had
admitted that the driver of the vehicle was murdered and accordingly, his son was taken
outside by putting handcuff to show the dead body of the Ford Figo car. Though his son was
reluctant to go, he was forced to go by assaulting him. In the subsequent morning, the other
witnesses shown the dead body of Jahangir, which was under handcuff and they had also
witnessed the bullet injury mark. It is alleged that the deceased was a weak person and had
become seriously ill due to the atrocities and he was murdered and thereafter a gun was kept
beside the dead body and thereafter a false Ejahar was lodged. In the Nota Bene (NB), it was
stated that since the witnesses were in custody and due to illness, the filing was delayed.
7.    Upon the receipt of such complaint, the learned CJM, Barpeta recorded the statement
of the complainant on 30.01.2013 and those of other four witnesses were recorded, who
were all the accused persons of Barpeta PS Case No.739/2012, in which charge-sheet was
also submitted. It is the case of the petitioner that the statements of the witnesses were
contradictory in nature. The petitioner's further case is that vide order dated 01.09.2015, the
learned Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Barpeta took cognizance of the case under
Section
302
of the IPC and accordingly, summons were issued to him. It is the specific case of the
petitioner that no sanction was taken from the Government prior to taking cognizance by the
learned Magistrate. It has also been pleaded that on an earlier occasion, the petitioner had to
approach this Court for conversion of a non-bailable warrant of arrest to a bailable one, as in
spite of his application, such a step was taken.
8.     The specific case of the petitioner is that sanction under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C is
mandatory, in absence of which, cognizance could not have been taken in the present case.
The petitioner has also relied upon a notification of the Government of Assam dated
                                                                                   Page No.# 7/59

29.05.1990, whereby all members of the Assam Police Force were brought into the ambit of
Section 197(3)
of the Cr.P.C. The petitioner has also pleaded that even otherwise, except
some bald statements, there was no material before the learned court to arrive at a finding of
a prima facie case against the petitioner under
Section 302
of the IPC. Under those
circumstances, the present petition has been filed for quashing the Complaint Case
No.528/2012 along with the impugned order dated 01.09.2015 by which cognizance had
been taken.
9.    I have heard Shri N Dutta, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner via remote video
conference, who is assisted by Shri S Borthakur, learned counsel. I have also heard Shri Z
Kamar, learned Senior Counsel for the complainant-respondent no. 2 assisted by Shri J
Ahmed, learned counsel as well as Shri H Sarma, learned Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam is
present for the respondent-State.
10.    Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has formulated his arguments
broadly on two legs. His first leg of argument is on the materials or the lack of it to come to a
prima facie finding which is the basis of taking cognizance. His second leg of argument is in
connection with the legal embargo laid down by Section 197 of the Cr.P.C.
11.   Elaborating on his first leg of argument, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner
has painstakingly drawn the attention of this Court to all the materials which were the basis
for taking cognizance, the foremost being the complaint itself which was filed on 01.12.2012.
The said complaint being with regard to an incident of 03.06.2012, the delay itself in filing the
same without any acceptable and reasonable grounds would raise considerable amount of
doubt on the veracity of the complaint itself. The only explanation given is that the witnesses
were in custody and 'due to illness', is absolutely vague. It is contended that at the stage of
filing a complaint, witnesses are not necessary. Further, it is not stated as to who was ill.
Under those circumstances, the learned court should have taken extra caution with regard to
the contents and bona fide of the complaint.
Page No.# 8/59
12.   Shri Dutta, learned counsel for the petitioner thereafter has made a serious exercise to
bring home the point of apparent inconsistencies in the contents of the complaint, vis-a-vis,
the statements of the five numbers of witnesses. The complainant (Tajuddin), who has
deposed as CW 1, has clarified that he came to know about the incident from the witnesses.
Therefore, the version of the remaining witnesses attains immense significance.
13.    CW 2-Nurjamal had deposed to have been confessed before the police regarding
commission of the offence of killing the driver of the Ford Figo vehicle. It was, however,
added that same confession was made on the fear of beating. CW 3-Hafizul Hoque stated
that the deceased Jahangir had become senseless and that the said Jahangir had stated that
the driver of the vehicle was killed. CW 4-Sanidul Islam had deposed that they were coming
in a Ford Figo vehicle driven by the deceased Jahangir when the vehicle was stopped in front
of Kayakuchi Police Out-Post. He further stated that Jahangir was taken out of the lock-up by
the police by putting handcuff. He further deposed that he had heard that Jahangir was killed
by the police by beating. CW 5-Shri Anowar Hussain had deposed that the police took him
and Sahidul inside the police station and were interrogated. Later, the present petitioner had
beaten up Jahangir who was not put behind the lock-up. Later, Jahangir was taken out from
the lock-up and in the next morning at about 5/6 am, he was taken to the National Highway
along with two others where he saw the dead body of Jahangir with a pistol nearby his hand.
14.    Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel accordingly submitted that on the basis of the
statements made by the five witnesses, the prime witness being a hearsay one, the
inconsistencies in the versions of the remaining four witnesses could not have led a
reasonable person to arrive at a conclusion of taking cognizance vide the impugned order
dated 01.09.2015. It is further contended that even assuming that the trial commences, it
would be only these materials before the learned court and which are wholly inadequate to
come to a finding of guilt. Therefore, the entire exercise of holding a trial would be a futile
one in which the petitioner would be put to unnecessary harassment.
15.   To buttress the aforesaid submission, Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel has drawn
                                                                                      Page No.# 9/59

the attention of this Court to the case of
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Vs.
Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
, reported in (1998) 1 SCC 692, which has also
been approved in the subsequent decision of
Bhajan Lal & Ors.
(supra), the relevant
paragraph being quoted hereinbelow:
"98. Speaking for the Bench, Ranganath Mishra, J. as he then was in
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
(1988) 1
              SCC 692: (AIR 1988 SC 709) has expounded the law as follows: (at p.711 of
              AIR)

                     "The legal position is well settled that when a prosecution at the
                     initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the
                     court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made prima
                     facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take into
                     consideration any special features which appear in a particular case
                     to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to
                     permit a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the
                     court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the
                     opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction are bleak and,
                     therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a
                     criminal prosecution to continue, the Court may while taking into
                     consideration the special facts of a case also quash the proceedings
                     even though it may be at a preliminary stage."
16.    The learned Senior Counsel submits that the contents of the complaint and the
statements of the five numbers of witnesses, even at a stage of not being controverted, do
not prima facie establish the offence and it would only be an instance of utilizing the court for
an oblique purpose even when the chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak.
17.   Elaborating the second leg of argument, Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel submits
that admittedly, the petitioner, who is the accused, is a Government servant and the alleged
                                                                                  Page No.# 10/59

offence had occurred in discharge of his official duties, the legal bar of
Section 197
of the
Cr.P.C would come into play and without taking the sanction from the appropriate authority,
no cognizance could have been taken. Shri Dutta, the learned Senior Counsel has drawn the
attention of this Court to the provision of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C along with sub-sections (1)
(2) and (3). Under
Section 197(3)
, the State Government has been empowered to issue a
notification directing that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to all such class or
category of the members of the Forces charged with maintenance of public order and for the
expression Central Government appearing in sub-section (2), State Government be
substituted. He has also referred to the notification dated 29.05.1990 issued by the State
Government under
Section 197(3)
of the Cr.P.C. Since the said notification was an old one, it
appears that its validity was enquired into through this Court. In response to the same, the
Home Department, Government of Assam has issued a communication dated 12.12.2018
whereby it has been informed that the notification dated 29.05.1990 has not been cancelled
and was still in force. It is the submission of the learned Senior Counsel that there being no
dispute regarding the official status of the petitioner coming within the ambit of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C, coupled with the fact that the alleged offence was committed in discharge of his
official duty, the legal bar would be applicable to the petitioner. Therefore, the order by which
cognizance has been taken without the prior sanction of the appropriate authority is non est
in law.
18.
In support of the above, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner by referring the
case of
Bhajan Lal
(supra), has submitted that in paragraph 102(6) of
the said judgment
,
one of the exceptions as way of illustration carved out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court is that
the extra-ordinary powers under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C can be exercised where there is an
express legal bar and drafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings. The learned Senior Counsel accordingly
contends that in view of such clear illustrations
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
there should be no manner of doubt to arrive at a finding that the impugned order dated
01.09.2015 is absolutely illegal.
Page No.# 11/59
19.      Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner accordingly submits that the
present is a fit case for exercise of the extra-ordinary jurisdiction conferred by
Section 482
of
the Cr.P.C and accordingly, the impugned order of taking cognizance is liable to be quashed
and consequently, the criminal complaint as such is liable to be quashed.
20.      Shri Z Kamar, learned Senior Counsel for the complainant on the other hand disputes
the contentions and submissions made on behalf of the petitioner. He submits that whether
the version of the complainant in the complaint accompanied by the statements made before
the learned Magistrate constitutes a prima facie case to take cognizance are matters of facts
which are to be examined by the learned Trial Court. It is submitted that such matters being
exclusively in the domain of the learned Trial Court before whom the statements have been
made, the High Court is required to look into that aspect with great circumspection as a
subjective satisfaction has been arrived at by the learned Trial Court on the basis of materials
before it. It is submitted that in view of availability of materials to come to a conclusion of
prima facie satisfaction, this Court should be loath in substituting such findings which are
based on facts. The learned Senior Counsel submits that coming to a finding of existence of a
prima facie case to go for trial does not mean that a finding of guilt has been arrived at and
therefore, it would be wholly premature at this stage to interfere with such proceedings and
rather, it would amount to pre-empt the learned Trial Court while discharging its functions in
accordance with law.
21.      Shri Kamar, learned Senior Counsel has drawn the attention of this Court to the
provisions of
Section 202
of the Cr.P.C. It is submitted that the offence being exclusively
triable by a Court of Sessions, the learned Magistrate has duly followed the provisions of
Section 202 (2)
Proviso which lays down that under such circumstances the learned
Magistrate shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them on
oath. In the instant case, the rigours of
Section 202 (2)
of the Cr.P.C have been duly met and
there is no procedural irregularity or illegality in the order by which cognizance has been
taken.
Page No.# 12/59
22.   The learned Senior Counsel for the complainant accordingly submits that the first leg of
argument made on behalf of the petitioner is wholly unsustainable and accordingly, not liable
for any consideration.
23.    Shri Kamar has also submitted that the FIR lodged by the petitioner does not
correspond to any GD Entry and therefore, it appears that the FIR was itself lodged as a
cover-up.
24.   As regards the issue of delay of about six months from the date of occurrence in filing
the complaint is concerned, Shri Kamar, learned Senior Counsel submits that the complaint
has been lodged within the prescribed period of limitation. Drawing the attention of this Court
to
Section 468
of the Cr.P.C, the learned Senior Counsel submits that for an offence under
Section 302
of the IPC, there is no limitation for filing a complaint. On the other hand, it is
submitted that it is the police consisting of the petitioner who are not following the guidelines
in case of custodial detention. The learned Senior Counsel for the complainant further
submits that the entire narration of the events in the FIR appears to be a concocted one. He
submits that it is absolutely impossible for a person in handcuff to snatch away a pistol, that
too, from a Police Officer. He has also submitted that the petitioner himself had violated the
law by trying to flee away from the dock and therefore, he is not entitled to any relief.
25.   Dealing with the second leg of argument made on behalf of the petitioner, Shri Kamar,
learned Senior Counsel for the complainant submits that application of the provisions of
Section 197(3)
of the Cr.P.C is dependent upon the language incorporated in the statute. It is
submitted that the protection would come into play only when the Officer is in charge of
maintenance of public order, which is distinct and different from maintenance of law and
order. The learned Senior Counsel submits that notwithstanding the notification dated
29.05.1990, which has been clarified to be still in force, the essential pre-requisite for such
notification to bring an Officer within its ambit is that the Officer should be in charge of
maintenance of public order and in the instant case, the offence was committed not in
discharge of duties for maintenance of public order. It is submitted that the provision of
                                                                                 Page No.# 13/59
Section 197
Cr.P.C is a kind of shield and not a sword. In other words, the same can be used
as a protection and not as a weapon.
26.   Shri Kamar, learned Senior Counsel submits that to come within the ambit of protection
of
Section 197
, the offence alleged to have been committed should be while acting or
purporting to act in discharge of his official duties. He submits that the offence committed
cannot be termed to be one which has been committed while acting or purported to act in
discharge of his official duties. He contends that official duties do not authorise killing of a
person by shooting him when he could have been easily apprehended. At this stage, the
learned Senior Counsel for the complainant reiterates that the projected case in the FIR is
wholly and unbelievable one when the deceased could attempt to flee away from a group of
police men. Since the offence alleged has not been committed while in discharge of official
duties, the petitioner is otherwise also not be entitled to the protective umbrella of Section
197 of the Cr.P.C.
27.   To bring home his above contentions, Shir Kamar, learned Senior Counsel has drawn an
analogy of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C with
Section 19 (1)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988. It is contended that while
Section 19 (1)
of the PC Act does not have any pre-
requirement that the public servant to be acting in his official duty, the protection under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C is a restrictive one which envisages that the offence is committed
while the incumbent is in discharge of official duties.
28.    Reiterating his submissions, Shri Kamar has contended that the present offence
involving
Section 302
of the IPC cannot be said to have been committed by the petitioner in
discharge of his official duties or even in purported discharge of his official duties. It is
submitted that law does not authorise a police personnel to cause death to anybody and in
the instant case, such causing of death being an admitted position, the offence cannot be
deemed to have been committed in discharge of duties. It is thus contended that when the
basic pre-condition of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C is not met of the offence being committed in
discharge of official duties, the said Section shall not come into operation.
Page No.# 14/59
29.    The learned Senior Counsel for the complainant accordingly submits that from all
corners, the present petition cannot succeed and therefore, the same be dismissed and the
trial be allowed to continue by vacating the interim order.
30.   In support of his submissions, the learned Senior Counsel for the complainant places
reliance upon the following case laws:
1) Rohtash Kumar Vs. State of Haryana and Ors.
, (2013) 14 SCC 290;
2) Dr. Mehmood Nayyar Azam Vs. State of Chattisgarh and Ors.
,
              (2012) 8 SCC 1;
3) Dineshbhai Chandubhai Patel Vs. State of Gujarat
, (2018) 3 SCC
              104;
4) Varala Bharath Kumar Vs. State of Telangana
, (2017) 9 SCC 413;
5) Judgment dated 11.02.2021 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Crl. Appl.
No.125 / 2011 (
Pravat Chandra Mohanty Vs. The State of Odisha and
              Anr.
);
6) Narayan Tamuli Vs. Pradip Kr. Talukdar & Ors., 1996 (1) GLT 597;
7) Devinder Singh and Ors. Vs. State of Punjab
, (2016) 12 SCC 87;
8) Devendra Prasad Singh Vs. State of Bihar and Anr., (2019) 4 SCC
351
9) Shambhoo Nath Misra Vs. State of UP and Ors.
, (1997) 5 SCC 326;
10) PK Pradhan Vs. The State of Sikkim, (2001) 6 SCC 704;
11) Sushil Kumar Barua Vs. Golok Ch. Kalita
, 2008 (1) GLT 714;
12) Amitava Sinha Vs. State of Assam and Anr.
, 2015 (3) GLT 1;
13) Binod Kumar Singh Vs. State of Bihar
, 1985 Cri.LJ 1878;
14) Dilip K. Basu Vs. State of West Bengal and Ors.
, 2015 Cri.LJ 4170
                                                                                    Page No.# 15/59

             (SC);
15) PP Unnikrishnan and Anr. Vs. Puttiyottil Alikutty and Anr.
, 2000
             Cri.LJ         4041;
31.   The case of
Rohtash Kumar
(supra) has been cited to highlight the duties of the
police to follow the guidelines dated 02.12.2003 of the National Human Rights Commission
which reads as follows:
"12. What disturbs us is the fact that the police have refused to follow
                      the guidelines dated 2/12/2003 issued by the National Human Rights
                      Commission. The two crucial guidelines which have been completely
                      ignored by the police are that the investigation into the encounter
                      death must be done by an independent investigation agency and that
                      whenever a complaint is made against the police making out a case of
                      culpable homicide, an FIR must be registered. In the instant case, the
                      police have refused to even register the FIR on the complaint made by
                      the appellant alleging that his son Sunil was killed by the police.
                      Section 154 of the Code mandates that whenever a complaint
                      discloses a cognizable offence, an FIR must be registered. This Court
                      has, in a catena of judgments, laid down that the police must register
                      an FIR if a cognizable offence is disclosed in the complaint. [See:
State
                      of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
[1992(supp)1 SCC 335]]. Ignoring the
                      mandate of Section 154 of the Code and the law
laid down by
this
                      Court, the police have merely conducted inquiries which appear to be
                      an eyewash. It is distressing to note that till date, no FIR has been
                      registered on the complaint made by the appellant. The only FIR
                      which was registered is against Umesh under Sections 332, 353, 307
                      read with
Section 34
of the IPC at the instance of ASI Ram Sarup. As
                      already noted
,
in that case
, Umesh has been acquitted ."
Page No.# 16/59
32.   The case of
Dr. Mehmood Nayyar Azam
(supra) has been cited to buttress the
argument on the role which is required to be played by a police, which includes the
sacrosanct duty to protect the fundamental right under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
The relevant paragraphs are quoted hereinbelow:
"36. From the aforesaid discussion, there is no shadow of doubt that
                    any treatment meted to an accused while he is in custody which
                    causes humiliation and mental trauma corrodes the concept of human
                    dignity. The majesty of law protects the dignity of a citizen in a society
                    governed by law. It cannot be forgotten that the Welfare State is
                    governed by rule of law which has paramountcy. It has been said by
                    Edward Biggon "the laws of a nation form the most instructive portion
                    of its history." The Constitution as the organic law of the land has
                    unfolded itself in manifold manner like a living organism in the various
                    decisions of the court about the rights of a person under
Article 21
of
                    the Constitution of India. When citizenry rights are sometimes dashed
                    against and pushed back by the members of City Halls, there has to be
                    a rebound and when the rebound takes place,
Article 21
of the
                    Constitution springs up to action as a protector. That is why, an
                    investigator to a crime is required to possess the qualities of patience
                    and perseverance as has been stated in Nandini Sathpaty v. P. L. Dani
                    [AIR 1978 SC 1025].
37.
In
Delhi Judicial Services Association v. State of Gujarat
[(1991) 4 SCC 406], while dealing with the role of police, this Court
                    condemned the excessive use of force by the police and observed as
                    follows:-
"The main objectives of police is to apprehend offenders, to
                           investigate crimes and to prosecute them before the courts and
                           also to prevent commission of crime and above all to ensure
                                                               Page No.# 17/59

       law and order to protect citizens' life and property. The law
       enjoins the police to be scrupulously fair to the offender and the
       Magistracy is to ensure fair investigation and fair trial to an
       offender. The purpose and object of Magistracy and police are
       complementary to each other. It is unfortunate that these
       objectives have remained unfulfilled even after 40 years of our
       Constitution. Aberrations of police officers and police excesses
       in dealing with the law and order situation have been subject of
       adverse comments from this Court as well as from other courts
       but it has failed to have any corrective effect on it. The police
       has power to arrest a person even without obtaining a warrant
       of arrest from a court. The amplitude of this power casts an
       obligation on the police and it must bear in mind, as held by
       this Court that if a person is arrested for a crime, his
       constitutional and fundamental rights must not be violated."
38. It is imperative to state that it is the sacrosanct duty of the police
authorities to remember that a citizen while in custody is not denuded
of his fundamental right under
Article 21
of the Constitution. The
restrictions imposed have the sanction of law by which his enjoyment
of fundamental right is curtailed but his basic human rights are not
crippled so that the police officers can treat him in an inhuman
manner. On the contrary, they are under obligation to protect his
human rights and prevent all forms of atrocities. We may hasten to
add that a balance has to be struck and, in this context, we may
fruitfully quote a passage from
D. K. Basu
(supra): -
"There can be no gainsaying that freedom of an individual must
       yield to the security of the State. The right of preventive
       detention of individuals in the interest of security of the State in
       various situations prescribed under different statutes has been
                                                                                  Page No.# 18/59

                           upheld by the Courts. The right to interrogate the detenus,
                           culprits or arrestees in the interest of the nation, must take
                           precedence over an individual's right to personal liberty. ..........
                           The action of the State, however, must be "right, just and fair".
Using any form of torture for extracting any kind of information
                           would neither be 'right nor just nor fair' and, therefore, would
                           be impermissible, being offensive to
Article 21.
Such a crime-
                           suspect must be interrogated-indeed subjected to sustain and
                           scientific interrogation-determined in accordance with the
                           provisions of law. He cannot, however, be tortured or subjected
                           to third degree methods or eliminated with a view to elicit
                           information, extract confession or derive knowledge about his
                           accomplishes, weapons etc. His constitutional right cannot be
                           abridged except in the manner permitted by law, though in the
                           very nature of things there would be qualitative difference in
                           the method of interrogation of such a person as compared to
                           an ordinary criminal.""
33.
Dineshbhai Chandubhai Patel
(supra) and
Varala Bharath Kumar
(supra) have
been cited in support of the submission that for discharging powers by a High Court either
under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India or
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C, the necessary
caution should be taken and further that at the initial stage, the High Court would not be in a
position to appreciate the evidence or draw its own inferences from the contents of the FIR.
The relevant paragraphs of
Dineshbhai Chandubhai Patel
(supra) are extracted
hereinbelow:
"26. The law on the question as to when a registration of the FIR is
                    challenged seeking its quashing by the accused under
Article 226
of
                    the Constitution or Section 482 of the Code and what are the powers
                    of the High Court and how the High Court should deal with such
                                                                                 Page No.# 19/59

                   question is fairly well settled.
31. At this stage, the High Court could not appreciate the evidence nor
                   could draw its own inferences from the contents of the FIR and the
                   material relied on. It was more so when the material relied on was
                   disputed by the Complainants and visa-se-versa. In such a situation, it
                   becomes the job of the investigating authority at such stage to probe
                   and then of the Court to examine the questions once the charge sheet
                   is filed along with such material as to how far and to what extent
                   reliance can be placed on such material.
34. The inherent powers of the High Court, which are obviously not
                   defined being inherent in its very nature, cannot be stretched to any
                   extent and nor can such powers be equated with the appellate powers
                   of the High Court defined in the Code. The parameters
laid down by
this Court while exercising inherent powers must always be kept in
                   mind else it would lead to committing the jurisdictional error in
                   deciding the case. Such is the case here.
40. Though learned senior counsel appearing for the parties argued
                   the issues touching the merits of the case by referring to hundreds of
                   documents but, in our view, it is wholly unnecessary to enter into the
                   factual arena once we record a finding that a prima facie case is made
                   out on reading the FIR including the documents enclosed therein. We,
                   therefore, do not consider it necessary to go in detail of their
                   submissions. Needless to say, all these submissions and unproved and
                   disputed documents on which reliance was placed by the parties would
                   be dealt with at a later stage as and when the occasion arises ."
So far as the case of
Varala Bharath Kumar
(supra) is concerned, the relevant paragraph is
7, which is quoted hereinbelow:
Page No.# 20/59

"7. It is by now well settled that the extraordinary power under
Article
226
or inherent power under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
Procedure can be exercised by the High Court, either to prevent abuse
of process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
Where allegations made in the First Information Report/the complaint
or the outcome of investigation as found in the Charge Sheet, even if
they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not
prima facie constitute any offence or make out the case against the
accused; where the allegations do not disclose the ingredients of the
offence alleged; where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
First Information Report or complaint and the material collected in
support of the same do not disclose the commission of offence alleged
and make out a case against the accused; where a criminal proceeding
is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and
personal grudge, the power under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India or under
Section 482
of Code of Criminal Procedure may be
exercised.
While exercising power under Section 482 or under
Article 226
in such
matters, the court does not function as a Court of Appeal or Revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code though wide has
to be exercised sparingly, carefully or with caution and only when such
exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down under Section
482 itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and
substantial justice, for the administration of which alone courts exist.
The court must be careful and see that its decision in exercise of its
power is based on sound principles. The inherent powers should not
be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. Of course, no hard and
fast rule can be
laid down in
regard to cases in which the High Court
                                                                                  Page No.# 21/59

                   will exercise its extra ordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceedings
                   at any stage."
34.   The case of
Pravat Chandra Mohanty
(supra) has again been cited to highlight the
role of police and as to whether an offence under
Section 324
of the IPC would be
compoundable. For ready reference, the relevant paragraphs are quoted hereinbelow:
"36. Present is a case where the offence was committed by the in-charge of
            the Police Station, Purighat, as well as the Senior Inspector, posted at the
            same Police Station. The Police of State is protector of law and order. The
            people look forward to the Police to protect their life and property. People go
            to the Police Station with the hope that their person and property will be
            protected by the police and injustice and offence committed on them shall
            be redressed and the guilty be punished. When the protector of people and
            society himself instead of protecting the people adopts brutality and
            inhumanly beat the person who comes to the police station, it is a matter of
            great public concern. The beating of a person in the Police Station is the
            concern for all and causes a sense of fear in the entire society.
37. We may refer to the judgment of this Court in
Yashwant and others
            vs. State of Maharashtra
, (2019) 18 SCC 571, where this Court laid
            down that when the police is violator of the law whose primary responsibility
            is to protect the law, the punishment for such violation has to be
            proportionately stringent so as to have effective deterrent effect and instil
            confidence in the society. Following was
laid down in
paragraph 34: -
"34. As the police in this case are the violators of law, who had the
                   primary responsibility to protect and uphold law, thereby mandating
                   the punishment for such violation to be proportionately stringent so
                   as to have effective deterrent effect and instill confidence in the
                   society. It may not be out of context to remind that the motto of
                                                                                  Page No.# 22/59

                    Maharashtra State Police is "Sadrakshnaya Khalanighrahanaya"
(Sanskrit : "To protect good and to punish evil"), which needs to be
                    respected. Those, who are called upon to administer the criminal law,
                    must bear, in mind, that they have a duty not merely to the individual
                    accused before them, but also to the State and to the community at
                    large. Such incidents involving police usually tend to deplete the
                    confidence in our criminal justice system much more than those
                    incidents involving private individuals. We must additionally factor this
                    aspect while imposing an appropriate punishment on the accused
                    herein"
38. The observations as quoted above are fully attracted in the facts of the
             present case. We, thus, are of the considered opinion that present is a case
             where this Court is not to grant leave for compounding the offences under
Section 324
IPC as prayed by the counsel for the appellants. The present is
             a case where the accused who were police officers, one of them being in-
             charge of Station and other Senior Inspector have themselves brutally
             beaten the deceased, who died the same night. Their offences cannot be
             compounded by the Court in exercise of Section 320(2) read with sub-
             section (5). We, thus, reject the prayer of the appellants to compound the
             offence."
35.   The case of Narayan Tamuli (supra) has been cited for the purpose of distinguishing
the expression of 'maintenance of public order' and 'maintenance of law and order' and also
for explaining what would constitute discharge of official duty. Paragraphs 5 and 7 of the said
judgment have been pressed into service, which read as follows:
"(5) Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned counsel on the other hand has submitted that
             since the opposite parties/accused happened to be police personnel, before
             issuing process in such circumstance learned court below was justified in
             directing the complainant as to obtain sanction. By referring to the counter
                                                                       Page No.# 23/59

affidavit so filed on behalf of the opposite parties particularly annexure-C
Notification it is painted out that the State Government under the provisions
of Section 197 (3), Cr. P. C, notified that all members of the Assam police
Forces deployed for maintenance of law and order in the State of Assam shall
have all the protection as provided u/s 197 (2) Cr. P. C and the said
Notification being of dated the 29. 5. 90 is still in force. Sanction before the
cognizance thus was a must and therefore the impugned order does not
suffer from any infirmity. Secondly, it is pointed out by referring to some of
the reported cases detailed below that in course of exercising official duty if
the circumstance so warrants, police personnel are very much within their
limits even as to use forces and in the present circumstance by referring
annexures-A and B of the counter affidavit so filed Mr. Bhattacharyya, learned
counsel averred that in course of the complainant attempted to escape after
insulting the police personnel, the accused/opposite parties had no
alternative but to chase the complainant and in that course because of his
falling down on the ground, he sustained injuries. That being the position
there is no merit in this criminal revision petition and the same be dismissed.
In support of this contention on behalf of the opposite parties some of the
reported cases so cited are - (1988) 1 GLR 235 (Abedur Rahman-Vs-Banamali
Choudhury), AIR 1956 SC 44 (Matajog Dobey-Vs-H. C. Bhari)- paragraphs 17
and 23. Basing on these two judgments referred to above Mr. Bhattacharyya,
learned counsel submits that if in performing of the official duty, police
personnel used force that can well be said to be within the scope of an act
coming under the purview of official duty. Mr. Bhattacharyya has also referred
to some of the other reported cases and they are 1988 CRI. L. J. 100
(Karnalsingh Gill-Vs-State of Gujarat). In the background of this reported
case it is further argued that the act so done by a government servant while
engaged in the performance of his official duties requires sanction if it is
directly concerned with his official duties so that, if questioned, it could be
claimed to have been done by virtue of the office and thus the act so done is
in proper discharge of his duties. In the instant case the opposite
                                                                      Page No.# 24/59

parties/accused it is pointed out had to take the complainant petitioner to the
police station because of his misbehaving as mentioned in annexure-A of the
counter affidavit and it was because of the complainant's falling down on the
ground as submitted by the learned counsel for the other side that he
sustained injuries.
(7) The act thus alleged to have been committed by the accused/ opposite
parties particularly detailed above as shown in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
complaint petition cannot be said to be done in discharge of their official
dudes and no sanction is required if the allegations is of using third degree
method of the police personnel when the situation did not warrant as to use
force for compliance of some duties entrusted upon them Abuse of official
position cannot be slid to be on act done in discharge of official duty. Non-use
of helmet while: driving gives right 19 the police on traffic duty particularly as
to stop him and to take action against him for the contravention of the
provisions of Motor Vehicle laws, but as alleged over acts said to have been
committed by opposite parties as detailed in the complaint petition (paras 2
and 3) does not seem at all to come under the purview of the act committed
in discharge of the official duty in the instant case. Thus the sanction u/s 97
Cr. P. C in the present circumstance was not required. As regards the point so
raised by the opposite parties that the accused/opposite party members are
protected by Annexure-C Notification under the provisions of
Section 19 (2)
Cr. P. C, I find that even in that circumstance it has to be seen as to whether
the opposite parties/accused were at that moment and at that place deputed
or deployed for the maintenance of law and order. Because as per the very
Govt. notification marked as Annexure-C much baked upon by the
accused/opposite parties; notification of the Govt. of Assam dated 29. 5. 90
No. HMA 280/88/41 gives protection of the provisions of Sec. 197 (2) Cr. P. C
to the Assam Police Forces when deployed for the maintenance of law and
order and on this score too the accused/opposite parties have failed to show
any order with regard to their (accused/opposite party members)deployment
                                                                                  Page No.# 25/59

             for maintaining tow and order at that point and on that date the opposite
             parties were as per their own case near the Circuit House at that time
             controlling traffic in Mangaldoi town as detailed in their Annexure-A. The
             second part of the act thus with regard to them an alleged for manhandling
             the complainant had nothing to do with the discharge of their official duty
             and sanction U/s 197 Cr. P. C in such circumstance is not required. Taking
             that view the impugned order to the extent of directing the complainant to
             procure sanction is set aside. The learned Court below, because of its finding
             prima facie material against the accused persons/opposite parties relating to
             the allegations so made in the complaint petition as detailed in the impugned
             order dated the 29th of My, 1995, may pass appropriate order under Chapter
             xvi of the Cr. P. C."
36.
Devinder Singh
(supra) and
Devendra Prasad Singh
(supra) have been similarly
cited in support of the contention that the official duty performed has to have some nexus
with the offence alleged.
The relevant paragraphs of
Devinder Singh
(supra) being
paragraphs 4, 39 and 40 are quoted hereinbelow:
"4. It is further averred that on 22.7.1993 four persons were killed in an
             encounter with the police. The prosecution alleged that they were killed in a
             fake encounter. On the basis of the complaint lodged by Chaman Lal, father
             of one of the deceased, the CBI obtained sanction from the State
             Government to prosecute the accused as at the relevant time, under
section
             6
of the 1983 Act, sanction from Central Government was required. However,
             on the basis of sanction obtained from the State Government, the CBI filed
             charge-sheet against the accused persons in the Court of Special Judge,
             Patiala. The appellants filed application under
section 227
of the Cr.P.C. for
             discharge on the ground that they had acted in the incident in the course of
             their duty and sanction granted by the State Government was without
             jurisdiction, illegal and void.
Page No.# 26/59
39. The principles emerging from the aforesaid decisions are summarized
hereunder :
39.1. Protection of sanction is an assurance to an honest and sincere officer
to perform his duty honestly and to the best of his ability to further public
duty. However, authority cannot be camouflaged to commit crime.
39.2. Once act or omission has been found to have been committed by public
servant in discharging his duty it must be given liberal and wide construction
so far its official nature is concerned. Public servant is not entitled to indulge
in criminal activities. To that extent
Section 197
CrPC has to be construed
narrowly and in a restricted manner.
39.3. Even in facts of a case when public servant has exceeded in his duty, if
there is reasonable connection it will not deprive him of protection under
section 197
Cr.P.C. There cannot be a universal rule to determine whether
there is reasonable nexus between the act done and official duty nor it is
possible to lay down such rule.
39.4. In case the assault made is intrinsically connected with or related to
performance of official duties sanction would be necessary under
Section 197
CrPC, but such relation to duty should not be pretended or fanciful claim. The
offence must be directly and reasonably connected with official duty to
require sanction. It is no part of official duty to commit offence. In case
offence was incomplete without proving, the official act, ordinarily the
provisions of
Section 197
CrPC would apply.
39.5. In case sanction is necessary it has to be decided by competent
authority and sanction has to be issued on the basis of sound objective
assessment. The court is not to be a sanctioning authority.
39.6. Ordinarily, question of sanction should be dealt with at the stage of
taking cognizance, but if the cognizance is taken erroneously and the same
                                                                      Page No.# 27/59

comes to the notice of Court at a later stage, finding to that effect is
permissible and such a plea can be taken first time before appellate Court. It
may arise at inception itself. There is no requirement that accused must wait
till charges are framed.
39.7. Question of sanction can be raised at the time of framing of charge and
it can be decided prima facie on the basis of accusation. It is open to decide
it afresh in light of evidence adduced after conclusion of trial or at other
appropriate stage.
39.8. Question of sanction may arise at any stage of proceedings. On a police
or judicial inquiry or in course of evidence during trial. Whether sanction is
necessary or not may have to be determined from stage to stage and
material brought on record depending upon facts of each case. Question of
sanction can be considered at any stage of the proceedings. Necessity for
sanction may reveal itself in the course of the progress of the case and it
would be open to accused to place material during the course of trial for
showing what his duty was. Accused has the right to lead evidence in support
of his case on merits.
39.9. In some case it may not be possible to decide the question effectively
and finally without giving opportunity to the defence to adduce evidence.
Question of good faith or bad faith may be decided on conclusion of trial.
40. In the instant cases, the allegation as per the prosecution case it was a
case of fake encounter or death caused by torture whereas the defence of
the accused person is that it was a case in discharge of official duty and as
the deceased was involved in the terrorist activities and while maintaining law
and order the incident has taken place. The incident was in the course of
discharge of official duty. Considering the aforesaid principles in case the
version of the prosecution is found to be correct there is no requirement of
any sanction. However it would be open to the accused persons to adduce
                                                                                   Page No.# 28/59

             the evidence in defence and to submit such other materials on record
             indicating that the incident has taken place in discharge of their official duties
             and the orders passed earlier would not come in the way of the trial court to
             decide the question afresh in the light of the aforesaid principles from stage
             to stage or even at the time of conclusion of the trial at the time of
             judgment. As at this stage it cannot be said which version is correct. The trial
             court has prima facie to proceed on the basis of prosecution version and can
             re-decide the question afresh in case from the evidence adduced by the
             prosecution or by the accused or in any other manner it comes to the notice
             of the court that there was a reasonable nexus of the incident with discharge
             of official duty, the court shall re-examine the question of sanction and take
             decision in accordance with law. The trial to proceed on the aforesaid basis ."
So far as
Devendra Prasad Singh
(supra) is concerned, the relevant paragraphs are
paragraphs 11 and 12, which are as follows:
"11. In our view, in order to attract the rigor of
section 197
of the Cr.P.C.,
             1973 it is necessary that the offence alleged against a Government Officer
             must have some nexus or/and relation with the discharge of his official duties
             as a Government Officer. In this case, we do not find it to be so.
12. So far as the second ground is concerned, we are of the view that the
             High Court while hearing the application under
section 482
of the Cr.P.C.,
             1973 had no jurisdiction to appreciate the statement of the witnesses and
             record a finding that there were inconsistencies in their statements and,
             therefore, there was no prima facie case made out against respondent No.2.
             In our view, this could be done only in the trial while deciding the issues on
             the merits or/and by the Appellate Court while deciding the appeal arising out
             of the final order passed by the Trial Court but not in
Section 482
Cr.P.C.,
             1973 proceedings."
Page No.# 29/59
37.
Shambhoo Nath Misra
(supra) is again in connection with the expression 'official
duties' and the relevant paragraphs, being 4, are extracted hereinbelow:
"4. Section 197(1) postulates that "when any person who is a public servant
             not removable from his office, save by or with the sanction of the
             Government, is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by
             him, while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, no
             Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction
             of the appropriate Government/authority". The essential requirement
             postulated for sanction to prosecute the public servant is that the offence
             alleged against the public servant must have been done while acting or
             purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. In such a situation, it
             postulates that the public servant's act is in furtherance of his performance or
             his official duties. If the act/omission is integral to performance of public
             duty, the public servant is entitled to the protection under Section 197(1) of
             Cr. P. C. Without previous sanction, the complaint/charge against him for the
             alleged offence cannot be proceeded with the trial. The sanction of the
             appropriate Government or competent authority would be necessary to
             protect a public servant from needless harassment or prosecution. The
             protection of sanction is an assurance to an honest and sincere officer to
             perform him public duty honestly and to the best of his ability. The threat of
             prosecution demoralises the honest officer. The requirement of sanction by
             competent authority of appropriate Government is an assurance and
             protection to the honest officer who does official duty to further public
             interest. However, performance of public duty under colour of public duty
             cannot be camouflaged to commit crime. Public duty may provide him an
             opportunity to commit crime. The Court to proceed further in the trial or the
             enquiry, as the case may be, applies its mind and records a finding that the
             crime and the official duty are not integrally connected ."
Page No.# 30/59
38.    In the case of PK Pradhan (supra), the emphasis is on the nature of the dues
performed which has to be official duties so as to enable a public servant to get the benefit of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. The relevant paragraph is extracted hereinbelow:
"5. The legislative mandate engrafted in sub-section (1) of Section 197
             debarring a Court from taking cognizance of an offence except with the
             previous sanction of the Government concerned in a case where the acts
             complained of are alleged to have been committed by a public servant in
             discharge of his official duty or purporting to be in the discharge of his official
             duty and such public servant is not removable from office save by or with the
             sanction of the Government touches the jurisdiction of the Court itself. It is a
             prohibition imposed by the statute from taking cognizance. Different tests
             have been laid down in decided cases to ascertain the scope and meaning of
             the relevant words occurring in Section 197 of the Code; "any offence alleged
             to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
             discharge of his official duty." The offence alleged to have been committed
             must have something to do, or must be related in some manner, with the
             discharge of official duty. No question of sanction can arise under Section
             197, unless the act complained of is an offence; the only point for
             determination is whether it was committed in the discharge of official duty.
             There must be a reasonable connection between the act and the official duty.
             It does not matter even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary for the
             discharge of the duty, as this question will arise only at a later stage when
             the trial proceeds on the merits. What a Court has to find out is whether the
             act and the official duty are so inter-related that one can postulate
             reasonably that it was done by the accused in the performance of official
             duty, though, possibly in excess of the needs and requirements of situation.
15. Thus, from a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions, it will be clear that
             for claiming protection under Section 197 of the Code, it has to be shown by
             the accused that there is reasonable connection between the act complained
                                                                                    Page No.# 31/59

             of and the discharge of official duty. An official act can be performed in the
             discharge of official duty as well as in dereliction of it. For invoking protection
             under Section 197 of the Code, the acts of the accused complained of must
             be such that the same cannot be separated from the discharge of official
             duty, but if there was no reasonable connection between them and the
             performance of those duties, the official status furnishes only the occasion or
             opportunity for the acts, then no sanction would be required. If the case as
             put forward by the prosecution fails or the defence establishes that the act
             purported to be done is in discharge of duty, the proceedings will have to be
             dropped. It is well settled that question of sanction under Section 197 of the
             Code can be raised any time after the cognizance; may be immediately after
             cognizance or framing of charge or even at the time of conclusion of trial and
             after conviction as well. But there may be certain cases where it may not be
             possible to decide the question effectively without giving opportunity to the
             defence to establish that what he did was in discharge of official duty. In
             order to come to the conclusion whether claim of the accused, that the act
             that he did was in course of the performance of his duty was reasonable one
             and neither pretended nor fanciful, can be examined during the course of
             trial by giving opportunity to the defence to establish it. In such an
             eventuality, the question of sanction should be left open to be decided in the
             main Judgment which may be delivered upon conclusion of the trial ."
39.   The judgments of this High Court in the case of
Sushil Kumar Barua
(supra) and
Amitava Sinha
(supra) have been cited in support of the submissions that it is only in
discharge of official duties that the protection under
Section 197
Cr.P.C would be available.
For ready reference, the relevant paragraphs of the aforesaid two referred cases are quoted
herein below:
Sushil Kumar Barua
(supra).
"(13) A close analysis of the provisions of Section 161 and 163 Cr. P. C. read
             with
Section 24
of the Evidence Act clearly indicates that a police officer is
                                                                      Page No.# 32/59

prohibited from beating or confining any person with a view to, inter alia,
induce and threaten such a person to make statement or confession. In fact
Section 330
IPC makes the act of causing hurt, aimed at extorting confession,
an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may be extended
to seven years. In view of such statutory prohibition, it cannot be argued that
the acts complained of, in the present case, are acts done 'by the accused-
petitioner under the colour of his duty or authority. There is no legitimate and
perceptible connection between the acts, which the accused-petitioner has
allegedly done, and the duties and obligations cast upon him by law. When
the law has prohibited an officer from doing what he has done, he cannot be
heard to say that what he had done was in exercise of his duties or even
purported exercise of his duties. It is no part of a duty of a Police Officer to
beat a person at the Police Station to extort confession from him nor is it a
part of the duty of a Police Officer to confine a person at the Police Station
without having arrested him, for in the case at hand, the complaint discloses
that the complainant was allegedly taken into custody as early as on 15. 07.
1994, but was produced before the chief Judicial Magistrate as late as on 19.
07. 1994 and that too, when a report was called for, in this regard, by the
Chief Judicial Magistrate on the basis of a complaint made by the complaint's
brother-in-law to the effect that the complainant and the said thelawalla had
been kept detained illegally and were being tortured at the said Police
Station."
Amitava Sinha
(supra).
"66. As discussed above, in the present case, it has been clearly alleged, in
the complaint, that the petitioner, besides assaulting the complainant in
custody, poured petrol into his private parts. The above discussed medical
reports support the said allegations of torture in custody. Hence, the said
alleged acts have nothing to do with official duty. Such inhuman act cannot
be remotely connected with official duty. Therefore, the protection under
Section 197
Cr.P.C. is not applicable in the present case.
Page No.# 33/59
69. In view of what has been discussed above and findings regarding
             existence of a prima-facie case under
Sections 325
and
331
IPC involving
             custodial torture, I don t find it to be a fit case for quashing the proceeding in
             exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. Hence, I find no merit in this
             petition."
40.   The case of
Binod Kumar Singh
(supra) has been relied upon again to reiterate the
requirement of being in official duty. The following has been stated
in that case
:
"14. On behalf of the State it has been contended that the allegations
             levelled against the petitioner in the instant case had nothing to do with his
             official act or purported discharge of his official act. It was not a part of his
             duty to visit the shop of the informant on the date of the occurrence in the
             guise of the Magistrate in charge of patrolling party and it was never his duty
             to extort a sum of Rs. 5,000/- from the informant by representing that he
             had a warrant of arrest against the son of the informant. Learned counsel has
             further contended that there was no warrant of arrest against the son of the
             informant and it was a novel method adopted by the petitioner for extorting
             money from innocent persons. Learned State counsel has further contended
             that the petitioner had not only made attempt to extort money but also
             ordered the Havildar and the constables to put the son of the informant into
             the jeep, which was protested and thereafter the petitioner ordered for firing.
             According to the learned State Counsel there was no reasonable connection
             between the acts alleged and the official duty of the petitioner.
It was never a part of his duty to do criminal act and kill innocent persons.
             According to him due to illegal order of the petitioner, firing was resorted to
             as a result of which life of two innocent persons have been lost. He has
             further contended that the written report alleged to have been filed by the
             petitioner is his defence and it cannot be accepted before the trial. No
                                                                        Page No.# 34/59

information was given to the officer-in-charge of Nawadih police station nor
any station diary entry was made about the apprehension of the breach of
peace in village Tarnari. The petitioner after the alleged occurrence had tried
to cover his mischief by giving it a colour of discharge of his official duty in
which he has miserably failed. He has further contended that it is not that
every offence committed by a public servant which required sanction for
prosecution under S. 197(1) of the Code nor even every act done by him
while he was actually engaged in the performance of his official duties.
According to him the acts complained must have direct link with his official
duties then only he is entitled to protection under S. 197(1) of the Code. In
support of this contention learned State Counsel has referred to a decision in
the case of Prabhakar V. Sinari v. Shanker Anant Verlekar. reported in AIR
1969 SC 686 : ( 1969 Cri LJ 10571. He has further contended that it was not
a case for discharge under S. 227 of the Code as sufficient materials had
been collected in course of investigation against the petitioner and thereafter
charge-sheet was submitted. According to him the Sessions Judge has rightly
rejected the prayer for discharge.
16. It is further to be noted that the petitioner after filing the written report
to the officer-in-charge did not even care to know as to what action was
taken on his application. He had not clearly stated in the said written report
that he ordered for firing. There is nothing on the record to show that he
brought this matter to the knowledge of the higher authorities. The attitude
of the State in the instant case also indicates that the acts done by the
petitioner were not in discharge of his official duties. It is never the spirit of
S. 197(1) of the Code to protect every offence committed by a public servant
while he was actually engaged in the performance of his official duties. The
acts concerned must have direct connection with his official duties so that, if
questioned, it could be claimed to have been done by virtue of official duties
and then only sanction would be necessary."
Page No.# 35/59
41.    The case of
PP Unnikrishnan and Anr.
(supra) has been relied upon to buttress the
same proposition of the pre-requirement to be in discharge of official duties, the relevant
paragraph being para 22, is extracted hereinbelow:
"22. If a police officer dealing with law and order duty uses force against
              unruly persons, either in his own defence or in defence of others and exceeds
              such right it may amount to an offence. But such offence might fall within the
              amplitude of S. 197 of the Code as well as
S. 64(3)
of the K.P. Act. But if a
              police officer assaults a prisoner inside a lock-up he cannot claim such act to
              be connected with the discharge of his authority or exercise of his duty
              unless he establishes that he did such acts in his defence or in defence of
              others or any property. Similarly, if a police officer wrongfully confines a
              person in the lock-up beyond a period of 24 hours without the sanction of a
              Magistrate or an order of a Court it would be an offence for which he cannot
              claim any protection in the normal course, nor can he claim that such act was
              done in exercise of his official duty. A policeman keeping a person in the lock-
              up for more than 24 hours without authority is not merely abusing his duty
              but his act would be quite outside the contours of his duty or authority."
42.   Shri Kamar, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent no. 2 submits that the trial will
bring out everything and since causing of custodial death is not a part of the official duties,
no sanctioned is required. He accordingly sums up his arguments by submitting that neither
on facts nor in law the petitioner has been able to make out any case for interference by this
Court and the present is not a fit case for exercising the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
43.   Shri H Sarma, learned Addl. Public Prosecutor submits that it may be too early in the
day to comment on the respective merits of the rival parties and therefore, the impugned
order dated 01.09.2015 by which cognizance has been taken may not be faulted with. He,
however, submits that whether the legal bar under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C would be
applicable has to be decided on the facts of the case.
Page No.# 36/59
44.    Shri N Dutta, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, in his rejoinder submits that
though a distinction has been sought to be introduced by the respondent no. 2 regarding the
2 expressions 'law & order' and 'public order' qua
Section 197 (3)
of the Cr.P.C., such
distinction will not have much of a relevance in view of the interpretation given by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rizwan Ahmed Javed Shaikh and Ors. vs.
Jammal Patel and Ors.
, reported in (2001) 5 SCC 7. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
as follows:
"4. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that in order to
              claim protection under the notification it is necessary that the accused must
              be a police officer as defined in the
Bombay Police Act, 1951
and must be
              charged with the maintenance of public order at the relevant time. In other
              words, if a police officer is discharging a duty referable to law and order only
              as distinguished from the maintenance of public order he cannot claim
              protection under the notification. In the case at hand the police officers had
              arrested the appellants, kept them in confinement and assaulted them which
              are acts referable at the most to the duty of a police officer related to
              maintenance of law and order but not the maintenance of public order and
              therefore the benefit of the notification is not available to the respondents.
              The learned counsel submitted that the orders of the learned Magistrate as
              also of the High Court deserve to be set aside and the learned Magistrate
              directed to proceed ahead with hearing of the complaint made against the
              accused persons.
9. We find ourselves in agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench
              of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Bhikhaji Vaghaji and therefore, also
              with the view taken by Division Bench of Bombay High Court in the order
              under appeal. The submission made by the learned counsel for the appellants
              confuses the issue as to applicability of notification with the span of
              protective umbrella or the purview or compass of such sub-section (2) of
                                                                                  Page No.# 37/59

             Section 197 of the Code. The person on whom the protection is sought to be
             conferred by the State Government notification is to be determined by
             reading the notification and once it is found that the State Government
             notification applies to the member of the force which the accused is, the
             scope, purview or compass of the protection has to be determined by reading
             sub-section (2) of Section 197 of the Code, i.e., by asking a question whether
             the act alleged to be an offence was done or purports to have been done in
             the discharge of the official duty of the accused. Such official duty need not
             necessarily by one related to the maintenance of public order."
45.   Shri Dutta, the learned Senior Counsel submits that most of the decisions cited by the
respondent no. 2 in fact support the petitioner. So far as the case of
Devinder Singh
(supra)
is concerned, while para 40 was urged by the respondent no. 2, Shri Dutta submits that the
aforesaid paragraph involves factual matrix. However, the general proposition of law is
laid
down in
paragraph 39.6 of the said Judgment which is extracted herein below:
"39.6. Ordinarily, question of sanction should be dealt with at the stage of
             taking cognizance, but if the cognizance is taken erroneously and the same
             comes to the notice of Court at a later stage, finding to that effect is
             permissible and such a plea can be taken first time before appellate Court. It
             may arise at inception itself. There is no requirement that accused must wait
             till charges are framed."
That apart, Shri Dutta also relies upon paragraphs 29 and 31 of the said Judgment which is
quoted herein below:
"29.
In
Sankaran Moitra v. Sadhna Das & Anr.
2006 (4) SCC 584 it
             was considered that sanction under
section 197
Cr.P.C. is a condition
             precedent though the question as to applicability of section 197 may arise not
             necessarily at the inception but even at a subsequent stage. Request to
             postpone the decision on the said question in the instant case, it was held, in
                                                                        Page No.# 38/59

the facts of the case was not accepted. The complaint disclosed that the
deceased was a supporter of a political party beaten to death by the police at
the instance of appellant police officer near a polling booth on an election
day. On the facts it was held that the appellant committed the act in question
during the course of performance of his duty and sanction under section
197(1) was necessary for his prosecution. This Court has observed thus :
"25. The High Court has stated that killing of a person by use of
       excessive force could never be performance of duty. It may be correct
       so far as it goes. But the question is whether that act was done in the
       performance of duty or in purported performance of duty. If it was
       done in performance of duty or purported performance of duty,
       Section 197(1) of the Code cannot be bypassed by reasoning that
       killing a man could never be done in an official capacity and
       consequently Section 197(1) of the Code could not be attracted. Such
       a reasoning would be against the ratio of the decisions of this Court
       referred to earlier. The other reason given by the High Court that if the
       High Court were to interfere on the ground of want of sanction, people
       will lose faith in the judicial process, cannot also be a ground to
       dispense with a statutory requirement or protection. Public trust in the
       institution can be maintained by entertaining causes coming within its
       jurisdiction, by performing the duties entrusted to it diligently, in
       accordance with law and the established procedure and without delay.
       Dispensing with of jurisdictional or statutory requirements which may
       ultimately affect the adjudication itself, will itself result in people losing
       faith in the system. So, the reason in that behalf given by the High
       Court cannot be sufficient to enable it to get over the jurisdictional
       requirement of a sanction under
Section 197(1)
of the Code of
       Criminal Procedure. We are therefore satisfied that the High Court was
       in error in holding that sanction under Section 197(1) was not needed
       in this case. We hold that such sanction was necessary and for want of
                                                                       Page No.# 39/59

         sanction the prosecution must be quashed at this stage. It is not for us
         now to answer the submission of learned counsel for the complainant
         that this is an eminently fit case for grant of such sanction."
31. Learned counsel for appellants has also relied upon the decision of this
Court in
General Officer Commanding, Rashtriya Rifles v. Central
Bureau of Investigation & Anr.
2012 (6) SCC 228 in which this Court
has observed that it is for the competent authority to decide the question of
sanction whether it is necessary or not and not by the court as sanction has
to be issued only on the basis of sound objective assessment and not
otherwise. Prior sanction is a condition precedent. This Court has laid down
thus :
"82. Thus, in view of the above, the law on the issue of sanction can
         be summarised to the effect that the question of sanction is of
         paramount importance for protecting a public servant who has acted in
         good faith while performing his duty. In order that the public servant
         may not be unnecessarily harassed on a complaint of an unscrupulous
         person, it is obligatory on the part of the executive authority to protect
         him. However, there must be a discernible connection between the act
         complained of and the powers and duties of the public servant. The
         act complained of may fall within the description of the action
         purported to have been done in performing the official duty. Therefore,
         if the alleged act or omission of the public servant can be shown to
         have a reasonable connection, interrelationship or is inseparably
         connected with discharge of his duty, he becomes entitled for
         protection of sanction.
83. If the law requires sanction, and the court proceeds against a
         public servant without sanction, the public servant has a right to raise
         the issue of jurisdiction as the entire action may be rendered void ab
                                                                                    Page No.# 40/59

                    initio for want of sanction. Sanction can be obtained even during the
                    course of trial depending upon the facts of an individual case and
                    particularly at what stage of proceedings, requirement of sanction has
                    surfaced. The question as to whether the act complained of, is done in
                    performance of duty or in purported performance of duty, is to be
                    determined by the competent authority and not by the court. The
                    legislature has conferred "absolute power" on the statutory authority
                    to accord sanction or withhold the same and the court has no role in
                    this subject. In such a situation the court would not proceed without
                    sanction of the competent statutory authority.""
46.   So far as the case of PK Pradhan (supra) is concerned, Shri Dutta, submits that in
para 15 of the said Judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has clearly laid down that the
question of requirement of sanction can be raised any time after the cognizance. For ready
reference, paragraph 15 is extracted herein below:
"15. Thus, from a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions, it will be clear that
             for claiming protection under Section 197 of the Code, it has to be shown by
             the accused that there is reasonable connection between the act complained
             of and the discharge of official duty. An official act can be performed in the
             discharge of official duty as well as in dereliction of it. For invoking protection
             under Section 197 of the Code, the acts of the accused complained of must
             be such that the same cannot be separated from the discharge of official
             duty, but if there was no reasonable connection between them and the
             performance of those duties, the official status furnishes only the occasion or
             opportunity for the acts, then no sanction would be required. If the case as
             put forward by the prosecution fails or the defence establishes that the act
             purported to be done is in discharge of duty, the proceedings will have to be
             dropped. It is well settled that question of sanction under Section 197 of the
             Code can be raised any time after the cognizance; may be immediately after
                                                                                   Page No.# 41/59

              cognizance or framing of charge or even at the time of conclusion of trial and
              after conviction as well. But there may be certain cases where it may not be
              possible to decide the question effectively without giving opportunity to the
              defence to establish that what he did was in discharge of official duty. In
              order to come to the conclusion whether claim of the accused, that the act
              that he did was in course of the performance of his duty was reasonable one
              and neither pretended nor fanciful, can be examined during the course of
              trial by giving opportunity to the defence to establish it. In such an
              eventuality, the question of sanction should be left open to be decided in the
              main Judgment which may be delivered upon conclusion of the trial ."
47.    By drawing the attention of this Court to
Section 46
of the Cr.P.C, law empowers the
police officer to make use all means necessary to affect the arrest when a person forcefully
resist. For ready reference,
Section 46 (2)
of the Cr.P.C. is extracted herein below:
"46 (2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or
              attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all
              means necessary to effect the arrest."
48.    The mechanical approach of the learned Magistrate has also been severely criticized
inasmuch as the impugned order dated 01.09.2015 by which cognizance has been taken does
not even reflect that there was any consideration on the aspect of the requirement of
sanction under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. as admittedly the accused (the present petitioner) is
a Government servant. The gravity of the situation in which the dead body of the driver of
the Ford Figo vehicle was also found nearby requiring extra ordinary alertness and swift
action appears to have been wholly overlooked by the learned Magistrate.
49.    Shri Dutta has also relied upon a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
Pepsi Foods Limited vs. Special Judicial Magistrate
reported in (1998) 5 SCC 749. In
the said case the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that merely because an accused can take
                                                                                  Page No.# 42/59

recourse to the provision of discharge under
Section 245
of the Cr.P.C., the extra ordinary
powers of Section 482 would still be available. It was also held that criminal law cannot be set
into motion as a matter of course. For ready reference, the relevant extracts are quoted
herein below:
"28. Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter. Criminal
             law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course. It is not that the
             complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the
             complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. The order of the
             Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind
             to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine
             the nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral
             and documentary in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the
             complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused. It is not that
             the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary
             evidence before summoning of the accused. Magistrate has to carefully
             scrutinize the evidence brought on record and may even himself put
             questions to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers to find out
             the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any
             offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused.
29. No doubt the Magistrate can discharge the accused at any stage of the
             trial if he considers the charge to be groundless, but that does not mean that
             the accused cannot approach the High Court under S. 482 of the Code or
Art.
             227
of the Constitution to have the proceeding quashed against him when
             the complaint does not make out any case against him and still he must
             undergo the agony of a criminal trial. It was submitted before us on behalf of
             the State that in case we find that the High Court failed to exercise its
             jurisdiction the matter should be remanded back to it to consider if the
             complaint and the evidence on record did not make out any case against the
                                                                      Page No.# 43/59

appellants. If, however, we refer to the impugned judgment of the High Court
it has come to the conclusion, though without referring to any material on
record, that "in the present case it cannot be said at this stage that the
allegations in the complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the
basis of which no prudent man can ever reach a just conclusion that there
exists no sufficient ground for proceedings against the accused." We do not
think that the High Court was correct in coming to such a conclusion and in
coming to that it has also foreclosed the matter for the Magistrate as well, as
the Magistrate will not give any different conclusion on an application filed
under S. 245 of the Code. The High Court says that the appellants could very
well appear before the Court and move an application under S. 245(2) of the
Code and that the Magistrate could discharge them if he found the charge to
be groundless and at the same time it has itself returned the finding that
there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the appellants. If we now
refer to the facts of the case before us it is clear to us that not only that
allegation against the appellants make out any case for an offence under
S. 7
of the Act and also that there is no basis for the complainant to make such
allegations. The allegations in the complaint merely show that the appellants
have given their brand name to "Residency Foods and Beverages Ltd." for
bottling the beverage "Lehar Pepsi." The complaint does not show what is the
role of the appellants in the manufacture of the beverage which is said to be
adulterated. The only allegation is that the appellants are the manufacturer
of bottle. There is no averment as to how the complainant could say so and
also if the appellants manufactured the alleged bottle or its contents. His sole
information is from A. K. Jain who is impleaded as accused No. 3. The
preliminary evidence on which the 1st respondent relied in issuing summon
to the appellants also does not show as to how it could be said that the
appellants are manufacturers of either the bottle or the beverage or both.
There is another aspect of the matter. The Central Government in the
exercise of their powers under
S. 3
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955
made the Fruit Products Order, 1955 (for short, the "Fruit Order"). It is not
                                                                                    Page No.# 44/59

             disputed that the beverage in the question is a "fruit product" within the
             meaning of Cl. (2)(b) of the Fruit Order and that for the manufacture thereof
             certain licence is required. The Fruit Order defines the manufacturer and also
             sets out as to what the manufacturer is required to do in regard to the
             packaging, marking and labelling of containers of fruit products. One of such
             requirement is that when a bottle is used in packing any fruit products, it
             shall be so sealed that it cannot be opened without destroying the licence
             number and the special identification mark of the manufacturer to be
             displayed on the top or neck of the bottle.
The licence number of
             manufacturer shall also be exhibited prominently on the side label on such
             bottle (Clause (8)(1)(b)). Admittedly, the name of the first appellant is not
             mentioned as a manufacturer on the top cap of the bottle. It is not necessary
             to refer in detail to other requirements of the Fruit Order and the
             consequences of infringement of the order and to the penalty to which the
             manufacturer would be exposed under the provisions of the
Essential
             Commodities Act, 1955
. We may, however, note that in
Hamdard Dawakhana
             (WAKF), Delhi v. Union of India
, AIR 1965 SC 1167 : (1965) 2 SCR 192, an
             argument was raised that the Fruit Order was invalid because its provision
             indicated that it was an order which could have been appropriately issued
             under the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
. This Court negatived
             this plea and said that the Fruit Order was validly issued under the
Essential
             Commodities Act
. What we find in the present case is that there was nothing
             on record to show if the appellants held the licence for the manufacture of
             the offending beverage and if, as noted above, the first appellant was the
             manufacturer thereof."
50.    Shri Dutta has also relied upon the case of
Sankaran Moitro Vs. Sadhna Das
,
reported in (2006) 4 SCC 548. To appreciate the law laid down, the learned Senior Counsel
has also referred to the facts of the case which are narrated in paragraph 2 of the judgment.
The accused
in that case
had also taken up the ground of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C which was
rejected by the Hon'ble Calcutta High Court in the following terms:
Page No.# 45/59



"6. The High Court by order dated 11.7.2003 dismissed the application. It
overruled the contention of the accused based on
Section 197
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure thus:
"In its considered view
Section 197
Cr.P.C. has got no manner of
       application in the present case. Under Section 197 Cr. P.C. sanction is
       required only if the public servant was, at the time of commission of
       offence, 'employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a
       State' and he was 'not removable from his office save by or with the
       sanction of the Government.' The bar under
Section 197
Cr.P.C. cannot
       be raised by a public servant if he is removable by some authority
       without the sanction of the Government.
Committing an offence can never be a part of an official duty. Where
       there is no necessary connection between the act and the
       performance of the duties of a public servant,
section 197
Cr.P.C. will
       not be attracted. Beating a person to death by a police officer cannot
       be regarded as having been committed by a public servant within the
       scope of his official duties."
7. After referring to the some of the decisions cited, the Court further stated:
"Committing of an offence of murder can never be a part of an official
       duty. Where there is no necessary connection between the act and the
       performance of the duties of a public servant, Section 197 of the Code
       will not be attracted. Merciless beating by a police officer causing
       death of a person can never be said to be an act in discharge of his
       official duty."
The Court stated that since from the statement of the doctor who conducted
the post-mortem examination it appeared that the victim had suffered as
many as six serious injuries and in the opinion of the doctor, the death was
                                                                                    Page No.# 46/59

             due to the injuries to the head inflicted on the deceased, it was justified in
             the view it had taken. The learned Judge wound up by stating that it was not
             a fit case for interference by the High Court and if the Court interferes with
             the proceedings on any of the grounds urged by the accused, people will lose
             their confidence in the administration of justice. The High Court directed the
             Magistrate to proceed with the matter with utmost expedition and in
             accordance with law."
In appeal, the Hon'ble Supreme Court reversed the finding of the Hon'ble Calcutta High
Court by holding as follows:
"23. Coming to the facts of this case, the question is whether the appellant
             was acting in his official capacity while the alleged offence was committed or
             was performing a duty in his capacity as a police officer which led to the
             offence complained of. That it was the day of election to the State Assembly,
             that the appellant was in uniform; that the appellant traveled in an official
             jeep to the spot, near a polling booth and the offence was committed while
             he was on the spot, may not by themselves attract Section 197 (1) of the
             Code. But, as can be seen from the facts disclosed in the counter affidavit
             filed on behalf of the State based on the entries in the General Diary of the
             Phoolbagan Police Station, it emerges that on the election day information
             was received in the Police Station at 1400 hours of some disturbance at a
             polling booth, that it took a violent turn and clashes between the supporters
             of two political parties was imminent. It was then that the appellant reached
             the site of the incident in his official vehicle. It is seen that a case had been
             registered on the basis of the incidents that took place and a report in this
             behalf had also been sent to the superiors by the Station House Officer. It is
             also seen and it is supported by the witnesses examined by the Chief Judicial
             Magistrate while taking cognizance of the offence that the appellant on
             reaching the spot had a discussion with the Officer-in-charge who was
             stationed at the spot and thereafter a lathi charge took place or there was an
                                                                     Page No.# 47/59

attack on the husband of the complainant and he met with his death.
Obviously, it was part of the duty of the appellant to prevent any breach of
law and maintain order on the polling day or to prevent the blocking of voters
or prevent what has come to be known as booth capturing. It therefore
emerges that the act was done while the officer was performing his duty.
That the incident took place near a polling booth on an election day has also
to be taken note of. The complainant no doubt has a case that it was a case
of the deceased being picked and chosen for illtreatment and he was beaten
up by a police constable at the instance of the appellant and the Officer-in-
charge of the Phoolbagan Police Station and at their behest. If that complaint
were true it will certainly make the action, an offence, leading to further
consequences. It is also true as pointed out by the learned counsel for the
complainant that the entries in the General Diary remain to be proved. But
still, it would be an offence committed during the course of the performance
of his duty by the appellant and it would attract Section 197 of the Code.
Going by the principle, stated by the Constitution Bench in Matajog Dobey
(supra), it has to be held that a sanction under
Section 197 (1)
of the Code
of Criminal Procedure is necessary in this case.
24. We may in this context notice the decision in
Rizwan Ahmed Javed Shaikh
& Ors. v. Jammal Patel & Ors.
[(2001) 5 SCC 7). This Court was dealing with
officers who were brought within the protective umbrella of Section 197 of
the Code by a notification issued under Section 197(3) thereof. Cognizance
had been taken of an offence under
Sections 220
and
342
of the Indian Penal
Code and
Sections 147
and
148
of the Bombay Police Act. The gravamen of
the charge was the failure on the part of the accused police officers to
produce the complainants before a magistrate within 24 hrs. of their arrest
for alleged offences under the
Indian Penal Code
. The police officers having
claimed the protection of Section 197(1) of the Code, this Court after
referring to the earlier decisions held"
Page No.# 48/59

                    "The real test to be applied to attract the applicability of Section
                    197(3) is whether the act which is done by a public officer and is
                    alleged to constitute an offence was done by the public officer whilst
                    acting in his official capacity though what he did was neither his duty
                    nor his right to do as such public officer. The act complained of may be
                    in exercise of the duty or in the absence of such duty or in dereliction
                    of the duty, if the act complained of is done while acting as a public
                    officer and in the course of the same transaction in which the official
                    duty was performed or purported to be performed, the public officer
                    would be protected."
Going by the above test it has to be held that Section 197(1) of the Code is
             attracted to this case."
51.   Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has also cited the case of Matajog Dobey
Vs. HC Hari, reported in AIR 1956 SC 44. A Constitutional Bench while dealing with the
vires of
Section 197
of the CrPC held as follows:
"15. The minor contentions may be disposed of at the outset. Even if there was
             anything sound and substantial in the constitutional point about the 'vires of
S.
             5 (1)
of the Act, we declined to go into it as it was not raised before the High
             Court or in the grounds of the petition for special leave to appeal.
Article 14
does not render S. 197, Criminal P. C. 'ultra vires' as the discrimination is based
             upon a rational classification.
Public servants have to be protected from harassment in the discharge of
             official duties while ordinary citizens not so engaged do not require this
             safeguard. It was argued that S. 197, Criminal P. C., vested an absolutely
             arbitrary power in the government to grant or withhold sanction at their sweet
             will and pleasure, and the Legislature did not lay down or even indicate any
             guiding principles to control the exercise of the discretion.
Page No.# 49/59



             There is no question of any discrimination between one person and another in
             the matter of taking proceedings against a public servant for an act done or
             purporting to be done by the public servant in the discharge of his official
             duties. No one can take such proceedings without such sanction. It the
             government gives sanction against one public servant but declines to do so
             against another, then the government servant against whom sanction is given
             may possible complain of discrimination. But the petitioners who are
             complainants cannot be heard to say so for there is no discrimination as against
             any complainant.
It has to be borne in mind that a discretionary power is not necessarily a
             discriminatory power and that abuse of power is not to be easily assumed
             where the discretion is vested in the government and not in a minor official.
             Further, we are not now concerned with any such question. We have merely to
             see whether the Court could take cognizance of the case without pervious
             sanction and for this purpose the Court has to find out if the act complained
             against was committed by the accused while acting or purporting to act in the
             discharge of official duty. Once this is settled, the case proceeds or is thrown
             out.
Whether sanction is to be accorded or not is a matter for the government to
             consider. The absolute power to accord or withhold sanction and foreign to the
             duty cast one the Court, which is the ascertainment of the true nature of the
             act."
52.   The aforesaid decision of the Constitutional Bench in the case of Matajog Dobey
(supra) has been consistently followed.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
General
Officer Commanding, Rashtriya Rifles Vs. CBI
, reported in (2012) 6 SCC 228 has laid
down as follows:
Page No.# 50/59



              "50.
In
Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari
, AIR 1956 SC 44, the Constitution Bench of
              this Court held that requirement of sanction may arise at any stage of the
              proceedings as the complaint may not disclose all the facts to decide the
              question of immunity, but facts subsequently coming either to notice of the
              police or in judicial inquiry or even in the course of prosecution evidence may
              establish the necessity for sanction. The necessity for sanction may surface
              during the course of trial and it would be open to the accused to place the
              material on record for showing what his duty was and also the acts complained
              of were so inter-related or inseparably connected with his official duty so as to
              attract the protection accorded by law. The court further observed that
              difference between "acting or purporting to act" in the discharge of his official
              duty is merely of a language and not of substance."
53.    Even our High Court in a recent decision dated 17.06.2020 rendered in the case of
Bhabesh Chandra Biswas Vs. State of Assam
, reported in (2021) 1 GLT 564 has held
as follows:
"12. At this stage, it is apt to refer to some of the decisions rendered in respect
              of Section197 of the Code. A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the
              case of
Matajog Dobey vs. H.C. Bhari
, reported in AIR 1956 SC 44, had
              considered the scope and ambit of
Section197
, Cr.P.C. The Constitution Bench
              has observed that public servants have to be protected from harassment in the
              discharge of official duties while ordinary citizens not so engaged do not require
              this safeguard. The arguments that firstly,
Section 197
, Cr.P.C has vested an
              absolutely arbitrary power in the Government to grant or withhold sanction at
              their sweet will and pleasure, and secondly, the legislature has not laid down or
              even indicated any guiding principles to control the exercise of discretion, have
              been repelled. It has been observed that there is no question of any
              discrimination between one person and another in the matter of taking
              proceeding against a public servant for an act done or purporting to be done by
                                                                                 Page No.# 51/59

             the public servant in the discharge of his official duties. No one can take such
             proceedings without such sanction. It is also observed that Section 197 of the
             Code is not violative of the fundamental rights of a citizen conferred under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. The Constitution Bench has further
             observed as under :
"17.Slightly differing tests have been
laid down in
the decided cases to
                    ascertain the scope and the meaning of the relevant words occurring in
                    Section 197 of the Code; 'any offence alleged to have been committed
                    by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
                    duty'. But the difference is only in language and not in substance. The
                    offence alleged to have been committed must have something to do, or
                    must be related in some manner, with the discharge of official duty. No
                    question of sanction can arise under Section197, unless the act
                    complained of is an offence; the only point to determine is whether it
                    was committed in the discharge of official duty. There must be a
                    reasonable connection between the act and the official duty. It does not
                    matter even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary for the
                    discharge of the duty, as this question will arise only at a later stage
                    when the trial proceeds on the merits. What we must find out is whether
                    the act and the official duty are so interrelated that one can postulate
                    reasonably that it was done by the accused in the performance of the
                    official duty, though possibly in excess of the needs and requirements of
                    the situation.""
54.   The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner accordingly summed up his arguments by
contending that no case for initiation of a trial is made out by the side of the complainant and
therefore, no cognizance could have been taken on the basis of the existing materials before
the Court below. In any case, there being no dispute regarding the status of the petitioner to
be a police officer and the fact that the offence was committed while discharging his official
                                                                                Page No.# 52/59

duties, the requirement of
Section 197
Cr.P.C would come into operation and in absence of
sanction to be taken from the competent authority, no cognizance otherwise would have also
been taken.
55    The rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties have been duly considered
and the records of the case have been carefully examined.
56.   The issue which calls for determination in the instant case can be divided into two folds
-
i) Whether the materials before the learned CJM, Barpeta justifies
                    passing of the order dated 01.09.2015 by which cognizance has taken
                    under
Section 302
of the IPC in CR Case No.528/2012.
ii) Whether the statutory embargo laid down in
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C
                    would come into play in the present case.
57.    With a view to persuade this Court to come to a finding that the materials before the
learned Magistrate, even unrebutted, would not make out a prima facie case against the
petitioner, Shri Dutta, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has strenuously taken this
Court to each and every statement of the five numbers of complaint witnesses, including the
complainant himself. It is submitted that the inconsistencies appearing in the respective
versions of the five CWs, including the version in the complaint would make it clear that the
allegations are absolutely concocted, malicious and has been lodged with a view to deter a
public servant from discharging his duties sincerely. The inordinate delay of almost six months
in lodging a complaint involving an offence, as serious as murder, under
Section 302
of the
IPC, would be a relevant factor to examine the veracity of the case projected by the
complainant.
58.    This Court has carefully gone through the materials, including the complaint and the
                                                                                 Page No.# 53/59

statements of the five CWs. This Court is also conscious of the fact that the complaint has
been lodged after an inordinate delay of about six months and the so called explanation in
the NB cannot be construed to be an explanation at all. It is true that for an offence involving
Section 302
of the IPC, no limitation, as such, is prescribed under
Section 468
of the Cr.P.C,
the inordinate delay, that too, without any reasonable explanation raises serious doubt on the
veracity of the case projected by the complainant. Further, cognizance has been taken by the
impugned order dated 01.09.2015 on the basis of the complaint and the statements of five
nos. of CWs where inconsistencies and discrepancies are apparent. Moreover, the said
statements are unrebutted statements which have not been baptised by the fire of cross-
examination. Having said that, this Court would not like to interfere with the impugned order
dated 01.09.2015 by holding the instant case to fall within the exception carved out in the
case of
Bhajan Lal
(supra) that the materials available, even unrebutted, do not make out a
case. Since the case is at the nascent stage, this Court would like to give the benefit of doubt
to the complainant as it cannot be said that there were no materials whatsoever, to come to a
prima facie finding to take cognizance.
Further, this Court has noted that since the present is
a Sessions Triable Case, the procedures laid down in
Section 202
of the Cr.P.C. have been
duly followed.
59.    The second point of determination is the aspect of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. Though in
common parlance the expression 'bar' is used, there is no absolute bar as such for
prosecution of Judges and public servants.
Section 197
Cr.P.C. only lays down a special
procedure to be adopted for such prosecution. The procedure, as laid down is to obtain a
previous sanction of the competent authority. Such requirement in law is with the objective to
give certain safeguards to such category of persons so that they can discharge their official
duties sincerely and without any fear.
60.    The petitioner in the instant case being a police officer, the relevant provisions are
Section 197(2)
and
197(3)
of the Cr.P.C. For ready reference, the aforesaid provisions are
extracted herein below:
Page No.# 54/59

           "197..........
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been
                committed by any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or
                purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with the previous
                sanction of the Central Government.
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
                sub- section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the
                Forces charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified
                therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that
                sub- section will apply as if for the expression" Central Government" occurring
                therein, the expression" State Government" were substituted ."
61.    There is no dispute to the fact that vide notification dated 29.05.1990 issued by the
Home Department of the State of Assam, all members of the Assam Police Force have been
brought within the ambit of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. and the fact that the said notification is
still in force was reiterated by a communication dated 12.12.2018 issued to the High Court in
the course of the present proceeding. Though the notification dated 29.05.2019 states that
deployment has to be for maintenance law and order, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
of
Rizwan Ahmed
(supra) has clarified that discharge of duties for maintenance of law and
order and for public order would not make any difference. In the said case of Rizwan, a pari
materia notification dated 02.06.1979 of the Home Department of the State of Maharashtra
was the subject matter of interpretation which also contain the expression " charged with the
maintenance of public order ". As has been observed above, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had
categorically laid down that "such official duties did not necessarily be one related to the
maintenance of public order". Therefore, this Court is left with no other option but to hold
that the notification dated 29.05.1990 of the Home Department would be applicable in the
instant case.
62.    What is now required to be seen is whether the offence alleged to have been
                                                                                 Page No.# 55/59

committed was in discharge of official duties. The offence alleged is murder of the deceased
Jahangir while he was in custody. The incident had occurred while the said Jahangir was
taken to the spot in the mid of the night to locate the body of the driver of the Ford Figo
vehicle who was killed by the said Jahangir and the other accomplices. It was under the
circumstances when the deceased tried to flee by snatching the pistol from the petitioner that
he was shot by another member of the police team. Discovery of the dead body of the driver
of the Ford Figo vehicle also gives credence to the case projected by the petitioner.
63.    Though Shri Kamar, the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent no. 2 may be right
in pointing out that the protection under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. is not an absolute one
unlike
Section 19(1)
of the Prevention of the Corruption Act, 1988, what is required to be
seen is that whether the offence alleged to have been committed was in discharge or
purported discharge of his official duties. For illustration, there can be many offences which
are not connected with discharge of official duties like those under
Sections 376
,
498(A)
,
500
IPC etc. Even in a given case, offence under
Section 300
of the IPC may not be in connection
with discharge of official duties when a police officer may be accused of causing death to a
person which is not at all in connection with his duties. However, in the instant case, it would
be difficult for this Court to come to a finding that the offence alleged to have been
committed was not done while in discharge of official duties. Admittedly, the incident had
occurred when a team of police personnel headed by the petitioner had gone out to the place
of occurrence led by the deceased Jahangir to find out the dead body of the driver of the
Ford Figo vehicle and as a matter of fact the body was indeed found.
64.    Though Shri Kamar, the learned Senior Counsel had forcefully argued that discharging
of duties by a police officer does not authorise him to kill a person, this Court, though on
principle agrees to such proposition, it is only with a purpose to deal with situation like the
present one that
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. was incorporated. At the same time, as has been
pointed out, one cannot be oblivious of the fact that the Code authorises a police officer or
other person to use all means necessary to affect the arrest when a person forcefully resist or
attempts to evade the arrest.
Page No.# 56/59
65.    The protective umbrella given under Section 197 of the Code is to protect responsible
public servants against institution of vexatious criminal proceedings for alleged offences
committed by them in acting or purported to act as public servant. The said protection, as
has been observed above is to give a sense of security to discharge their function without any
fear or favour. The legislative intent for such enactment is to afford adequate protection to
the public servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted for actions taken as part of official
duties without reasonable cause. As the statute itself prescribes, certain limits are attached to
such protection and only when the allegation is in connection with discharge of official duties
and not merely a cloak for doing objectionable acts. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has gone to
the extent of holding that if in doing the official duty, the public servant acted in excess of its
duty but there is a reasonable connection between the act and the performance of the official
duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground to deprive the public servant of the protection.
The Section however does not extend its protective cover to each and every act or omission
done by the public servant in service but restricts its scope of operation to only those acts or
omission done by the said public servant in discharge or purported discharge of official duties.
66.    In the opinion of this Court, gravity or seriousness of the offence has got no manner
of connection with the law requiring procurement of sanction under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C.
The only requirement is that the offence alleged has to be committed in discharge or
purported discharge of official duties by a public servant who falls within the definition of the
said Section.
67.    The Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Matajog Dobey
having upheld the vires of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C., the only duty left to this Court is to see
whether a case for applying the rigors of the said Section are duly complied with or not. As
stated above, the status of the petitioner as a police officer is not disputed. There is also no
dispute regarding the notification dated 29.05.1990 issued by the Home Department,
Government of Assam in accordance with
Section 197(3)
of the Cr.P.C. to bring in a police
officer within its ambit. The applicability of the said notification regarding in charge of
                                                                                         Page No.# 57/59

maintenance of public order or maintenance of law and order would not be relevant as the
thin distinction has been done away with by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rizwan Ahmed
(supra). This Court has already held above that the offence alleged was
committed in discharge of official duties when the petitioner along with its team were led to
the place of occurrence by the deceased and when the deceased had tried to flee by
snatching the pistol, he was shot.
Whether, the said commission constitutes an offence is for
the prosecution to establish but in accordance with the law and by overcoming the hurdle of
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C. At this juncture, it would be beneficial to refer to the case of
Nazir
Ahmed vs. King Emperor
, reported in AIR 1936 PC 253 (II) wherein it has been laid
down when a particular procedure is prescribed by the statute, that procedure must be
followed and all other modes are necessarily forbidden. For ready reference, the relevant part
is extracted herein below:
"The rule which applies is a different and not less well recognized rule--
               namely, that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way the
               thing must be done in that way or not at all. Other methods of performance
               are necessarily forbidden."
68.   One may also gainfully refer to a recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated
18.06.2020 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 458 of 2020 (
D. Devaraja VS. Owais Sabeer Hussain
),
which is on a similar situation. For ready reference, the relevant paragraphs of
the said judgment
are
extracted hereinbelow:
"73. To decide whether sanction is necessary, the test is whether the act is
               totally unconnected with official duty or whether there is a reasonable
               connection with the official duty. In the case of an act of a 33 policeman or
               any other public servant unconnected with the official duty there can be no
               question of sanction. However, if the act alleged against a policeman is
               reasonably connected with discharge of his official duty, it does not matter if
               the policeman has exceeded the scope of his powers and/or acted beyond
               the four corners of law.
Page No.# 58/59
74. If the act alleged in a complaint purported to be filed against the
             policeman is reasonably connected to discharge of some official duty,
             cognizance thereof cannot be taken unless requisite sanction of the
             appropriate government is obtained under
Section 197
of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure and/or
Section 170
of the Karnataka Police Act .
             ...
...
...
77. It is well settled that an application under
Section 482
of the Criminal
             Procedure Code is maintainable to quash proceedings which are ex facie bad
             for want of sanction, frivolous or in abuse of process of court. If, on the face
             of the complaint, the act alleged appears to have a reasonable relationship
             with official duty, where the criminal proceeding is apparently prompted by
             mala fides and instituted with ulterior motive, power under
Section 482
of the
             Criminal Procedure Code would have to be exercised to quash the
             proceedings, to prevent abuse of process of court.
78. There is also no reason to suppose that sanction will be withheld in case
             of prosecution, where there is substance in a complaint and in any case if, in
             such a case, sanction is refused, the aggrieved complainant can take
             recourse to law. At the cost of repetition it is reiterated that the records of
             the instant case clearly reveal that the complainant alleged of police excesses
             while the respondent was in custody, in the course of investigation in
             connection with Crime No.12/2012. Patently the complaint pertains to an act
             under colour of duty. "
69.    In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, while this Court would be reluctant
to interfere with the impugned order dated 01.09.2015 on the ground of lack of materials to
come to a prima facie satisfaction to take cognizance, the same is however interfered with on
the second ground, namely, failure to obtain sanction under
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C.
Accordingly the criminal proceeding in CR Case No. 528 / 2012 under
Section 302
IPC before
                                                                               Page No.# 59/59

the Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Barpeta and the impugned order dated 01.09.2015 passed
in the said proceedings by which cognizance has been taken are set aside and quashed. It is
however needless to mention that since the interference is on the ground of lack of prior
sanction, the complainant would be at liberty to apply for such sanction from the competent
authority and thereafter take subsequent steps in accordance with law.
70.   The present petition stands accordingly allowed to the extent indicated above.
JUDGE

Comparing Assistant
