Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 7 of 2020
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/21243834/

[Cites
34
, Cited by
0
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Amandeep Kaur vs Vikram Anantrai Doshi on 20 September, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1




           IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AT SHIMLA

                       ON THE 20thDAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2021

                                   BEFORE




                                                              .

                      HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANOOP CHITKARA

         CRIMINAL MISC. PETITION (MAIN) U/S 482
CrPC
No. 447 of 2021.





          Between:-

          AMANDEEP KAUR, WIFE OF
          SHRI BALJEET MARWAHA,
          RESIDENT OF HOUSE NO.259,





          KASHMIRI MOHALLA, SABATHU,
          TEHSIL AND DISTRICT SOLAN,
          H.P.

                                                               ....PETITIONER

          (BY SH. DALIP K. SHARMA, ADVOCATE)

          AND

    1.    STATE OF H.P.
    2.    BALJEET MARWAHA, SON OF
          SHRI ASHOK MARWAHA,


          RESIDENT OF HOUSE NO.259,
          KASHMIRI MOHALLA,
          SABATHU, TEHSIL AND
          DISTRICT SOLAN, H.P.




    3.    IQBAL MARWAH, WIFE OF
          SHRI ASHOK MARWAHA,





          RESIDENT OF HOUSE NO.259,
          KASHMIRI MOHALLA,
          SABATHU, TEHSIL AND
          DISTRICT SOLAN, H.P.





                                                            ....RESPONDENTS
          (SHRI NAND LAL THAKUR,
          ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL,
          WITH SHRI KUNAL THAKUR,
          DEPUTY ADVOCATE GENERAL
          AND SHRI SUNNY DHATWALIA,
          ASSISTANT ADVOCATE GENERAL,
          FOR R-1
          Sh. N.K. BHALLA, ADVOCATE, FOR
          R-2 & R-3.




                                             ::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
                                                                                            2




          RESERVED ON :17.09.2021
          DECIDED ON :20.09.2021
    __________________________________________________________

           This petition coming on for presence of parties this day, the Court passed the




                                                                        .
    following:





                                 ORDER
FIR No.        Dated     Police Station     Sections
     07/2020        20.1.2020 Dharampur,         324, 326, 307, 506 of IPC





                              District    Solan,
                              H.P.
A wife, arraigned as an accused and facing prosecution for assaulting her
    husband, has come up before this Court under
Section 482
, Code of Criminal





    Procedure, 1973, for quashing the proceedings because they have compromised the
    matter.             r
2.        The facts of the case are that on 19.1.2020, Cantonment Hospital, Subathu

    informed the Police Post about admission of a person with injury on his throat.
    Based on this information, the Investigator reached the said hospital. They noticed
    Baljeet Marwah (respondent No.2 herein) admitted in the hospital. He was referred
    to IGMC or PGI. The Doctor, who had provided first aid to him, informed the



    Investigator that the injured had received injury with a sharp edged weapon on his
    throat and body. After that, the Police recorded statement of the mother of the




    injured (third respondent herein) under
Section 154
Cr.PC. She stated that the
    injured is running a shop of General Merchandise in Subathu. He was married to the





    petitioner in the year 2013 and two children were born from the wedlock. She
    further stated that her son alongwith his family stays separately in the upper floor of





    the house.     His wife keeps on quarrelling with him on small things.            In the
    intervening night of 18.1.2020 and 19.1.2020 at about 3:30 a.m., her husband made
    her wake up by saying that the petitioner, Amandeep Kaur had inflicted injuries on
    the throat of her husband, Baljeet Marwah (respondent No.2 herein). On this, she
    reached there and respondent No.2, Baljeet told her that petitioner Amandeep Kaur
    i.e. his wife had inflicted such injuries to him. Based on such information, Police
    registered the FIR captioned above. Subsequently, the second respondent got his
    treatment from PGI, Chandigarh and when he recovered he was discharged from the
    hospital.    During investigation, Police also recovered the knife with which the
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
3
petitioner had caused injuries to her husband. After that the Police arrested the
    petitioner and later on she was released on bail by the Sessions Court.              After
    completion of investigation, the Officer in-Charge of Police Station, Dharampur




                                                                          .
launched prosecution against the accused by filing report under
Section 173(2)
Cr.PC





    for commission of offence punishable under
Sections 324
,
326
,
307
and
506
of IPC.
3.     Seeking quashing of FIR and subsequent proceedings, the accused came up





    before this Court by filing the present petition under
Section 482
Cr.PC. She has
    arraigned her husband as 2nd respondent and her mother-in-law as 3rd respondent,
    who is formal in nature.
4.     Paragraph-2 of the petition reads as follows:-
"That petitioner and respondent No.2 are residing separately since
           19th January, 2019. That thereafter in the first week of July, 2021 the

           respectable family members of both of petitioner and respondent
           No.2 sit together and resolved all the disputes amicably taking into

           the consideration the future of children and entered into an
           compromise the relevant portion of the terms and condition as
           stipulated in compromise are reproduced as under:-
I That both of the parties shall file a joint petition under
Section 13 (B)
of Hindu Marriage Act for dissolution of
                   the marriage by mutual consent.
II Thatin view of consent divorce, the second party has




                   returned dowry, stridhan and other article belonging to
                   be first party list whereof was supplied by the first party





                   to the second party. The petitioner has now nothing to
                   be received from the complainant. The custody of
                   children shall always remain with the father. The
                   petitioner shall not, therefore, claim custody in the





                   children during all time to come. The petitioner shall
                   not claim any maintenance or any right from the
                   complainant, husband. The petitioner shall also not
                   claim any right in the property of the complainant.
III The FIR No.7 of 2020 under
Section 324
,
307
,
506
IPC which has been lodged on the basis of complaint
                   filed by second party the second party shall not pursue
                   the same and will not object in case the first party file
                   the petition for quashing under
Section 482
Cr.PC
                   before the Hon'ble High Court.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
4
The copy of compromise deed attached herein
                   as Annexure P-2."
5.     Ld. Counsel for the parties submitted that the parties have resolved the




                                                                          .
criminal dispute between them and seek quashing of the FIR mention above and





    closure of all consequential proceedings.
6.     Ld. Additional Advocate General contended that the High Court could not





    quash FIR solely based on the settlement/compromise between the complainant and
    the accused, without even considering the gravity and seriousness of the offences
    alleged against the accused person because the offences alleged were against the
    society at large and not restricted to the personal disputes between the parties.
ANALYSIS AND REASONING:
7.

           On Sep 17, 2021, both husband and wife had appeared before this Court and

    made separate and joint statement on oath requesting quashing of the FIR. They

    stated that a divorce petition under
section 13-B
of the Hindu Marriage Act, has
    already been filed by them, and they shall neither change their respective stands nor
    delay the proceedings.
8.     The following aspects would be relevant to conclude this petition:-
a)          On 17.9.2021, the victim was present in the Court. His




                 statement was also recorded, on oath, in which he says that he has





                 compromised the entire matter with the accused without any coercion,
                 duress, pressure, or any wrong tactics. He further states that he made
                 the statement in his conscious state of mind and admitted that he is





                 aware that this stand would result in the quashing of F.I.R. against the
                 petitioner.
b)          The parties have amicably settled the matter between them in
                 terms of the compromise deed (Annexure P-2). The 2nd respondent in
                 his statement stated that he has been authorized by his mother, who is
                 the complainant, to make statement on her behalf that she has no
                 objection in case present FIR and consequent proceedings are quashed.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
5
c)       In the given facts, the occurrence does not affect public peace
                 or tranquility.
d)       The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will, and the




                                                                         .
purpose of criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to work





                 for bringing peace in family and society.
e)       The pendency of trial affects career and happiness.
f)       Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to





                 maintain the stand they have taken in this compromise, which is
                 expected to result in the accused's acquittal.
g)       Accused is the first offender.





                 h)       The accused is facing prosecution for the last more
                  than one and half years.

    STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
9.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the propriety
    of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need not


    necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds, "...This
    argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as merely because an accused
    has a right to plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no sufficient




    material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal
    Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic





    earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and
    summons the accused to appear to contend that the very issuance of the order of





    taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said to have been
    made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition. It has been held in a
    number of cases that power under Section 482 has to be exercised sparingly and in
    the interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue even where
    the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any offence would be
    tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore, there cannot be any
    dispute that in such case power under section 482 of the Code can be exercised..."
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
6
10.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd. and another
, (2002) 2
    SCC 383, Para 8, Hon'ble Supreme Court Held that "...There is no hard and fast rule
    that the objection as to cognizability of offence and maintainability of the complaint




                                                                         .
should be allowed to be raised only at the time of framing the charge."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING UNDER SECTION 307
IPC
:
11.
In
Ram Prasad v State of Uttar Pradesh
, (1982) 2 SCC 149, Supreme Court





    holds,
          The appellants, who are the accused and the complainant, Shri Ram, who
          was the person injured as a result of firing, have appeared before us and
          stated that they wish to compound the offence. The offence for which





          both the appellants have been convicted is one under Section 307 read
          with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, but having regard to the nature
          of the injury sustained by Shri Ram, we think that the proper offence for
          which the appellants should have been convicted was under Section 324
          read with Section 34. Shri Ram received only one injury on the shoulder

          and that was also in the nature of simple hurt. We would, therefore,
          convert the conviction of the appellants to one under Section 324 read

          with Section 34. Since the parties belong to the same village and desire to
          compound the offence, we think, in the larger interest of peace and
          harmony between the parties and having regard to the nature of the
          injury, that it would be proper to allow the parties to compound the
          offence.
12.
In
Mahesh Chand v State of Rajasthan
, 1990 SCC 781, Hon'ble Supreme
    Court holds as under:
[2]. The accused were acquitted by the trial court, but they were
          convicted by the High Court for the offence under
section 307
Indian





          Penal Code This offence is not compoundable under law. The parties,
          however. want to treat it a special case, in view of the peculiar
          circumstances of the case. It is said and indeed not disputed that one of
          the accused is a lawyer practising in the lower court. There was a counter





          case arising out of the same transaction. It is said that this case has
          already been compromised. The decision of this Court in
Suresh Babu v.
          State of Andhra Pradesh
, 1987(2) JT 361, has been also referred to in
          support of the plea for permission to compound the offence.
13.
In
Dimpey Gujraj v Union Territory
, (2013) 11 SCC 497, Supreme Court
    holds,
          [5].
In light of the above observations of this court in
Gian Singh v. State
          of Punjab and another
, 2012(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 543 : 2012(4) Recent
          Apex Judgments (R.A.J.) 549 : 2012(5) CTC 526 (SC) we feel that this is
          a case where the continuation of criminal proceedings would tantamount
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
7
to abuse of process of law because the alleged offences are not heinous
          offences showing extreme depravity nor are they against the society.
          They are offences of a personal nature and burying them would bring
          about peace and amity between the two sides. In the circumstances of the
          case, FIR No. 163 dated 26/10/2006 registered under Section 147, 148,




                                                                          .
149, 323, 307, 452 and 506 of the
Indian Penal Code
at Police Station





          Sector 3, Chandigarh and all consequential proceedings arising therefrom
          including the final report presented under Section 173 of the Code and
          charges framed by the trial court are hereby quashed.
14.
In
State of Rajasthan v. Shambhu Kewat
, (2014) 4 SCC 149, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds,
          [14] We notice that the gravity of the injuries was taken note of by the
          Sessions Court and it had awarded the sentence of 10 years rigorous





          imprisonment for the offence punishable under
Section 307
IPC, but not
          by the High Court. The High Court has completely overlooked the
          various principles
laid down by
this Court in Gian Singh , and has
          committed a mistake in taking the view that, the injuries were caused on
          the body of Abdul Rashid in a fight occurred at the spur and the heat of

          the moment. It has been categorically held by this Court in Gian Singh
          that the Court, while exercising the power under Section 482, must have

          "due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime" and "the societal
          impact". Both these aspects were completely overlooked by the High
          Court. The High Court in a cursory manner, without application of mind,
          blindly accepted the statement of the parties that they had settled their
          disputes and differences and took the view that it was a crime against "an


          individual", rather than against "the society at large".
[15] We are not prepared to say that the crime alleged to have been
          committed by the accused persons was a crime against an individual, on




          the other hand it was a crime against the society at large. Criminal law is
          designed as a mechanism for achieving social control and its purpose is





          the regulation of conduct and activities within the society. Why
Section
          307
IPC is held to be non-compoundable, because the Code has
          identified which conduct should be brought within the ambit of non-
          compoundable offences.
Such provisions are not meant, just to protect the individual, but the
          society as a whole. High Court was not right in thinking that it was only
          an injury to the person and since the accused persons had received the
          monetary compensation and settled the matter, the crime as against them
          was wiped off. Criminal justice system has a larger objective to achieve,
          that is safety and protection of the people at large and it would be a
          lesson not only to the offender, but to the individuals at large so that such
          crimes would not be committed by any one and money would not be a
          substitute for the crime committed against the society. Taking a lenient
          view on a serious offence like the present, will leave a wrong impression
          about the criminal justice system and will encourage further criminal
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
8
acts, which will endanger the peaceful co-existence and welfare of the
          society at large.
[16] We are, therefore, inclined to allow this appeal and set aside the
          judgment of the High Court. The High Court was carried away by the




                                                                        .
settlement and has not examined the matter on merits, hence, we are





          inclined to direct the High Court to take back the appeal to its file and
          decide the appeal on merits.
15.
In
Yogendra Yadav v State of Jharkhand
, 21.7.2014, Supreme Court holds,





          [4]. Now, the question before this Court is whether this Court can
          compound the offences under
Sections 326
and
307
of the IPC which are
          non-compoundable. Needless to say that offences which are non-
          compoundable cannot be compounded by the court. Courts draw the
          power of compounding offences from Section 320 of the Code.
The said





          provision has to be strictly followed (
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
,
          2012(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 543 : 2012(4) Recent Apex Judgments (R.A.J.)
          549 : (2012)10 SCC 303). However, in a given case, the High Court can
          quash a criminal proceeding in exercise of its power under section 482 of
          the Code having regard to the fact that the parties have amicably settled

          their disputes and the victim has no objection, even though the offences

          are non-compoundable. In which cases the High Court can exercise its
          discretion to quash the proceedings will depend on facts and
          circumstances of each case. Offences which involve moral turpitude,
          grave offences like rape, murder etc. cannot be effaced by quashing the
          proceedings because that will have harmful effect on the society. Such


          offences cannot be said to be restricted to two individuals or two groups.
          If such offences are quashed, it may send wrong signal to the society.
          However, when the High Court is convinced that the offences are entirely
          personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect public peace or




          tranquillity and where it feels that quashing of such proceedings on
          account of compromise would bring about peace and would secure ends
          of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them. In such cases, the





          prosecution becomes a lame prosecution. Pursuing such a lame
          prosecution would be waste of time and energy. That will also unsettle
          the compromise and obstruct restoration of peace.
16.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dhruv Gurjar
, (2019) 5 SCC 570, the FIR was
    registered under S 307, 294 and 34
IPC
based on the allegations that Dhruv Gurjar
    (accused) armed with a 12-bore gun, and his gang, visited the house of the
    complainant with a view to take revenge with his nephew. When the complainant
    told them that his nephew was not present at home, on this Dhruv Gurjar fired, and
    the pellets struck on his forehead, left shoulder and left ear. Disagreeing with the
    order of High Court quashing the FIR, Hon'ble Supreme Court held,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
9
[16.1] However, the High Court has not at all considered the fact that the
          offences alleged were non-compoundable offences as per
Section 320
of
          the Cr.P.C. From the impugned judgments and orders, it appears that the
          High Court has not at all considered the relevant facts and circumstances
          of the case, more particularly the seriousness of the offences and its




                                                                        .
social impact. From the impugned judgments and orders passed by the





          High Court, it appears that the High Court has mechanically quashed the
          respective FIRs, in exercise of its powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. The
          High Court has not at all considered the distinction between a personal or
          private wrong and a social wrong and the social impact. As observed by





          this Court in the case of
State of Maharashtra vs. Vikram Anantrai Doshi
,
          2014 15 SCC 29, the Court's principal duty, while exercising the powers
          under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal proceedings, should be
          to scan the entire facts to find out the thrust of the allegations and the
          crux of the settlement. As observed, it is the experience of the Judge that





          comes to his aid and the said experience should be used with care,
          caution, circumspection and courageous prudence.
JURISPRUDENCE ON QUASHING:
17.    In the present case, the offences are not compoundable under
Section 320
CrPC. However, the law is almost settled by larger benches judgments of Supreme
    Court that the offences, those are not listed as compoundable, under
Section 320
CrPC, can also be compounded, and the procedure to follow would be by quashing
    the FIR, and consequent proceedings.
18.
In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three-member Bench of
    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,




          "[6]. ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of the High
          Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case either to





          prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
          ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an
          accused person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the
          High Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an





          interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to lay down
          any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of this inherent
          jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some categories of cases where
          the inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for quashing the
          proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possible for the High
          Court to take the view that the institution or continuance of criminal
          proceedings against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the
          process of the Court or that the quashing of the impugned proceedings
          would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal proceeding in question is
          in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by an accused
          person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the
          institution or continuance of the said proceeding, the High Court would
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
10
be justified in quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the
          requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category.
          Cases may also arise where the allegations in the First Information
          Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
          accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged; in such




                                                                          .
cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of





          looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to decide
          whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be
          legitimate for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to
          allow the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the accused





          person. A third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of the
          High Court can be successfully invoked may also arise. In cases falling
          under this category the allegations made against the accused person do
          constitute an offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced
          in support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to





          prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is important to
          bear in mind the distinction between a case where there is no legal
          evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly
          inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where there is legal
          evidence which on its appreciation may or may not support the

          accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the
          High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the

          evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the function of the trial
          magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the
          High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable
          appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the accused
          would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the


          inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of
          quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial
          decisions on the point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928
          Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786,




          Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954 Punj
193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu Majumdar
, AIR 1924





          Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47
          Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39).
19.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
, 1988





    (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,
          [7]. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at the initial
          stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to
          whether the uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the
          offence. It is also for the court to take into consideration any special
          features which appear in a particular case to consider whether it is
          expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to
          continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any
          oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an
          ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to
          be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
11
while taking into consideration the special facts of a case also quash the
          proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary stage."
20.
In
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, three Judges bench of




                                                                          .
Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,





          "[53]. Section 482 of the Code, as its very language suggests, saves the
          inherent power of the High Court which it has by virtue of it being a
          superior court to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to
          secure the ends of justice. It begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code'





          which means that the provision is an overriding provision. These words
          leave no manner of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code limits
          or restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise of such power
          is provided in Section 482 itself i.e., to prevent abuse of the process of
          any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. As has been





          repeatedly stated that Section 482 confers no new powers on High Court;
          it merely safeguards existing inherent powers possessed by High Court
          necessary to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or to secure the
          ends of justice. It is equally well settled that the power is not to be
          resorted to if there is specific provision in the Code for the redress of the

          grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be exercised very sparingly
          and it should not be exercised as against the express bar of law engrafted

          in any other provision of the Code.
[57]. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of
          settlement between an offender and victim is not the same thing as
          compounding of offence. They are different and not interchangeable.
Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of offences given to a court
          under Section 320 is materially different from the quashing of criminal
          proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In
          compounding of offences, power of a criminal court is circumscribed by




          the provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is guided solely and
          squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by





          the High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal proceeding or
          criminal complaint is guided by the material on record as to whether the
          ends of justice would justify such exercise of power although the ultimate
          consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
[58]. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to
          the fact that dispute between the offender and victim has been settled
          although offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion,
          continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and
          justice in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is put to
          an end and peace is restored; securing the ends of justice being the
          ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful
          effect on the public and consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers
          and threatens well-being of society and it is not safe to leave the crime-
          doer only because he and the victim have settled the dispute amicably or
          that the victim has been paid compensation, yet certain crimes have been
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
12
made compoundable in law, with or without permission of the Court. In
          respect of serious offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other
          offences of mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of
          moral turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants while working in that




                                                                        .
capacity, the settlement between offender and victim can have no legal





          sanction at all. However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and
          predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil, mercantile,
          commercial, financial, partnership or such like transactions or the
          offences arising out of matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or





          the family dispute, where the wrong is basically to victim and the
          offender and victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
          irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made
          compoundable, the High Court may within the framework of its inherent
          power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it





          is satisfied that on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any
          likelihood of offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
          proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be
          defeated. The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will
          depend on its own facts and no hard and fast category can be prescribed."
21.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir v State of Gujarat
, (2017) 9 SCC 641, a three Judges

    Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for quashing of
    FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
[16]. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
          subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to
          prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of




          justice. The provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises and
          preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a
          First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a
          settlement has been arrived at between the offender and the victim is not
          the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of





          compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the power of
          the court is governed by the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of
          Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is
          attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
          complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section
          482, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of justice would
          justify the exercise of the inherent power;
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
13
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and
          plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
          prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information Report




                                                                          .
should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have





          settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances of
          each case and no exhaustive elaboration of principles can be formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while dealing





          with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High Court must have
          due regard to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious
          offences involving mental depravity or offences such as murder, rape and
          dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family
          of the victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly speaking,





          not private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The decision
          to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the overriding
          element of public interest in punishing persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal

          cases which have an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil
          dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the

          inherent power to quash is concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial,
          financial, mercantile, partnership or similar transactions with an
          essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall for quashing


          where parties have settled the dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding
          if in view of the compromise between the disputants, the possibility of a




          conviction is remote and the continuation of a criminal proceeding would
          cause oppression and prejudice; and





          16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions
(viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving the financial and
          economic well-being of the state have implications which lie beyond the





          domain of a mere dispute between private disputants. The High Court
          would be justified in declining to quash where the offender is involved in
          an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The
          consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or economic
          system will weigh in the balance.
22.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh v Laxmi Narayan
, (2019) 5 SCC 688, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
14
[15]. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of this
     Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed and held as
     under:
[15.1] That the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash




                                                                    .
the criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable offences





     under Section 320 of the Code can be exercised having overwhelmingly
     and predominantly the civil character, particularly those arising out of
     commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or
     family disputes and when the parties have resolved the entire dispute





     amongst themselves;
[15.1] Such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which
     involved heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
     like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature





     and have a serious impact on society;
[15.3] Similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under
     the special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences
     committed by public servants while working in that capacity are not to be

     quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the victim and the
     offender;
[15.4] Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act etc. would fall
     in the category of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be
     treated as crime against the society and not against the individual alone,
     and therefore, the criminal proceedings for the offence under
Section


     307
IPC and/or the
Arms Act
etc. which have a serious impact on the
     society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of the
     Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute
     amongst themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision




     merely because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the
     charge is framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court





     to examine as to whether incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is there for
     the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which
     if proved, would lead to framing the charge under
Section 307
IPC. For
     this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of





     injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate
     parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. However, such an exercise
     by the High Court would be permissible only after the evidence is
     collected after investigation and the charge sheet is filed/charge is framed
     and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not permissible when the matter
     is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate conclusion in
     paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in the case of
Narinder Singh
(supra) should be read harmoniously and to be read as a
     whole and in the circumstances stated hereinabove;
[15.5] While exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code to
     quash the criminal proceedings in respect of non-compoundable offences,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
15
which are private in nature and do not have a serious impact on society,
          on the ground that there is a settlement/compromise between the victim
          and the offender, the High Court is required to consider the antecedents
          of the accused; the conduct of the accused, namely, whether the accused
          was absconding and why he was absconding, how he had managed with




                                                                        .
the complainant to enter into a compromise etc.





    CONCLUSION:
23.    Upon perusal of the record, it appears that wife allegedly assaulted her





    husband. After this incident, they have parted company. They have also settled their
    disputes amicably, and no untoward incident has ever taken place after the date of the
    incident. Both of them made a joint statement before this Court, on oath not to delay





    and not to change their stands in the divorce proceedings which are pending
    adjudication.
24.    This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal

    Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter. Given the entirety of the case and

    judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the continuation of these
    proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever. The Court is inclined to
    invoke the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC to quash the FIR and all


    subsequent proceedings in the peculiar facts and circumstances.
25.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh
, 2018




    (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[47]. As far as Writ Petition
    (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court





    challenging the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was
    already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the
    order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet.
Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In any
    case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of cognizance would
    automatically stands vitiated."
26.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p 642,
    Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of Justice arises propitiously
    when parties, who fell apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship or
    reunion.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
16
27.       Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit case where the inherent
    jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure
    is invoked to quash the proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is




                                                                           .
quashed, and all the consequential proceedings are also quashed and set aside. The
    bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All pending application(s), if any, stand
    closed.
In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is allowed in
    the aforementioned terms.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                                       Judge
    September 20, 2021 (ks)
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:05:55 :::CIS
