Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 1 of 2016
Citation: AIR 2012 SC 2216 (Para-9 at Page-3319), Hon'ble the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/23116244/

[Cites
17
, Cited by
103
]
Orissa High Court
Pramod Kumar Ray And Others vs State Of Odisha on 10 May, 2017
Author:
C.R. Dash
Bench:
C.R. Dash
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                               ABLAPL No.18056 of 2016

          In the matter of an application under
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
                                                   -----------------


          Pramod Kumar Ray and others                                                 ...          Petitioners

                                                     Versus
          State of Odisha                                                             ...          Opposite Party


                               For Petitioners :                Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, Senior Advocate
                                                                as the Amicus Curiae
                                                                And
                                                                M/s. R.N. Mohanty, M.K. Barik, A.K. Majhi
                                                                and P.K. Das.
                               For Opp. Parties :               Mr. S.P. Mishra, Advocate General
                                                                And
                                                                Mr. S.K. Nayak, Addl. Govt. Advocate and
                                                                Mr. T. Praharaj, Addl. Standing Counsel

                                                                 -----------------


          PRESENT:
                                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
          -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Date of Order              :     10.05.2017
          -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

C.R. Dash, J.
Heard Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel, who acted

          as Amicus Curiae on the request by this Court, and Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned

          Advocate General.
2
2.
The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities) Act, 1989
("S.C. & S.T. Act" for short) came into force w.e.f.

30.01.1990. It needs no mention that, this Act is relatable to the expression

'Law' in
Article 17
of the Constitution of India. The objects and reasons of the

S.C. & S.T. Act clearly pronounce that the members of the S.C. & S.T.

communities remain vulnerable and they are denied number of civil rights in the

society. They are also subjected to numerous humiliation and harassments.
Since the Protection of Civil Rights Act (1951) and the general

provisions of the
Indian Penal Code
were found inadequate to meet the

situations faced by the members of the S.C. & S.T. communities, a special

legislation in the form of S.C. & S.T. Act was promulgated to check and deter

crimes against the members of the S.C. & S.T. communities. Recently, some

important amendments were brought into the S.C. & S.T. Act. Said Amendment

of 2015 (Act-1 of 2016) ("S.C. & S.T. Amendment Act" for short) has come into

force w.e.f. 26.01.2016 to further the objects outlined supra. In the S.C. & S.T.

Act,
Section 18
of the Act barred jurisdiction of the competent courts so far as

application of
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to persons

committing an offence under the S.C. & S.T. Act is concerned. The vires of

Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. Act barring application of
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. to

the offences under the Act was the subject matter of challenge before Hon'ble
3
the Supreme Court in an Appeal by the State of Madhya Pradesh. Hon'ble the

Supreme Court in the said case (State of Madhya Pradesh vrs. R.K. Balothia,

A.I.R. 1995 SC 1198) held that the provision of Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. Act

is intra vires. Hon'ble the Supreme Court further proceeded to observe that the

offences enumerated in
Section 3
of the said Act are committed to humiliate and

subjugate the members of the S.C. & S.T. communities, and these offences

constitute a separate class and cannot be compared with offences provided in

the
Indian Penal Code
.
3.            Subsequently, in umpteen decisions, Hon'ble the Supreme Court

and different High Courts dealt with the question of bar of
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. in
Section 18
of the S.C. & S.T. (P.A.) Act.
In the case of Vilas Pandurang Pawar and Another vrs. State of

Maharastra and others, AIR 2012 SC 2216 (Para-9 at Page-3319), Hon'ble the

Supreme Court held that, where an offence is registered against a person under

the provision of S.C. & S.T. Act, no Court shall entertain any application for

anticipatory bail unless it prima facie finds that such an offence is not

made out. Hon'ble the Supreme Court, again in the case of Sakuntala Devi

vrs. Balinder Singh, (2014) 15 SCC 521, relying on the case of Vilas

Pandurang Pawar (supra) held that the High Court is required to give a finding
4
that an offence under the Act has not been made out before granting anticipatory

bail (para-4). Same is the view of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of

Bachu Das vrs. State of Bihar and others, (2014) 3 SCC 471. This Court also

in the cases of Dharani Pradhan and another vrs. State of Orissa, 2014 (2)

OLR-720, Ratikanta Ray vrs. State of Orissa, 2015 (1) I.L.R. Cuttack 1127,

Ramesh Prasad Bhanja and others vrs. State of Orissa, 1996 (10) OLR-466 /

1996 Crl.J. 2743, took similar view.
4.            While the position of law stands thus, S.C. & S.T. (Amendment)

Act, 2015 has come into force w.e.f. 26.01.2016. It is seen from
Section 3
, which

provides for punishment for offences of atrocities that the Section has been

substantially amended and more categories of atrocities constituting offence

under the said Act have been provided.
Section 14
of the Act providing for

establishment of Special Court has been amended, authorizing the Special Court

to take cognizance of the offence. So far as
Section 18
is concerned, the same

remains unaltered. It is also to be noted that, in Chapter IV-A,
Section 15-A
has

been inserted, and relevant provisions of
Section 15-A
so far as the present

discussion is concerned, reads as follows :-
15-A. Rights of victims and witnesses. -
(1)     xx        xx       xx   xx
                     (2)     xx        xx       xx   xx
5
(3)     A victim or his dependent shall have the
              right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of
any Court proceeding including any bail proceeding and
              the Special Public Prosecutor or the State Government
              shall inform the victim about any proceedings under this
              Act.
(4)     xx     xx       xx   xx

                     (5)     A victim or his dependent shall be entitled
              to be heard at any proceeding under this Act in respect
              of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or
              sentence of an accused or any connected proceedings
              or arguments and file written submission on conviction,
              acquittal or sentencing.
xx     xx       xx   xx
5.            It is seen from the aforesaid provisions that, notice of "any

proceeding before the Court" is a right on the part of the victim or his dependent.
The word "shall" in the opening sentence of Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
and

the words "reasonable, accurate and timely notice" read with the provisions

contained in Sub-Section (5) of
Section 15-A
makes it clear that such notice is

mandatory. As the notice under Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
is held to be

mandatory, the Court is to be satisfied that the victim or his/her dependent has

received "reasonable, accurate and timely notice" of "any court proceeding"
6
including bail proceeding. The question now arises, whether notice is to be

served through court process or through any other agency. Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
, in clear terms following the conjunction 'and' enjoins the duty on

the Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor or the State Government to

inform the victim about any proceeding under the Act. Therefore, it is the duty of

the persons seeking bail, to serve two applications for bail on the Special Public

Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor, out of which one is to be sent as notice to the

victim or his/her dependent. If the Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor

so requires, more number of copies of such petitions are to be served on him for

the purpose of such notice. Factum of any proceeding before the Special Court

under this Act is to be noticed to the victim or his/her dependent through the

Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor or the State Government, as the

case may be. Before taking up "any proceeding" including the bail proceeding,

the Special Court or the Court in seisin over the matter is to satisfy itself that the

Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor has given "reasonable, accurate

and timely notice" of any Court proceeding including any bail proceeding to the

victim or his/her dependent. Such satisfaction can be reached by seeking a

written undertaking from the Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor

or the agency of the State Government, as the case may be, about the
7
information received by the victim or his/her dependent about the

proceeding.
The provision of Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
is therefore held

to be mandatory in nature, non-compliance of the provision has to negate,

frustrate or make otiose, the relief granted to a party without noticing the victim or

his/her dependent. It is however worthwhile to mention here that, though

notice under Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
of the Act is mandatory in

nature, presence of the victim or his/her dependent in course of the

proceeding is not mandatory. On receipt of notice, it is left to the choice of

the victim or his/her dependent to participate or not to participate in the

proceeding.
6.             Keeping in view the aforesaid discussion and provisions in mind

about the scope of entertaining application under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. so far as

the offences under S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act are concerned, the following

Issues were framed in this case by this Court in its order dated 23.03.2017.
(i) There being bar under Section 18 of the S.C. &

               S.T. (Amendment) Act, whether interim protection can be

               given to an accused, who has filed an application for

               anticipatory bail before production of the Case Diary by
8
the State, from which it can be ascertained whether any

              offence under the Act is prima facie made out or not;
(ii) After the amendment in January, 2016 in S.C.

              & S.T. Act, even if application for anticipatory bail is

              rejected, whether any scope is left for this Court to protect

              innocent persons from getting arrested before moving the

              Special Court for bail, and whether in the interregnum

              period any interim protection can be given.
7.            Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel, relying on the

cases of Rashmirekha Thatoi vrs. State of Orissa and others, (2012) 5 SCC

690 and Sudam Charan Das vrs. State of Orissa, 2012 (2) OLR (SC) 936,

submits that, once the application under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. is rejected, no

order can be passed directing the petitioner to surrender before the trial court

and make a motion before the trial court, and the trial court further cannot be

directed to release him on bail on the basis of the said motion on such terms and

conditions as deem fit and proper. It is further submitted by him that, Hon'ble the

Supreme Court while disagreeing with the view of the High Court in the aforesaid

case, set aside the impugned order and held that, if an anticipatory bail

application has been rejected, there could not have been any further direction
9
which would tantamount to conferment of benefit by which the accused would be

in a position to avoid arrest. Drawing a parlance from the aforesaid judgments of

Hon'ble the Supreme Court, Mr. Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel would proceed

to argue that, it is evident that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in no uncertain terms

held in the aforesaid decisions that, once the application for anticipatory bail is

rejected, the High Court is denuded of its power to pass any further order

tantamounting to protection of the accused from arrest.
8.            Being enlightened by Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior

Counsel, I am of the view that the second question above should have been

framed in the following manner :-
(i) After the amendment of the S.C. & S.T. Act in
              January, 2016, whether any facilitatory relief can be
              granted to the accused-petitioner directing him to move
              the Special Court for bail, and whether in the
              interregnum period (i.e., from the date of passing of the
              order by this Court and the date when the Special Court
              is moved for bail) any interim protection can be given to
              him, and whether the Special Court while hearing the
              bail application can grant interim bail to the petitioner
              without waiting for sufficiency of notice on the victim or
              his/her dependent.
10
9.            An application under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. has been barred in

Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act. Under Chapter XVIII of the

Rules of the High Court of Orissa in Rule-4, it has been provided that, no

application for bail shall be made without notice in writing given to the Public

Prosecutor not later than noon of the day preceding the date on which the

application is to be made. Therefore, at the time of hearing of the bail application

under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. at the first instance, especially in view of Sub-Section

(3) of Section 15-A of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act and Rule 4 under

Chapter-XVIII of the Rules of the High Court of Orissa, the question arises as to

whether at this stage the Court is to be satisfied that the victim or his/her

dependent has to be informed of the existence of the proceeding.
Mr. Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel further submits that, at the

initial stage it is not necessary for the Court to be satisfied about such notice to

the victim or his dependent, in as much as, under the Rules of the High Court the

Public Prosecutor has already received notice and represents the cause of the

victim. Otherwise also when at the first instance the bail application is to be

taken for consideration soon after service of notice on the learned Public

Prosecutor, it is not possible for him to inform the victim of the date of hearing of

the bail matter at that stage. Further it is submitted by him that, as would be

seen from Sub-Section (3) of Section 15-A of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act,
11
the legislature has nowhere provided that at the time of a proceeding under the

Act being taken up, the presence of the victim is to be ensured. In other words,

the presence of the victim or his representation is not mandatory at the time of

any proceeding before the Court, but all the same elaborate procedures has

been provided for in the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act for the protection of the

interest of the victim or his/her dependent to secure the ends of justice. But, at

the time of final disposal of the bail application, as submitted by Mr. Pattnaik,

learned Senior Counsel, this Court is required to be satisfied that the Public

Prosecutor has duly served notice on the victim or his/her dependent and the

latter has knowledge of the existence of the proceeding.
10.           Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned Advocate General, on the other hand

submits that, whatever be the stage of the proceeding, notice to the victim being

mandatory under Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
, such notice is to be given to

him notwithstanding his presence or absence at the time of the proceeding. He

agrees with Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel, to the effect that

though notice to the victim or his/her dependent is mandatory, in Sub-Section (3)

of
Section 15-A
, his presence at the time of proceeding is not mandatory, but the

Court is to be satisfied that the victim or his/her dependent has received

"reasonable, accurate and timely notice".
12
11.            It is no more res-integra that the civilized countries have

recognized that, liberty is the most precious of all human rights. American

declaration of independence 1776, French declaration of rights of men and

citizen 1789, Universal declaration of human rights and the international

covenant of civil and political rights 1966, all speak with one voice - liberty is

the natural and inalienable right of every human being. Similarly,
Article 21
of the Constitution of India proclaims that, no one shall be deprived of his liberty

except in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.               Arrest and

imprisonment means infringement of precious right of an individual. (Reference

may be made to Inder Mohan Goswami and another vrs. State of

Uttaranchal and others, (2007) 12 SCC 1). Such being the position of liberty in

the eye of the Constitution of India and in the eyes of all civilized countries, it is

the duty of every court to protect the liberty of an individual.
Sections 436
to
439
,

Cr.P.C. are provisions dealing with question of liberty of a person, who has been

arrested or who has been submitted to the jurisdiction of the Court or who

apprehends arrest for a non-bailable offence. Notice through any agency,

whosoever he or it may be, takes some time and at the initial stage if any Court

has any implicit or incidental power, such power cannot be circumspected or

narrowed down for want of notice.          Sufficiency or otherwise of notice, as

provided under Sub-Section (3) of
Section 15-A
is to be insisted upon at the final
13
hearing of an application for regular bail or anticipatory bail, in as much as notice

instantaneously at the initial stage is far from possibility. At the cost of repetition,

I reiterate here that, presence of the victim or his/her dependent at the time of

any proceeding including bail proceeding is not mandatorily required. The Court

is to be satisfied about "reasonable, accurate and timely notice" to the victim or

his/her dependent about the existence of a proceeding including the bail

proceeding, and choice is to be left upon the victim or his dependent either to

absent himself from the proceeding or to come and participate in the proceeding.

Therefore, at the initial stage of hearing of any petition under
Section 438
,

Cr.P.C. or any bail petition if question of exercise of incidental or implicit

power arises, the exercise of power by the Court cannot be deferred for

want of notice.         "Reasonable, accurate and timely notice" of the

proceeding, as enshrined in Sub-Section (3) of Section 15-A of the S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act shall be taken care of at the final stage of hearing of

any proceeding including a bail proceeding, may it be anticipatory bail or

regular bail.
12.             Coming to the question of passing of order of interim protection at

the threshold in an anticipatory bail application involving offences under the

provisions of S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act, it is relevant to mention here that,
14
Hon'ble the Supreme Court on more than one occasions has propounded that

interim protection can be given by the Court while hearing the bail application

under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. Reference may be made in this regard to the

Constitution Bench decision of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of

Gurbaksh Singh vrs. Sarbjit Singh, AIR 1980 SC 1632 and other decisions of

Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Savitri Agarwal and others vrs.

State of Maharashtra and another, (2009) 8 SCC 325, Rashmirekha Thatoi

vrs. State of Odisha, (2012) 5 SCC 661, Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth vrs. State

of Gujarat and another, AIR 2015 SC 3090. There is no doubt that, this Court

is clothed with the power to grant interim protection at the threshold in exercise

of the jurisdiction under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. irrespective of the nature of the

offence. But the question arises for consideration as to whether such interim

protection can be granted in cases involving offences under the provisions of

S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act in view of the clear bar in Section 18 of the S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act and ruling of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Court,

as discussed supra, to the effect that before granting anticipatory bail under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C., a clear finding is to be given that no prima facie offence

under the provisions of the S.C. & S.T. Act has been committed.
15
13.            Hon'ble the Supreme Court, in the case of Gurbaksh Singh

(supra) was considering the question of personal liberty of the individual, as

enshrined in
Article 21
of the Constitution of India in the context of
Section 438
,

Cr.P.C. In that case, Hon'ble the Supreme Court held that, interim bail can be

granted while considering bail application under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. and the

matter can be re-examined in the light of the contention of the parties at the time

of final hearing.
14.            Drawing a parlance from the discussion in the aforesaid

Constitution Bench decision, Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel

submits that Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act cannot act as a

fetter on the power of the Court to grant interim protection at the threshold, and it

is further submitted by Mr. Pattnaik that a prima facie case about commission of

the offence under the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act can be found out from the

copy of the F.I.R. attached with the application for anticipatory bail at the time of

its filing. Further, relying on the case of Dr. Rabindranath Pradhan vrs. State

of Orissa, 2005 (I) OLR 628, it is submitted by learned Senior Counsel Mr.

Pattnaik that, interim protection can be given and arrest of the petitioner can be

stayed by exercising power under
Section 482
, Cr.P.C. till availability of the

credible evidence against the accused-petitioner.
16
It is further submitted by Mr. Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel that

the decisions of Hon'ble the Supreme Court and different High Courts as regards

Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. Act, 1989, as has been referred to supra, in the

forgoing paragraphs are relatable and relevant at the time of final disposal of the

anticipatory bail application, when all the required materials are available for

consideration. But at the threshold, in view of the observation of Hon'ble the

Supreme Court in the Constitution Bench decision in the case of Gurbaksh

Singh (supra), this Court is not denuded of any power to grant interim protection

in a case involving offence under the provision of S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act.
15.            Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned Advocate General, on the other hand

submits that, interim protection is a matter of discretion of the Court and it is not

a matter of right on the part of the accused-petitioner invoking the fundamental

right enshrined in
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. It is further submitted by

him that, in clear terms Hon'ble the Supreme Court and this Court in very many

decisions have held that in view of the bar under Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T.

Act, a petition under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. can only be allowed on the basis of the

finding that no prima facie case involving offence under the provision of the S.C.

& S.T. Act is made out from record. Said decisions cannot be stretched to the

extent of granting interim protection to an accused involved in committing offence
17
under the provisions of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act. It is further submitted

by him that, observation of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the Constitution Bench

decision of Gurbaksh Singh (supra) has no application to the fact of the present

case, especially in view of the bar under Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T.

(Amendment) Act.
16.           In this regard, I feel persuaded to refer to paragraph-2 of the

Statement of Objects and Reasons of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act, which

reads as follows :-
Statement of Objects and Reasons -
The
              Scheduled     Castes     and    the   Scheduled    Tribes
              (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
was enacted with a
              view to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities
              against the members of the Scheduled Castes and
              Scheduled Tribes and to establish Special Courts for the
              trial of such offences and for providing relief and
              rehabilitation of the victims of such offences.
2. Despite the deterrent provisions made in the
              Act, atrocities against the members of the Scheduled
              Castes and Scheduled Tribes continue at a disturbing
              level. Adequate justice also remains difficult for a
              majority of the victims and the witnesses, as they face
              hurdles virtually at every stage of the legal process. The
              implementation of the Act suffers due to (a) procedural
18
hurdles such as non-registration of cases; (b) procedural
               delays in investigation, arrests and filing of charge-
sheets; and (c) delays in trial and low conviction rate.
From the aforesaid paragraph, it is clear that, procedural delay in

arrest is one of the causes for bringing amendment in the S.C. & S.T. Act, 1989.
When the Act
has provided a particular bar in a particular Section, such a bar is

total and absolute in contradistinction to partial and relative. Such bar cannot be

over-reached unless the tests underlined by Hon'ble the Supreme Court and

different High Courts have been satisfied. Hon'ble the Supreme Court and

different High Courts in clear terms have held that the Courts are not precluded

from entertaining a petition under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. irrespective of the bar

under Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. Act. But, unless a finding is reached by the

Court to the effect that no offence under the provisions of the S.C. & S.T. Act has

prima facie been made out from the records of the case, no anticipatory bail can

be granted. Copy of the F.I.R. filed along with the application for anticipatory bail

cannot be held to be an encyclopedia of all the circumstances attending and

following a particular transaction. The members of S.C. & S.T. communities are

generally rustic and majority of them are illiterate. They cannot be expected to

file an F.I.R. satisfying all the ingredients of the offences prescribed in the S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act. The finding regarding the conclusion that, no prima facie
19
offence under the provisions of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act has been made

out, can be reached only on perusal of the entire Case Diary. In view of the bar

under Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act and the anxiety of the

legislature, as outlined in paragraph-2 of the Statement of Objects and

Reasons, no interim protection at the threshold can be given to the

petitioner filing a petition for anticipatory bail, as it would militate against

the provisions contained in Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act.
17.            So far as this Court is concerned, three kinds of reliefs are granted

in a petition for anticipatory bail -
(i) Preemptive or Preventive Relief;
(ii) Substantive Relief; and
(iii) Facilitatory Relief.
Preemptive or Preventive Relief is granted in the form of interim

protection, the contents of which varies from Court to Court. Whatever be the

content, the offender is protected from arrest by police during currency of the

preemptive or preventive relief or till final disposal of the anticipatory bail

application.
Substantive Relief is the grant of anticipatory bail to an accused-

petitioner in a given case on conclusion of hearing.
20
Facilitatory Relief is generally given by this Court in the form of

allowing the petitioner to surrender before the competent court and directing the

competent court to dispose of his bail application on merit on the same day.

Such relief is usually granted in a case where the co-accused persons similarly

circumstanced with the petitioner have already been released on bail, and where

this Court feels that instead of relief in an anticipatory bail, the matter may be

dealt with appositely by the appropriate court in a bail proceeding.
18.           Taking into consideration the bar under Section 18 of the S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act and requirement of giving a finding regarding non-

commission of offence under the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act prima facie by

the Court before granting anticipatory bail and the anxiety of the legislature in

paragraph-2 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons, as quoted supra, I am of

the view that, no preemptive or preventive relief can be given in an

application for anticipatory bail involving offence under the provisions of

the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act.
19.           So far as Substantive Relief is concerned, on hearing of the

learned Public Prosecutor / Special Public Prosecutor after sufficiency of notice

on the victim or his/her dependent under Sub-Section (3) of Section 15-A of the

S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act, if the Court finds that no prima facie offence is
21
made out under the provisions of S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act against the

accused-petitioner, he/she can be granted anticipatory bail.
20.           Coming to the Facilitatory Relief, the Court exercising the

jurisdiction under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. being devoid of any jurisdiction in view of

the bar under Section 18 of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act till a conclusion is

reached to the effect that no prima facie offence under the provision of S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act has been made out, no interim protection during the

interregnum period (from the date of passing of the order till the date the

accused-petitioner moves for bail before the Special Court) can be granted.
21.           I have dealt with the question exhaustively in the preceding

paragraphs, so far as jurisdiction of this Court in dealing with the petitioners

involved in commission of offence under the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act in a

petition under
Section 438
, Cr.P.C. is concerned.         I have dealt with the

jurisdiction of the Court to pass order in an anticipatory bail application and

regular bail application at the threshold, and the power of the Court to grant

interim protection to a person involved in offence under the S.C. & S.T.

(Amendment) Act. From my discussion supra, it is clear that, a competent court

dealing with a petition for bail shall have jurisdiction over the matter to grant

interim bail in exercise of incidental and implicit power under
Section 437
/
439
,
22
Cr.P.C. The question now arises as to whether at the threshold when this Court

has reached no conclusion to the effect that no prima facie offence under the

S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act has been made out, can any jurisdiction be

exercised to give facilitatory relief, as discussed supra.
In my considered view, by invoking the power of general

superintendence of the High Court over the Sub-ordinate Courts and by invoking

the jurisdiction under
Section 482
, Cr.P.C., this Court in a petition under
Section

438
, Cr.P.C. can direct the petitioner to approach the Special Court for bail within

a specified period. In order to apply for bail before the Special Court, the

petitioner must have to submit to the jurisdiction of the Special Court by

surrendering before that Court. Before seven days of the date of his surrender,

which he or his counsel knows better, a copy of the bail application or such

number of copies of the bail applications, as may be required by the Special

Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor, may be served upon him towards notice

for compliance of Sub-Section (3) of Section 15-A of the S.C. & S.T.

(Amendment) Act. On the date of surrender of the petitioner, the Special Public

Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor shall have the Case Diary and other relevant

records with him in order to assist the Special Court so far as the question of

interim bail is concerned. Without prejudice to any party, I feel persuaded to

make it clear that, barring certain grave offences like the offence punishable
23
under
Sections 302
, I.P.C., 306,
I.P.C
. (where the petitioner is alleged to have

made the victim to commit suicide for harassing him on the ground of his/her

caste as S.C. or S.T.), 376,
I.P.C
., 436,
I.P.C
. (where the dwelling house of a

member of the S.C. & S.T. community has been burnt),
Section 307
, I.P.C.

(where the injuries sustained by the victim / victims are near fatal and he is still in

bad shape) coupled with the offence / offences under the S.C. & S.T.

(Amendment) Act, in all other cases interim bail, as a rule, is to be granted to the

petitioner on the date of his surrender, and the matter of grant or rejection of

regular bail can be re-examined in the light of the contentions of the parties and

the materials available on record at the time of final hearing of the bail

application, after sufficiency of notice on the victim or his dependent in

compliance of Sub-Section (3) of Section 15-A of the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment)

Act.
The lists of grave offences given above, is not exhaustive and

complete. Different Benches sitting at different time, on consideration of the

materials on record and the circumstances prevailing in the society at the

relevant time, may add to the said list of grave offences more number of

offences.
From the number of cases filed in Court during my incumbency in

the assignment, I have found out the aforesaid grave offences usually committed
24
against the members of the S.C. & S.T. communities. Further, I feel worthwhile

to mention here that the restraint on the power of the Special Court, so far as the

aforesaid grave offences are concerned, is more relative than absolute. In spite

of the gravity of the offence as enumerated supra, the Special Court, from the

materials on record, may find ground to grant interim bail, and the Special Court

may do so in exercise of its judicial discretion in appropriate case.
I feel further persuaded to observe here that, there is no concept

of "interim bail" in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
. But, it is no more res-integra

that grant of interim bail is an incidental / implicit power in the hands of the Court

exercising jurisdiction over "regular bail".      Such a facilitatory relief in an

application for anticipatory bail, in my view, is a step forward to further the

intention of the Constitution-makers so far as the rights enshrined in
Article 21
of

the Constitution of India is concerned. No person should unnecessarily be

detained awaiting a procedural requirement of notice to the victim or his

dependent. But, while granting interim bail on the same day the petitioner

surrenders, the Special Court should impose the conditions to protect the interest

of the victim and his dependent, and the Special Court should also impose

conditions binding down the petitioner to appear before the I.O. for the purpose

of investigation at an interval of certain days or weeks, so that the petitioner
25
cannot be in a position to repeat the offence which is alleged against him, and he

cannot avoid the process of law and he cannot keep himself at large.
22.           People of S.C. & S.T. communities are generally poor persons.

Provision has been made in Sub-Section (6) of
Section 15-A
to give Travelling

Allowances, etc. during investigation, enquiry and trial, to the victim or his

dependent. If a victim or his dependent comes to the Court to participate in a

proceeding, including a bail proceeding, he is required to be paid with "BATA

Expenses", especially taking into consideration his poverty.       But the State

Government has made no provision for payment of "BATA Expenses" to a victim

or his dependent intending or coming to participate in a proceeding in a Special

Court under the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act, and it is the duty of the State

Government to make adequate arrangement for payment of such expenses to a

victim or his dependent.
In view of such fact, the State Government in Home Department

and Finance Department are directed to place at least Rs.50,000/- (rupees fifty

thousand) each at the disposal of the Sessions Judge of each districts of the

State to meet the "BATA Expenses" to a victim or his dependent belonging to

S.C. or S.T. community. On a certificate given by the Public Prosecutor / Special

Public Prosecutor regarding participation of a victim or his dependent in a
26
proceeding under the S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act, the concerned Sessions

Judge shall pay "BATA Expenses", as admissible to any witness in a case, to the

victim or his dependent who has participated in the proceeding under the S.C. &

S.T. (Amendment) Act. If such "BATA Expenses" cannot be paid on the same

day, the same be sent to the victim or his dependent by Bank Draft or by Money

Order, whichever facility is available, within 7 (seven) days of his appearance.
A fund of Rs.1,00,000/- (rupees one lakh) should also be placed at

the disposal of the Registrar (Judicial), Orissa High Court, Cuttack for the

aforesaid purpose, so that "BATA Expenses" can be paid to the victim or his

dependent coming to this Court for participating in any proceeding under the

S.C. & S.T. (Amendment) Act. Such payment can also be made on the basis of

the certificate given by the Public Prosecutor to the victim or his dependent.
The aforesaid funds are to be made available to the concerned

Sessions Judges and the Registrar (Judicial), Orissa High Court within a period

of two months from today. Till that date such "BATA Expenses" shall be paid by

the Collector of the concerned District where the Special Court sits, and such

payment by the Collector shall be made on the basis of the certificate given by

the Public Prosecutor.
For the purpose of Notice, etc., each Special Public Prosecutor /

Public Prosecutor (where there is no Special Court) should be placed with fund
27
of Rs.20,000/- (rupees twenty thousand) at least, and such fund may be spent by

the Special Public Prosecutor / Public Prosecutor towards Postal Expenses, etc.

for issuing notice by Post. A copy of the order each be communicated to the

Secretary to the Government in Finance Department and Secretary to the

Government in Home Department to do the needful at their end within the time

specified.
23.           Taking into consideration the aforesaid discussion, so far as the

present bail application is concerned, the petitioners are directed to surrender

before the learned Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge, Puri in G.R. Case

No.138 of 2016 arising out of Delanga P.S. Case No.169 of 2016 within 7

(seven) days from the date of re-opening of the Court after the ensuing Summer

Vacation. The petitioners, if so feel, may surrender earlier before the aforesaid

date, if the Court is in seisin over the matter during the Summer Vacation.

Seven days prior to the date of surrender of the petitioner, a copy or such

number of copies of the bail application, as required by the Public Prosecutor /

Special Public Prosecutor, be served on the learned Public Prosecutor / Special

Public Prosecutor for the purpose of notice to the victim or his / her dependent.

On the date of surrender, the petitioner shall be admitted to interim bail after

hearing the Public Prosecutor / Special Public Prosecutor in the aforesaid case.
28
The question of rejection or allowing the bail application on merit shall be dealt

with at the time of final hearing of the bail application after sufficiency of notice

on the victim or his/her dependent, irrespective of his/her presence or absence.

The petitioners shall be bound by the following conditions besides the conditions

imposed by the learned trial court.
(i)     The petitioners shall appear before the I.O. once in a

                week on the day and time fixed by the I.O. till the date the

                condition is lifted by the learned trial court;
(ii)    They shall not threaten, induce or coerce the victim or

                any witness of the case in any manner whatsoever; and
(iii)   They shall not involve themselves in similar or any other

                offence during currency of this order.
24.             Before parting with the order, I put on record the fair and

enlightened assistance rendered by Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior

Counsel, Mr. Surya Prasad Mishra, learned Advocate General, Mr. Saubhagya

Ketan Nayak, learned Addl. Govt. Advocate and Mr. Tapas Praharaj, learned

Addl. Standing Counsel in reaching the conclusion, as discussed in detail supra.
29
25.                The ABLAPL is accordingly disposed of. A free copy of this order

each be supplied to Mr. Jagannath Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel and Mr.

S.P. Mishra, learned Advocate General.
........................
C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 10th day of May, 2017.
S.K. Parida, Secretary.
