Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 3 of 2008
Citation: AIR 2000 SC 1296).
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/26018251/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Patna High Court
Dayanand Singh vs The Government Of Bihar & Ors on 10 November, 2014
Author:
R.M. Doshit
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Ashwani Kumar Singh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA

             Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.14677 of 2009
                                  With
               Interlocutory Application No. 6894 of 2009
                                   and
              Interlocutory Application No. 10443 of 2010
                                   and
               Interlocutory Application No. 1514 of 2010
                                   and
                Interlocutory Application No. 838 of 2010
                                   and
               Interlocutory Application No. 3645 of 2013
                                   and
               Interlocutory Application No. 2661 of 2013
===========================================================
Dayanand Singh S/O Ayodhya Prasad Singh, Resident of Vill.- Shermari, P.O.-
Pirpainti, P.S.- Pirpainti, Distt.- Bhagalpur
                                                                  .... ....   Petitioner
                                        Versus
1. The Government of Bihar through The Chief Secretary, Government of Bihar,
Patna
2. The Principal Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms,
Government of the State of Bihar, Patna
3. The Secretary Law-Cum-Legal Remembrancer, Government of the State of
Bihar, Patna
4. The Bihar Public Service Commission Through its Secretary, Bailey Road, Patna
5. The Secretary, Bihar Public Service Commission, Bailey Road, Patna
6. The Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna through its Registrar General
Patna
7. Registrar General, Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna
                                                              .... .... Respondents
                                          with
===========================================================
                 Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 10226 of 2010
===========================================================
Manjeet Kumar S/O Sri Gyan Shankar Singh, R/O At+P.O.Alawalpur,
P.S.Gaurichak, Distt-Patna
                                                                  .... ....   Petitioner
                                        Versus
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014

                                         2/30




    1. The O.S.D. to His Excellency, The Governor of Bihar, Rajbhawan, Patna
    2. The Government of State of Bihar, Through The Chief Secretary , Patna
    3. The Principal Secretary, Personnel and Administrative Reforms, Department
    Government of State of Bihar, Patna
    4. The Law Secretary Cum Legal Remembrancer, Government of State of Bihar,
    Patna
    5. The Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna Through The Registrar General
    Patna High Court, Patna
    6. The Registrar General , Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna
    7. The Bihar Public Service Commission, Through its Secretary, Bailey Road,
    Patna
    8. The Secretary, Bihar Public Service Commission, Bailey Road, Patna
                                                                   .... .... Respondents
                                                 with
    ===========================================================
                       Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 7508 of 2011
    ===========================================================
     Neeraj Kumar S/O Chhtrapati Shivaji ,Resident of J.P. Lane, East Lohanipur, P.S.
    Kadamkuan, Patna.
                                                                       .... ....   Petitioner
                                                Versus
    1. The O.S.D. to His Excellency, The Governor of Bihar, Raj Bhawan, Patna.
    2. The Government of State of Bihar Through The Chief Secretary Government of
    Bihar, Patna.
    3. The Principal Secretary, General Administration Department, Government of
    The State of Bihar, Patna.
    4. The Secretary, Law Cum Legal Remembrancer, Government of the State of
    Bihar, Patna.
    5. The Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna Through its Registrar General,
    Patna.
    6. Registrar General, Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Patna.
                                                                   .... .... Respondents
    ===========================================================
    Appearance :
    (In CWJC No. 14677 of 2009)
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014

                                          3/30




    For the Petitioner       :     M/s. Chakrapani, Sanjay Kumar Singh,
                                  Dipak Kumar and Madhuresh Singh, Advocates
     For the State           :    Mr. P N Shahi, Addl. Advocate General
                                  Mr. Mrityunjay Kumar, AC to AAG
    For the High Court of Patna       :          Mr. Satyabir Bharti, Advocate
                                                 Mr. Bindhyachal Singh, Advocate
    For Bihar Public Service Commission: Mr. Lalit Kishore, Sr. Advocate
                                                 Mr. Sanjay Pandey, Advocate
     For Intervenor Applicant : M/s. Rakesh Kumar, Indradeo Prasad, Sanjay Kumar
                                  Sunil Kumar Singh and Arun Kumar No.1, Advocates
     For Intervenor Respondents: M/s Ramchandra Singh, Lal Babu Singh, Sankar
                                    Kumar, Indradeo Prasaad, Sanjay Kumar and
                                    Akshay Lal Pandit, Advocates
     (In CWJC No. 10226 of 2010)
    For the Petitioner/s :        M/s. Chakrapani, Sanjay Kumar Singh,
                                  Dipak Kumar and Madhuresh Singh, Advocates
     For the State           :    Mr. P N Shahi, Addl. Advocate General
                                  Mr. Mrityunjay Kumar, AC to AAG
    For the High Court of Patna       :           Mr. Bindhyachal Singh, Advocate
    For the Bihar Public Service Commission: Mr. Sanjay Pandey, Advocate
    (In CWJC No. 7508 of 2011)
    For the Petitioner/s :        M/s. Chakrapani, Sanjay Kumar Singh,
                                  Dipak Kumar and Madhuresh Singh, Advocates
     For the State           :    Mr. P N Shahi, Addl. Advocate General
                                  Mr. Mrityunjay Kumar, AC to AAG
    For Bihar Public Service Commission: Mr. Lalit Kishore, Sr. Advocate
                                                 Mr. Sanjay Pandey, Advocate
    ===========================================================
    CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
                and
                HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ASHWANI KUMAR SINGH
    CAV JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUTICE)
    Date: 10-11-2014
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
4/30
The above CWJC No. 14677 of 2009 has been filed by one
        Dayanand Singh, a practicing advocate, to challenge the constitutional
        validity of Rule 3A of the Bihar Civil Service (Judicial Branch)
        (Recruitment) Rules, 1955. A similar challenge is made in CWJC No.
        10226 of 2010. In CWJC No. 7508 of 2011 similar challenge is made
        in respect of Rule 4A of the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules,
        1951.
The facts leading to the above Writ Petitions may be
        recorded in a nutshell. On 9th August 2008, the Bihar Public Service
        Commission (hereinafter referred to as „the Commission‟) published
        advertisement no.3 of 2008 for recruitment for 217 posts in
        Subordinate Judicial Service. Of the said 217 posts advertised, as per
        the statutory reservation, 35 posts (16%) were reserved for Scheduled
        Castes and 2 posts (1%) were reserved for Scheduled Tribes. The last
        date for submitting applications was 7th January 2009. Since the
        publication of the said advertisement, under the impugned
        Notification dated 25th June 2009 the State Government has, effective
        from 1st October 2008, amended the Bihar Civil Service (Judicial
        Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1955 to insert Rule 3A in the said
        Rules. The said Notification reads as under:-
"In exercise of the powers conferred by
Article 234
of the
        Constitution of India read with the proviso to
Article 309
, the
        Governor of Bihar is pleased to make the following amendment in
        Bihar Judicial Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1955, in consultation
        with High Court, Patna and Bihar Public Service Commission.
Amendments
                In the Bihar Judicial Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1955, the
        following new Rule 3A shall be added:-
"3A- The Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in Post and
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
5/30
Services (for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
                  Backward Classes) Act 1991, (as amended from time to
                  time) shall also apply to direct recruitment to the post of
                  Civil Judge (Junior Division)."
It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the
        date 01.10.2008."
Pursuant to the above Notification dated 25th June 2009,
        under letter dated 26th June 2009 the State Government withdrew the
        requisition made earlier. On 27th June 2009, the State Government
        made a fresh requisition for 217 posts in Subordinate Judicial Service.
        This time the State Government reserved 50% of the vacancies; 34
        posts for Scheduled Castes, 2 posts for Scheduled Tribes, 39 posts for
        Extremely Backward Class, 26 posts for Backward Class and 7 posts
        for women in Backward Class. In consonance with the said requisition
        made on 27th June 2009, the Commission published a fresh
        advertisement no. 45 of 2009 on 4th July 2009. It is the said
        advertisement and the ensuing recruitment process and the
        Government Notification dated 25th June 2009 which are the subject
        matter of challenge before us. It would not be out of place to note that
        pending these Petitions, the recruitment process for the said 217 posts
        is completed in consonance with the existing Rules as directed by the
        Hon‟ble Supreme Court under its order dated 23rd September 2008
        made in the matter of Malik Mazhar Sultan (Civil Appeal No. 1867 of
        2006) pending before the Hon‟ble Court. Appointments have been
        made and the candidates have completed the induction training of one
        year in Bihar Judicial Academy.
Recruitment in the Bihar State Judiciary at the lower levels
        in the cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division) and of Civil Judge
        (Senior Division) is governed by the Bihar Civil Service (Judicial
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
6/30
Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as "the
        1955 Rules"). Recruitment in Superior Judiciary in the State is
        governed by the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1951
        (hereinafter referred to as "the 1951 Rules").
The centre of controversy is the reservation in direct
        recruitment provided for the subordinate and superior judicial service
        in the State of Bihar. Historically no reservation was made for
        recruitment to State Judicial Services. However, considering the trend
        of the State Government and the strong support for reservation, the
        High Court has allowed reservation for Scheduled Castes and
        Scheduled Tribes candidates in respect of direct recruitment to the
        cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division). The High Court has time and
        again considered reservation for direct recruitment in the Superior
        Judicial Service but has opined against such reservation. The High
        Court has also considered reservation for other backward classes, but
        has voted against such reservation.
The State Government has, in exercise of its legislative
        power, enacted the Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in Post and
        Services (for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
        Backward Classes) Act, 1991 (Bihar Act 3 of 1992) (hereinafter
        referred to as "the 1991 Act"). As the title suggests, the 1991 Act is
        enacted with a view to introducing a uniform pattern of reservation for
        Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
        in services under the State. The word "State" has been defined in
        clause (n) of Section 2 of the 1991 Act to include "the Government,
        the Legislature and the Judiciary of the State of Bihar and all local
        or other authorities within the State or under the control of the State
        Government". Thus by sheer definition Judicial Services under the
        State is equated with the Civil Services under the State and have been
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
7/30
brought within the purview of the 1991 Act.
Section 3 of the 1991 Act excludes certain services, such as
        services under the Central Government, in the private sectors,
        appointments made on compassionate grounds etc. from the
        applicability of the 1991 Act. Section 4 thereof provides for
        reservation in the matter of direct recruitment to the extent of 50% of
        the vacancies. Sub-section (2) thereof provides for various
        percentages for different categories totaling 50%. It also provides for
        reservation in the matter of promotion for the Scheduled Castes and
        Scheduled Tribes. Sub-section (3) thereof provides that reserved
        category candidate if selected on the basis of merit, he will be counted
        against 50% vacancies for open merit category and not against the
        reserved category vacancies. The said section further provides for
        carry forward of unfilled vacancies and exchange between the
        Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes etc.
Section 16 thereof gives
        the 1991 Act overriding effect over any other law in force, any
        judgment or decree of a court, any order, notification, circular etc.
                   The 1991 Act in so far as it was made applicable to the
        Judicial Services under the State came to be challenged before this
        Court in the matter of Bal Mukund Sah. This Court set aside the
        enactment in so far as it was made applicable to the Judicial Services.
        The decision of this Court came to be challenged before the Hon‟ble
        Supreme Court in the matter of
State of Bihar & Another vs. Bal
        Mukund Sah
(AIR 2000 SC 1296).
A Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court by majority
        set aside the enactment in so far as it was made applicable to the
        Judicial Services. According to the Hon‟ble Supreme Court,
        appointment to the State Judiciary is governed by the provisions
        contained in
Articles 233
to 235 of the Constitution. The rules made
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
8/30
thereunder cannot be insulted by the State Legislature or by the
        Governor of the State in exercise of power under
Article 309
of the
        Constitution. Undeterred by
the said judgment
, the Government of
        Bihar has entered into a long drawn correspondence with the High
        Court asking the High Court to introduce the reservation as provided
        in the 1991 Act and in the same manner for direct recruitment to the
        State Judicial Services at the subordinate and superior level. The High
        Court has earnestly protected its independence and has repeatedly
        turned down the request of the State Government. The State
        Government has, since then, in exercise of powers conferred by
Article 234
read with
Article 309
of the Constitution, and in purported
        consultation with the High Court and in consultation with the Public
        Service Commission, on 25th June 2009, issued Notification to amend
        the "Bihar Judicial Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1955". Under the
        said Notification, the State Government has inserted Rule 3A in the
        Rules of 1955 to make the Act of 1991 applicable to direct
        recruitment to the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division). A similar
        Notification has been issued to insert Rule 4A in the Bihar Superior
        Judicial Service Rules, 1951 to make the 1991 Act applicable to direct
        recruitment in Superior Judicial Service.
It is the aforesaid two Notifications which are the subject
        matter of challenge in this group of Writ Petitions.
Learned advocate Mr. Chakrapani has appeared for the writ
        petitioners. He has relied upon
Articles 162
, 163
, 234
and
309
of the
        Constitution. The sum and substance of the long-winding arguments
        of Mr. Chakrapani is that the State Government has no authority to
        make rules to govern recruitment to the Judicial Services in the State
        except with the consultation with the High Court. In the present case,
        the impugned Notifications have been issued without proper
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
9/30
consultation with the High Court. A mere correspondence expressing
        the views of the State Government cannot be said to be „consultation‟
        within the meaning of
Article 234
of the Constitution.
In support of
        his submissions, Mr. Chakrapani has relied upon the aforesaid
        judgment in the matter of
State of Bihar & Another vs. Bal Mukund
        Sah
(AIR 2000 SC 1296) and the judgments in the matters of
Chief
        Justice of Andhra Pradesh & Others vs. L V A Dixitulu & Others
[(
1979) 2 SCC 34] and of State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lal
        Srivastava
(AIR 1957 SC 912).
Learned advocate Mr. Satyabir Bharti has appeared for the
        High Court. He has supported the writ petitions. He has submitted that
        the impugned Notifications have not been issued after proper
        consultation with the High Court. Mr. Satyabir Bharti has drawn our
        attention to the decision of the High Court in the subject matter.
In
        support of his submission, Mr. Satyabir Bharti has relied upon the
        judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of
Union of
        India vs. Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth
(AIR 1977 SC 2328) and of
        Gauhati High Court &
Another vs. Kuladhar Phukan & Another
[(2002) 4 SCC 524].
Learned Additional Advocate General Mr. P N Shahi has
        appeared for the State Government. He has supported the impugned
        Notifications issued by the State Government. Mr. Shahi has taken us
        through the records, the counter affidavits and also the aforesaid
        judgment in the matter of Bal Mukund Sah. In the submission of Mr.
        Shahi, the relevant provisions of the 1991 Act by which it was
        extended to the State Judicial Services was held to be bad and illegal
        for want of previous consultation with the High Court. The said
        infirmity has since been cured by the State Government. The State
        Government has entered into a long drawn correspondence and
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
10/30
dialogue with the High Court; has met the Hon‟ble Judges of the High
        Court and has discussed the matter. Thus there has been sufficient
        consultation with the High Court. After such consultation the State
        Government has felt the need for providing reservation for direct
        recruitment in the State Judicial Services in the same terms as in the
        Civil Services of the State. Thus the State Government has acted in
        accordance with the constitutional scheme in an effort to bring about
        social justice. The State Government has acted wholly within its
        power in issuing the impugned Notifications. The impugned
        Notifications, therefore, do not call for interference. The High Court is
        bound to accept the reservation pattern introduced in the Civil
        Services of the State under the 1991 Act.
Learned advocate Mr. Rakesh Kumar has appeared for the
        intervenor, Nyaypalika Arakshan Andolan. He has supported the
        impugned Notifications. He has tried to convince the Court in respect
        of the necessity for reservation in the Judicial Services with socio-
        economic angle. He has submitted that the High Court has given
        evasive reply; that it has no power to veto the decision of the
        Government. The decision of the State Government is binding to the
        High Court.
Since the matter relates to reservation of posts for
        recruitment to the State Judicial Services it would be appropriate to
        refer to the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
Article 14
of the
        Constitution provides for „equality before law‟, whereas
Article 16
of
        the Constitution provides for "equality of opportunity in matters of
        public employment". Nevertheless, clause (4) thereof, inter alia,
        enables the State to make reservation of appointment or posts in
        favour of any backward class of citizens. Clause (4-A) thereof makes
        a similar provision for reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
11/30
and Scheduled Tribes in the matter of promotion. It is this power to
        make the reservation in public employment which has become the
        bone of contention and has led to the present set of Writ Petitions.
Part IV of the Constitution comprises "DIRECTIVE
        PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY" contained in
Articles 38
to 51.
Article 50
provides for "Separation of Judiciary from Executive". It
        reads "the State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the
        executive in the public services of the State". Part VI of the
        Constitution provides for "THE STATES". Chapter II whereof
        provides for "THE EXECUTIVE". Chapter III provides for "THE
        STATE LEGISLATURE". Chapter IV provides for "LEGISLATIVE
        POWER OF THE GOVERNOR". Chapter V provides for "THE
        HIGH COURTS". Chapter VI comprises
Articles 233
to 237 and
        provides for "SUBORDINATE COURTS‟. The constitutional scheme
        for appointment of the District Judges and other judicial officers in a
        State under this Chapter has constantly been the subject matter of
        discussion by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. I, therefore, do not
        elaborate upon the said provisions at this stage. The same will be
        considered while referring to the judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme
        Court. I shall also refer to
Article 335
of the Constitution which
        provides, "The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and
        Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration consistently with
        the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of
        appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of
        the Union or of a State".
Before I deal with the rival contentions, I will record the
        decisions of the Patna High Court in this regard. The matter has come
        up before the High Court time and again. As recorded earlier, after the
        judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of Bal Mukund
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
12/30
Sah (AIR 2000 SC 1296) the State Government entered into a
        correspondence with the High Court. After the judgment and the
        correspondence, on 21st May 2005 the Full Court decided, "The Full
        Court after having considered the matter and having found that
        there is reservation for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
        Tribes in the Bihar Judicial Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1955,
        and the members of the Backward Classes are adequately
        represented in the Judicial Services, there is no need for further
        reservation for them in the Judicial Service. Accordingly, this
        Court does not concur to the amendments proposed by the State
        Government in the Bihar Judicial Service (Recruitment) Rules,
        1955, and the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1951." Even
        after the aforesaid decision of the Full Court, a Committee of Judges
        constituted by Hon‟ble the Chief Justice, entered into the discussion
        with the State Government. After such discussion, in its minutes
        drawn on 25th August 2008, the Committee noted that irrespective of
        the absence of reservation for Backward and Extremely Backward
        Classes they had sufficient representation in the Higher Judicial
        Service, the Fast Track Courts and the Subordinate Judicial Service.
        In absence of any contradictory material brought by the State
        Government the Committee opined, "in view of failure of the
        representatives of the State Government to furnish the details in
        regard to the inadequate representation of the Most Backward
        Class and Backward Class, which are fundamental facts
        necessary for the decision, the Committee is of the opinion that
        there does not exist any reason to reconsider the decision taken by
        the Full Court in its meeting held on 21st of May, 2005."
Once again the Full Court in its meeting held on 18th
        September 2010 discussed the issue and decided, "Keeping in view
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
13/30
the powers and responsibility attached to the Officers for
        Superior Judicial Service and that 75% posts are filled in by
        promotion from the Officers of Subordinate Judicial Service, it is
        resolved not to provide reservation in Bihar Superior Judicial
        Service. However, preference shall be given to S.C./S.T. and
        O.B.C. categories in case merit is found equal to others.
        Considering the figures of representation, it is further resolved
        that 10% of the vacancies in Bihar Subordinate Judicial Service
        be reserved for Backward Class I category in addition to 16% of
        the vacancies         reserved for Scheduled Castes and 1% of the
        vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Tribes. Relaxation in age by
        3 years be also granted to S.C./S.T. and O.B.C. category."
It is thus apparent that the issue has been given due attention
        by the High Court time and again. The High Court has consistently
        opined against the reservation in Superior Judicial Service. Although
        on facts it has been found that the candidates in other Backward
        Classes had adequate representation in the Judicial Services of the
        State, the High Court has indeed allowed reservation for Backward
        Class I candidates to the extent of 10% increasing total reservation to
        27% of the vacancies.
In answer to the Writ Petitions, the High Court has filed
        counter affidavits to place the aforesaid decisions of the High Court
        on the record and has brought the factual position as regards the
        representation of the Backward Class candidates in the State
        Judiciary. The High Court has also brought on record the order dated
        23rd September 2008 made by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the
        matter of Malik Mazhar Sultan (Civil Appeal No. 1867 of 2006).
        Under the said order, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court had directed, "in
        our opinion, it would be appropriate if the process of recruitment
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
14/30
is undertaken immediately by both, namely, the State of Bihar as
        well as the High Court of Patna as per the existing Rules." The
        Hon‟ble Court had further directed the State Government and the
        High Court to expedite the process of recruitment so that the vacant
        posts could immediately be filled in.
The scope of the 1991 Act in so far as its applicability to the
        Judicial Services in the State is concerned, has been elaborately
        discussed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of Bal
        Mukund Sah (AIR 2000 SC 1296). The Constitutional Bench of the
        Supreme Court has considered all the earlier judgments in the subject
        matter. The case before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court also arose on
        account of the application of the 1991 Act to the recruitment for
        Judicial Service commenced in 1991. After the process for
        recruitment had commenced, the Government of Bihar applied
        reservation under the 1991 Act for recruitment to Judicial Service by
        promulgating an ordinance which later on became enactment. The
        enactment was purported to have been enacted in consultation with
        the Public Service Commission and the High Court. In my view, this
        judgment is the complete answer to the controversy raised before us.
        The Hon‟ble Court has considered the constitutional scheme, the
        legislative power of the State, the legislative power of the Governor
        under
Article 309
of the Constitution and other provisions which have
        bearing on the matter at issue. Having considered the independent
        autonomy granted by the Constitution to certain offices such as
        Parliament, State Legislature, Supreme Court, the High Courts,
        Election Commission, the office of the Comptroller & Auditor
        General, the Public Service Commission, the Hon‟ble Court has
        observed that legislative power of the Central Government or the
        State Government or, for that matter, of the President of India or the
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
15/30
Governor of the State under
Article 309
of the Constitution is not
        absolute, but is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and the
        Acts of the appropriate legislature. Whereas the powers of the above
        referred constitutional functionaries is independent and is not
        dependent or subject to the enactment or the rules made under
Article
        309
of the Constitution. In the opinion of the Hon‟ble Court, such
        rules, therefore, shall prevail over the legislative enactment or the
        rules made under
Article 309
of the Constitution. In paragraph-22 of
        the judgment the Hon‟ble Court has summarized - "The aforesaid
        constitutional provisions clearly indicate that independently of
        general provisions regarding services as mentioned in Part XIV,
        different types of services contemplated by the Constitution in
        other parts have their own procedural schemes for recruitment
        and regulation of conditions of these services and, therefore,
Art.
        309
found in Part XIV necessarily will have to be read subject to
        these special provisions regarding recruitment and conditions of
        services of diverse types governed by the relevant different
        constitutional provisions as indicated hereinabove." The Hon‟ble
Court further held
, "Thus, even if under
Art. 16(4)
the State
        proposes to provide reservation on the ground of inadequate
        representation of certain Backward Classes in services, if it is
        considered by the appropriate authority that such reservation will
        adversely affect the efficiency of the administration, then exercise
        under
Art. 16(4)
is not permissible. This is the constitutional
        limitation on the exercise of the enabling power of reservation
        under
Art. 16(4).
As we shall presently show, question whether in
        the subordinate judiciary covered by Arts. 233 and 234 if
        reservation is provided, then the efficiency of the judicial
        administration will be affected, is a matter within the exclusive
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
16/30
purview of the High Court which shall have to be consulted. Such
        consultation is a constitutional obligation before any Rules are
        made for reservation."
In respect of the legislative power of the State, the Hon‟ble
        Court considering the scheme under
Articles 245
and
246
of the
        Constitution, held, "Meaning thereby, if other provisions of the
        Constitution cut down or exclude the legislative powers of
        Parliament or State Legislature qua given topics, then those other
        provisions have to be given their full play and effect."
Keeping with these basic principles of the Constitution, in
        context of
Articles 233
to 235 it was held that the 1991 Act having
        regard to the definition of the word "State" would apply to govern
        reservation for direct recruitment to the posts of Presiding Officers in
        the district courts as well as courts subordinate thereto. Having held
        thus the Hon‟ble Court proceeded further to hold that Section 4 of the
        1991 Act in its application to the Judicial Services under the State was
        ultra vires
Articles 233
and
235
of the Constitution. In holding thus
        the Hon‟ble Court resorted to
Article 50
of the Constitution which
        mandates the State to take steps to separate the judiciary from the
        executive in the public services of the State; that the power of the
        legislature or the Governor to make enactment or rules under
Article
        309
of the Constitution is circumscribed by the other provisions of the
        Constitution; that control of the High Court over the subordinate
        courts under
Article 235
of the Constitution and consultation with the
        High Court for recruitment of District Judges are absolute and sine
        qua non. As held by plethora of judgments the authority or power of
        appointment of a District Judge conferred upon the Governor of the
        State is subject to the consultation with the High Court and no person
        can be appointed as a District Judge unless he is recommended by the
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
17/30
High Court for such appointment. In respect of „consultation‟, the
        Hon‟ble Court held, "thus consultation of the Governor with the
        High Court under
Article 234
is entirely of a different type as
        compared to his consultation with the Public Service Commission
        about procedural aspect of selection. So far as direct recruitment
        to the posts of District Judges is concerned,
Article 233
, sub-
article (2)
leaves no room for doubt that unless the candidate is
        recommended by the High Court, the Governor cannot appoint
        him as a District Judge. Thus,
Articles 233
and
234
, amongst
        them, represent a well-knit and complete scheme regulating the
        appointments at the apex level of District Judiciary, namely,
        District Judges on the one hand and Subordinate Judges at the
        grass-root level of judiciary subordinate to the District Court."
The Hon‟ble
Court further held
, "it has also to be kept in
        view that neither
Art. 233
nor
Art. 234
contains any provision of
        being subject to any enactment by appropriate Legislature as we
        find in Arts. 98, 146, 148, 187, 229(2) and 324(5). These latter
        articles contain provisions regarding the rule making power of the
        concerned authorities subject to the provisions of the law made by
        the Parliament or Legislature. Such a provision is conspicuously
        absent in Arts. 233 and 234 of the Constitution of India.
        Therefore, it is not possible to agree with the contention of
        learned counsel for the appellant-State that these Articles only
        deal with the rule making power of the Governor, but do not
        touch the legislative power of the competent Legislature. It has to
        be kept in view that once the Constitution provides a complete
        Code for regulating recruitment and appointment to District
        Judiciary and to Subordinate Judiciary, it gets insulated from the
        interference of any other outside agency. We have to keep in view
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
18/30
the scheme of the Constitution and its basic framework that the
        Executive has to be separated from the judiciary. Hence, the
        general sweep of
Art. 309
has to be read subject to this complete
        Code regarding appointment of District Judges and Judges in the
        subordinate judiciary."
"In this connection, we have also to keep in view
Art. 245
which, in its express terms, is made subject to other provisions of
        the Constitution which would include Arts. 233 and 234.
        Consequently, as these twin articles cover the entire field
        regarding recruitment and appointment of District Judges and
        Judges of the Subordinate Judiciary at base level pro tanto the
        otherwise paramount legislative power of the State Legislature to
        operate on this field clearly gets excluded by the constitution
        scheme itself. Thus both Arts. 309 and 245 will have to be read
        subject to Arts. 233 and 234 as provided in the former articles
        themselves."
In respect of reservation in judicial service and the power of
        the State Government under
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution, the
        Hon‟ble Court held, "it is true, as submitted by learned senior
        counsel Shri Dwivedi for the appellant-State that under
art. 16(4)
the State is enabled to provide for reservations in service. But so
        far as „judicial service‟ is concerned, such reservation can be
        made by the Governor, in exercise of his rule making power only
        after consultation with the High Court. The enactment of any
        statutory provision dehors consultation with the High Court for
        regulating the recruitment to District Judiciary and to
        Subordinate Judiciary will clearly fly in the face of the complete
        scheme of recruitment and appointment to Subordinate Judiciary
        and the exclusive field earmarked in connection with such
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
19/30
appointments by Arts. 233 and 234. It is not as if that the High
        Court being constitutional functionaries may be oblivious of the
        need for a scheme of reservation if necessary in appropriate cases
        by resorting to the enabling provision under
Art. 16(4).
The High
        Courts can get consulted by the Governor for framing
        appropriate         rules      regarding        reservation   for   governing
        recruitment under Arts. 233 and 234. But so long as it is not done,
        the Legislature cannot, by an indirect method, completely
        bypassing the High Court and exercising its legislative power,
        circumvent and cut across the very scheme of recruitment and
        appointment to District Judiciary as envisaged by the makers of
        the Constitution. Such an exercise, apart from being totally
        forbidden by the constitutional scheme, will also fall foul on the
        concept relating to "separation of powers between the legislature,
        the executive and the judiciary" as well as the fundamental
        concept of an „independent judiciary‟. Both these concepts are
        now elevated to the level of basic structure of the Constitution and
        are the very heart of the constitutional scheme."
The Hon‟ble
Court further held
, "any statutory provision
        bypassing consultation with the High Court and laying down a
        statutory fiat as is tried to be done by enactment of S.4 by the
        Bihar Legislature has got to be held to be in direct conflict with
        the complete Code regarding recruitment and appointment to the
        posts of District Judiciary and Subordinate Judiciary as
        permitted and envisaged by Arts. 233 and 234 of the Constitution.
        Impugned S. 4, therefore, cannot operate in the clearly
        earmarked and forbidden field for the State Legislature so far as
        the topic of recruitment to District Judiciary and Subordinate
        Judiciary is concerned. That field is carved out and taken out
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
20/30
from the operation of the general sweep of
Art. 309".
It was also held by the Hon‟ble Court that, "but for that
        purpose, the Governor can, in consultation with the High Court,
        make appropriate rules and provide for a scheme of reservation
        for appointment at grass-root level or even at the highest level of
        the District Judiciary but so long as this is not done, the State
        Legislature cannot, by upsetting the entire apple-cart and totally
        bypassing the Constitutional mandate of
Articles 233
and
234
and
        without being required to consult the High Court, lay down a
        statutory scheme of reservation as a road roller, straight-jacket
        formula uniformly governing all States Services, including
        Judiciary."
In above view taken by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, the
        Court held and directed, "in the light of our answer to point no. 2,
        the question survives for consideration as to what appropriate
        orders can be passed in connection with the impugned Section 4 of
        the Act. Now it must be kept in view that Section 4, as enacted in
        the Act, can have general operation and efficacy regarding other
        Services of the State not forming part of Judicial Service of the
        State. Qua such other services Section 4 can operate on its own
        and in that connection consultation with the High Court is not at
        all required. However, in so far as it tries to encroach upon the
        field of the recruitment and appointment to Subordinate Judicial
        Service of the State as envisaged by
Articles 233
and
234
it can
        certainly be read down by holding that Section 4 of the impugned
        Act shall not apply for regulating the recruitment and
        appointments to the cadre of District Judges as well as to the
        cadre of Judiciary subordinate to the District Judges and such
        appointments will be strictly governed by the Bihar Superior
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
21/30
Judicial Service Rules, 1951 as well as by the Bihar Judicial
        Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1955. In other words, Section 4 will
        not have any impact on these rules and will stand read down to
        that extent. Once that is done, question of striking down the said
        rule from the statute book would not survive and would not be
        required. We, accordingly, read it down as aforesaid. Point no. 3
        is answered accordingly in favour of the respondent and against
        the appellant-State."
Hon‟ble Mr. Justice G B Pattanaik, in his separate
        judgment, did agree with the supremacy of the power of the High
        Court under
Articles 333
to 337 of the Constitution. The Hon‟ble
        Judge observed, "in other words, so far as recruitment to the
        judicial services of the State is concerned, the same being
        provided for specifically in Chapter VI under
Articles 233
to 237,
        it is those provisions of the Constitution which would override any
        law made by the appropriate legislature in exercise of power
        under
Article 309
of the Constitution. The State Legislature
        undoubtedly can make law for regulating the conditions of
        services of the officers belonging to the Judicial Wing but cannot
        make law dealing with recruitment to the judicial services since
        the field of recruitment to the judicial service is carved out in the
        Constitution itself in Chapter VI under
Articles 233
to 236 of the
        Constitution."
However, Hon‟ble Mr. Justice R P Sethi speaking for
        himself and for Hon‟ble Mr. Justice V N Khare had a different view.
        According to the said minority view, "it follows, therefore, that
        subject to the other provisions of the Constitution, the
        appropriate Legislature can regulate the recruitment and
        condition of service of all persons appointed to public services
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
22/30
including the judicial services and posts in connection with the
        affairs of the Union or of the State. Similarly with restraint of the
        provisions of
Article 309
the Governor of the State can make rules
        regulating the recruitment and condition of service of such
        persons. The scheme of the Constitution, ensuring independence
        of judiciary clearly and unambiguously provides that no power is
        conferred upon executive to exercise disciplinary authority and
        jurisdiction in respect of judicial service. Express provision has
        been made under the Constitution, vesting in the High Court "the
        control over District Courts and Courts subordinate thereto".
        Such a provision did not exist in the
Government of India Act,
        1935
."
The Hon‟ble Judge further held, "it is thus evident that
        having failed to get the consent of the High Court in framing the
        Rules either under
Article 234
or
Article 309
read with
Article
        233
of the Constitution, resort was had to the issuance of
        Ordinance and thereafter enacting the impugned Act. This
        unfortunate position arose on account of the antagonistic and
        belligerent approaches adopted by the State Government and the
        High Court. Had the aforesaid two wings of the State acted fairly
        realizing      their      obligations       under   the   Constitution,   the
        confrontation could have been avoided."
The State Government has in its counter affidavit relied
        upon the above referred correspondence to buttress the contention that
        the impugned Notifications have been issued after due consultation
        with the High Court. It was the High Court which had deliberately
        delayed the matter. The State Government has, without any
        supporting materials, denied that there is an adequate representation of
        backward class candidates in the State Judiciary. Instead, it has relied
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
23/30
upon the reservation allowed in the judicial services of various States
        and the power of the State Government to provide for such
        reservation. The State Government has also relied upon the above
        referred direction dated 23rd September 2008 issued by the Hon‟ble
        Supreme Court to resolve the issue expeditiously.
In support of its
        contentions, the State Government has also relied upon the minority
        view expressed in the matter of
Bal Mukund Sah
(supra) without
        reference to the majority decision.
In the backdrop of the above referred facts and the law
        decided by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, let me examine whether the
        impugned Notifications are validly issued by the State Government in
        exercise of its power to provide for reservation especially for
        backward classes in the Judicial Services of the State. There indeed is
        no question about the power of the State Government to provide
        reservation in the posts in services under the State but whether the
        State Government is justified in introducing the reservation in the
        Judicial Services in the State contrary to the opinion of the High
        Court.
Let us first be clear that although the State is empowered to
        provide for reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
        Other Backward Classes, the Constitution does not compel the State
        to provide for such reservation nor does the Constitution restrict the
        extent to which such reservation can be provided. Probably, the
        Constitution makers relied upon the wisdom of the State in making
        reservation only to the extent it is necessary and maintaining
        efficiency in the administration. It is known to one and all that the
        power of providing reservation in public services has largely been
        politicized. Reservation in public services is more a political
        manifesto than the necessity; effort is to appease the mass by
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
24/30
including more and more castes and communities in one or the other
        reserved category without reference to the necessary criteria, such as
        normal profession of the community concerned or the educational
        level. The effect of the reservation on the efficiency of the
        administration is the factor totally overlooked. A time came where the
        reservation was extended to more than 70% of the posts which called
        for intervention by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. The Hon‟ble Supreme
        Court put its foot down and directed that in no circumstances the
        reservation shall exceed 50% of the posts. This has now been used as
        a leverage for providing for 50% reservation of the posts. It has not
        been examined or not even the case of the State that reservation to the
        extent of 50% is required or that even after 50% reservation the
        efficiency of the administration is not adversely affected. The State
        Government appears to have lost sight of these vital factors.
Further, as held by some of the High Courts and the Hon‟ble
        Supreme Court, and as provided under the 1991 Act, if the candidates
        in the reserved categories are able to secure general standard of
        selection they are accommodated on general category posts and not
        against the reserved category posts. In other words, those reserved
        category candidates who are appointed on reserved posts are
        necessarily the candidates below general standard of selection. In
        other words, they are necessarily below average or below par or I may
        call them, though it sounds derogatory, substandard candidates.
The matter requires to be looked from one another angle
        also. The establishment of the Civil Services of the State is very large
        and may be it is able to sustain 50% substandard employees. So far as
        the Judicial Services is concerned, the establishment of the total
        number of judicial posts sanctioned is not more than 1500 in the State
        having population of more than 10 crores. It is the consistent
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
25/30
experience that it is difficult to recruit even 1500 suitable candidates
        to man the judicial posts. The State Government has to suffer constant
        deficit in the number of judicial officers. If in such a small cadre 50%
        of the officers are selected on the basis of reservation who are below
        the general standard of selection, it would certainly impair the
        dispensation of justice. The casualty will be the State which is one
        single largest litigant; poor and ignorant litigants who are not well
        advised; the beneficiaries will be the affluent and capable litigants and
        those who approach the courts for false or frivolous claims with a
        view to buying time. As recorded by the High Court in its decision on
        administrative side, the High Court is satisfied about adequate
        representation of backward classes at all levels in the State Judiciary
        and reservation for them is not required.
The State Government although has relied upon some parts
        of the judgment in the matter of
Bal Mukund Sah
(supra) and some
        orders issued by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of Malik
        Mazhar Sultan, has not taken into consideration the primacy of the
        decisions of the High Court in the matters relating to judicial officers.
        There is no dearth of the judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court
        that the opinion of the High Court shall prevail.
In the matter of L V A Dixitulu & Others [(1979) 2 SCC
        34], a Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court has reiterated its
        concern about independence of Judiciary and primacy of the opinion
        of the High Court in the matters relating to the Judicial Officers in the
        State and the ministerial staff of the High Court. The Hon‟ble Court
        has held, "the officers and servants of the High Court and the
        members of the Judicial Service, including District Judges, being
        outside the purview of clause (3), the non obstante provision in
        clause (10) cannot operate to take away the administrative or
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
26/30
judicial jurisdiction of the Chief Justice or of the High Court, as
        the case may be, under
Articles 229
, 235
and
226
of the
        Constitution in regard to these public servants in matters or
        disputes falling within the scope of the said Articles."
In the matter of Manbodhan Lal Srivastava (AIR 1957 SC
912), the Hon‟ble Court has emphasized on consultation and the
        nature of consultation required in the matters under
Articles 233
and
234
of the Constitution. Same concern for the independence of
        Judiciary and primacy of the opinion of the Supreme Court and the
        High Court are the subject matter of discussion in the matter of
        Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth (AIR 1977 2328).
Once again in the matter of
M M Gupta vs. State of
        Jammu & Kashmir
(AIR 1982 SC 1579), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court
        recorded "unfortunately, for some time past, there appears to be
        an unhappy trend of interference in the matter of judicial
        appointments by the executive both at the State and the Central
        level."     The Hon‟ble Court also recorded, "if in the matter of
        appointment, the High Court is sought to be ignored and the
        executive       authority       chooses         to   make   the   appointment,
        independence of the Judiciary will be affected."
The primacy of
        the opinion of the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the
        High Court in the matter of appointment of the Judges of the Supreme
        Court or the High Court has been reiterated by the Constitutional
        Bench of the Supreme Court in the matter of Supreme Court
        Advocates-on- Record Association vs. Union of India (AIR 1994 SC
268). The matter of independence of Judiciary and the consultation
        envisaged by
Article 234
of the Constitution has once again been the
        subject matter of consideration by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the
        matter of Gauhati High Court vs. Kuladhar Phukan [(2002) 4 SCC
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
27/30
525] and in the matter of Jamaluddin vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir
        [(2011) 14 SCC 725].
The Hon‟ble Supreme Court has in the above referred
        judgments also distinguished the nature of consultation with the
        Public Service Commission and with the High Court and the nature of
        consultation in respect of the Civil Services of the State and the
        Judicial Services of the State. In my view, the correspondence relied
        upon by the State Government can hardly be said to be consultation in
        the real sense of the word. Writing letters and displaying the
        earnestness of the Government for providing desired reservation in
        Judicial Services cannot be said to be consultation. The State
        Government was required to pay attention to the opinion of the High
        Court keeping in view the general representation of different classes,
        the total strength of the judicial officers and the maintenance of the
        high standards in respect of dispensation of justice. None of these
        factors appears to be the primary concern or of any concern at all of
        the State Government. In my opinion, not only the State Government
        has failed to properly consult the High Court, it has not taken into
        consideration the vital factors of total strength of the judicial officers
        and advisability of the reservation, that too to the extent of 50% of
        vacancies, in judicial services vis-à-vis the maintenance of efficiency
        and competency. The State Government has, in its zeal to provide for
        reservation, lost sight that the opinion of the High Court will have
        primacy over the desire of the State Government.
All these judgments only prove the obduracy of the
        executive Government to impose reservation in Judicial Services
        contrary to the opinion of the High Court, without regard to the
        necessity to maintain certain standard of efficiency and competence of
        the judicial officers. The independence of the Judiciary and the
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
28/30
primacy of the opinion of the High Court are constantly under attack
        by the executive Government. The High Court is constantly on the
        edge, fervently protecting its independence and primacy.
Let me record that action of the State Government lacks
        bonafide. At first in 2008, the State Government made requisition for
        217 posts in the cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division) indicating the
        extent of reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The
        recruitment process was commenced under advertisement no. 3 of
        2008 published on 9th August 2008. Although the Hon‟ble Supreme
        Court had made order on 23rd September 2008 to complete the
        recruitment process in accordance with the existing Rules, ignoring
        the said direction, in purported compliance with the direction to
        complete the process in consultation with the High Court, the State
        Government entered into some correspondence with the High Court
        and before the matter could be crystallized in consultation with the
        High Court, on 25th June 2009 the State Government issued the
        impugned Notifications in purported exercise of power conferred by
Article 234
read with
Article 309
of the Constitution and in alleged
        consultation with the High Court and the Public Service Commission.
        On the very next day on 26th June 2009, the State Government
        withdrew its requisition made earlier and the next day on 27th June
        2009 made a fresh requisition maintaining reservation in accordance
        with the 1991 Act. The quick succession of the aforesaid events
        smacks lack of bonafide on the part of the State Government. Once
        the recruitment process had commenced; the Hon‟ble Supreme Court
        had directed to complete the recruitment process in accordance with
        the existing Rules, the State Government ought not to have meddled
        with the said recruitment process. Instead, the State Government has
        surreptitiously introduced the reservation under the 1991 Act to the
 Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
29/30
posts in Judicial Services; stalled the recruitment which had already
        commenced, and by circumventing the order of the Hon‟ble Supreme
        Court, started recruitment process afresh, without the knowledge of
        the High Court. The action of the State Government is deprecated and
        is abhorred.
In my opinion, the High Court has, for cogent reasons
        decided not to make reservation for backward classes or to the extent
        of 50% of the posts. It is hightime the State Government accepts the
        opinion of the High Court and forbears itself from interfering with the
        administrative powers of the High Court in respect of the posts in the
        State Judiciary.
To understand the implications of the reservation in the
        Judiciary, I have gathered some information which, in my opinion,
        should be fruitful to note. Since the recruitment in question
        commenced in 2009 the State Government has sanctioned some more
        posts in Judicial Services at all levels. As on today, the sanctioned
        strength of the Judicial Officers at all levels together is 1670. Out of
        the said sanctioned posts, 1035 posts are filled in. Recruitment for 118
        posts of Judicial Magistrate, [Civil Judge (Junior Division)]
        commenced in 2012 is now completed and the final merit list is
        published. In the recruitment just completed, out of the general merit
        candidates who had qualified for interview, nearly 20% were from the
        reserved categories. To this if we add 27% reservation approved for
        the cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division) total representation of the
        reserved categories will be around 45% or more, not far from the 50%
        target adopted by the State Government. These figures also strengthen
        the decision of the High Court not to make further reservation in the
        cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division).
For the aforesaid reasons, all the Writ Petitions are allowed.
       Patna High Court CWJC No.14677 of 2009 dt. 10-11-2014
30/30
The impugned Notification No. 6067 dated 25th June 2009 issued in
              respect of the Bihar Civil Services (Judicial Branch)(Recruitment)
              Rules, 1955, and the Notification No.6069 dated 25th June 2009 issued
              in respect of the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1951 are
              quashed and set aside. Legal consequences shall follow.
Interlocutory Applications stand disposed of.
Before parting I would like to refer to the Intervention
              Application No. 838 of 2010 filed by the intervenor-Nyaypalika
              Arakshan Andolan through its President, Phulen Yadav. We must
              record that the intervenor has not made out a case that it has a legal
              existence and has the authority to intervene in the present proceeding.
              The averments made in the Application and the written arguments
              filed in the proceeding are highly objectionable and are contemptuous.
              The submissions made by the learned advocate Mr. Rakesh Kumar on
              behalf of the intervenor are equally contemptuous, so is the behaviour
              of Mr. Rakesh Kumar. Although the submission made by Mr. Rakesh
              Kumar is recorded, I reject the Interlocutory Application No. 838 of
              2010 filed by the intervenor- Nyaypalika Arakshan Andolan through
              its President, Phulen Yadav, and record my displeasure for the manner
              in which the case has been presented by the intervenor.
(R.M. Doshit, CJ)
                  Ashwani Kumar Singh, J.               I agree.


                                           (Ashwani Kumar Singh, J)
mrl
 U
AFR
