Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/26861400/

[Cites
23
, Cited by
6
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Arun Kumar And Others vs State Of Himachal Pradesh And Others on 22 October, 2019
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH,
                SHIMLA




                                                                             .
Cr.MMO No.580 of 2019
                                    Reserved on : 18.10.2019
                                    Date of decision : 22nd October, 2019





   Arun Kumar and others
                                                                  ... Petitioners.
Versus





   State of Himachal Pradesh and others
                              r                                   ...Respondents

   Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
    Whether approved for reporting?1 No

   For the Petitioners           : Mr. Manohar Lal Sharma, Advocate.
For the Respondents : Mr. Ashwani K. Sharma & Mr. Nand Lal
                         Thakur, Addl. A.G. with Mr. Narinder Thakur,
                         Dy. A.G. for Respondent No.1/ State.
Mr. Vivek Sharma, Advocate, for respondents





                                    No.2 and 3/ complainant.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge





                     The Accused, after compromising the entire matter with

   the injured, has come up before this Court under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.,

   by invoking inherent powers, seeking quashing of FIR No.190/2012

   dated 26.11.2012, under Sections 498-A read with 34 of
IPC
, in the file
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...2...
of Police Station, Nagrota Bagwan, District Kangra, Himachal




                                                              .
Pradesh, and all subsequent proceedings.
2.          The present F.I.R. stands registered on the basis of

information given by Smt. Rama Walia, mother of the victim Ruchi,





both of whom have been arrayed as respondents No. 2 & 3 in the

present petition, and Mr. Vivek Sharma, Advocate duly represents





them.
3. FACTS: The gist of the entire case is as follows:
a)

          The present FIR was registered on the basis of

     information given by Smt. Rama Walia, mother of the
     victim, Ruchi. She stated that at the time of marriage, a
     false horoscope was given and they were cheated by



     comparing the horoscope of the victim with incorrect
     horoscope of accused Arun Kumar. She further stated that




     after the marriage, whenever her daughter tried to establish
     relations with the accused, then, he would not respond and





     he did not want to accept her and slowly started troubling
     her. They would tease her about the quality of marriage.
She further stated that they demanded gold and other
     ornaments. She further stated that in the month of May,
     the sister-in-law of her daughter namely Vaneeta visited
     their house and she also harassed her for dowry. On these
     allegations, present FIR was registered.
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...3...
b)    Now the parties         have entered into a written
    compromise       which has been placed on record as




                                                                 .
Annexure P2.
c) Respondents No.2 and 3, Smt. Rama Walia and Smt.
    Ruchi, had put in appearance and made statements on





    oath that they have compromised the entire matter with the
    accused Arun Kumar and others, the present petitioners.
    The statements are taken on file.
4.

            REASONING: The following aspects would be relevant

     to arrive at a final conclusion in this petition:-
a)    The private respondents No.2 and 3 stated that the FIR in
    question was registered on the basis of complainant made by
    mother Smt. Rama Walia and now they have amicably settled the


    matter with the petitioners without any coercion, duress, pressure
    or any wrong tactics.
b)    Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District
    Magistrate as a normal procedure. However, there is inherent





    jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of
    Criminal Procedure to intervene in such kind of matter. It is not





    the requirement of law that the cancellation has to be approved
    only through the District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of High
    Court under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. can always be exercised,
    depending upon the facts and circumstances of each and every
    case.
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...4...
c)   Even if, this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to
     maintain the stand which they have taken in this compromise,




                                                                 .
which is likely to result in the acquittal of the accused.
5.   STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
a)   In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H. Chanchani

     and another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds





     that the determination of the question as regards the propriety of

     the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing

     process need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the

     charge. The Court observed thus :-
"5.... .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to us


          inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to
          plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no
          sufficient material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred





          from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic earlier)
          point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the





          offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that
          the very issuance of the order of taking cognizance is invalid
          on the ground that no offence can be said to have been
          made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition.
          It has been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the interest
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...5...
of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue
          even where the allegations in the complaint petition do not




                                                               .
make out any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of
          the process of court, and therefore, there cannot be any
          dispute that in such case power under
Section 482
of the





          Code can be exercised."
b)   In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd
.
as under:-
"8.   ....
....
and another, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds



                          ....There is no hard and fast rule that the

          objection as to cognizability of offence and maintainability of
          the complaint should be allowed to be raised only at the time


          of framing the charge."
6.   JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
a)   In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three





     Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"6. ....     ...    ...It is well established that the inherent





          jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash
          proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of
          the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of
          justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an
          accused person must be tried under the provisions of the
          Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to interfere with
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...6...
the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not
     possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible




                                                          .
rule which would govern the exercise of this inherent
     jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some categories of
     cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be





     exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be
     cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take
     the view that the institution or continuance of criminal





     proceedings against an accused person may amount to the
     abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the
     impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If

     the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an

     offence alleged to have been committed by an accused
     person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar


     against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding,
     the High Court would be justified in quashing the
     proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite




     sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this





     category. Cases may also arise where the allegations in the
     First Information Report or the complaint, even if they are





     taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do
     not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question
     of appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of
     looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to
     decide whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In
     such case, it would be legitimate for the High Court to hold
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...7...
that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of the
     criminal Court to be issued against the accused person. A




                                                            .
third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of
     the High Court can be successfully invoked may also arise.
     In cases falling under this category the allegations made





     against the accused person do constitute an offence alleged
     but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support of
     the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to





     prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is
     important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
     where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence

     which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the

     accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence
     which on its appreciation may or may not support the


     accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S.
     561-A, the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as
     to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is




     the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not





     be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent
     jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of





     the evidence the accusation made against the accused
     would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and
     scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S.
     561-A in the matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and
     that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide :
     In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...8...
Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress
, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr.
          Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954




                                                                .
Punj 193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu
          Majumdar, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v.
          Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad
39)."
b)   In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao

     Chandrojirao Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges bench of




     the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds:-
"7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution

          at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be

          applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted
          allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is
          also for the court to take into consideration any special



          features which appear in a particular case to consider
          whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit




          a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the
          court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where





          in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction
          is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be





          served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the
          court may while taking into consideration the special facts of
          a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at
          a preliminary stage."
7.   JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...9...
a)   A three Judge bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Gian




                                                               .
Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law





    on quashing on account of compromise/compounding, in the

    following terms:
"53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language suggests,
         saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by





         virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the
         process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
         justice. It begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which

         means that the provision is an overriding provision. These

         words leave no manner of doubt that none of the provisions
         of the Code limits or restricts the inherent power. The


         guideline for exercise of such power is provided in
Section
         482
itself i.e., to prevent abuse of the process of any court or
         otherwise to secure the ends of justice. As has been




         repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers no new powers





         on High Court; it merely safeguards existing inherent powers
         possessed by High Court necessary to prevent abuse of the





         process of any Court or to secure the ends of justice. It is
         equally well settled that the power is not to be resorted to if
         there is specific provision in the Code for the redress of the
         grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be exercised very
         sparingly and it should not be exercised as against the
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...10...
express bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the
     Code.
.
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the
     ground of settlement between an offender and victim is not





     the same thing as compounding of offence. They are
     different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the
     power of compounding of offences given to a court under
Section 320
is materially different from the quashing of
     criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
     inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a

     criminal court is circumscribed by the provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is guided solely and squarely
     thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by
     the High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal



     proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the material on
     record as to whether the ends of justice would justify such




     exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may
     be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having





     regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and
     victim   has   been   settled   although     offences       are    not
     compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, continuation of
     criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice
     in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is
     put to an end and peace is restored; securing the ends of
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...11...
justice being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes
     are acts which have harmful effect on the public and consist




                                                           .
in wrong doing that seriously endangers and threatens well-
     being of society and it is not safe to leave the crime- doer
     only because he and the victim have settled the dispute





     amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet
     certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
     or without permission of the Court. In respect of serious





     offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of
     mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of
     moral turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of

     Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants

     while working in that capacity, the settlement between
     offender and victim can have no legal sanction at all.
However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and
     predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil,
     mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or such like




     transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony,





     particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute,
     where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender and





     victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
     irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been
     made compoundable, the High Court may within the
     framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal
     proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that
     on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...12...
of offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
         proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice




                                                                  .
shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and not
         exhaustive. Each case will depend on its own facts and no
         hard and fast category can be prescribed."
b)   In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur
    and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr., (2017) 9 SCC 641, a





    Three Judge Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the
    broad principles for quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as
    follows:
"16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents
         on the subject, may be summarised in the following
         propositions :
16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of
               the High Court to prevent an abuse of the process
               of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The




               provision does not confer new powers. It only





               recognises and preserves powers which inhere in
               the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High
               Court to quash a First Information Report or a
               criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement
               has been arrived at between the offender and the
               victim is not the same as the invocation of
               jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:00 :::HCHP
...13...
offence. While compounding an offence, the power
     of the court is governed by the provisions of Section




                                                        .
320 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973. The
     power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even
     if the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal
     proceeding or complaint should be quashed in
     exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the





     High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
     justice would justify the exercise of the inherent
     power;
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court

     has a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be
     exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to


     prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
     16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or
     First Information Report should be quashed on the




     ground that the offender and victim have settled the





     dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and
     circumstances of each case and no exhaustive





     elaboration of principles can be formulated;
     16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section
     482 and while dealing with a plea that the dispute
     has been settled, the High Court must have due
     regard to the nature and gravity of the offence.
     Heinous and serious offences involving mental
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...14...
depravity or offences such as murder, rape and
     dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed though




                                                         .
the victim or the family of the victim have settled the
     dispute. Such offences are, truly speaking, not
     private in nature but have a serious impact upon





     society. The decision to continue with the trial in
     such cases is founded on the overriding element of
     public interest in punishing persons for serious





     offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences,
     there may be criminal cases which have an

     overwhelming or predominant element of a civil

     dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as
     the exercise of the inherent power to quash is


     concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which
     arise   from   commercial,     financial,     mercantile,




     partnership    or   similar   transactions       with     an





     essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations
     fall for quashing where parties have settled the





     dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash
     the criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise
     between the disputants, the possibility of a
     conviction is remote and the continuation of a
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...15...
criminal proceeding would cause oppression and
           prejudice; and




                                                             .
16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set
           out in propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic





           offences involving the financial and economic well-
           being of the state have implications which lie
           beyond the domain of a mere dispute between





           private disputants. The High Court would be
           justified in declining to quash where the offender is
           involved in an activity akin to a financial or
           economic
                   r      fraud    or    misdemeanour.           The

           consequences of the act complained of upon the
           financial or economic system will weigh in the
           balance."
8.   JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS IN WHICH FIR UNDER SECTION 498-A:
a)       In
Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand
, (2010) 7 SCC 667,





Supreme Court observed:
30. It is a matter of common experience that most of these
         complaints under
Section 498A
Indian Penal Code are filed
         in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper
         deliberations. We come across a large number of such
         complaints which are not even bonafide and are filed with
         oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the
         number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a
         matter of serious concern.
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...16...
31. The learned members of the Bar have enormous social
     responsibility and obligation to ensure that the social fiber of




                                                             .
family life is not ruined or demolished. They must ensure that





     exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be
     reflected in the criminal complaints. Majority of the
     complaints are filed either on their advice or with their
     concurrence. The learned members of the Bar who belong to





     a noble profession must maintain its noble traditions and
     should treat every complaint under Section 498-A as a basic
     human problem and must make serious endeavour to help
     the parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that





     human problem. They must discharge their duties to the best
     of their abilities to ensure that social fiber, peace and
     tranquility of the society remains intact. The members of the
     Bar should also ensure that one complaint should not lead to
     multiple cases.
32. Unfortunately, at the time of filing of the complaint the
     implications and consequences are not properly visualised
     by the complainant that such complaint can lead to
     insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the
     complainant, accused and his close relations.
33. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and
     punish the guilty and protect the innocent. To find out the




     truth is a herculean task in majority of these complaints. The
     tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate





     relations is also not uncommon. At times, even after the
     conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult to ascertain the real
     truth. The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious





     in dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic
     realities into consideration while dealing with matrimonial
     cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's close
     relations who had been living in different cities and never
     visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant
     resided would have an entirely different complexion. The
     allegations of the complaint are required to be scrutinised
     with great care and circumspection. Experience reveals that
     long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour, acrimony
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...17...
and bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is
             also a matter of common knowledge that in cases filed by




                                                                  .
the complainant if the husband or the husband's relations





             had to remain in jail even for a few days, it would ruin the
             chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of
             suffering is extremely long and painful.
b)   In
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P.
, 2012(10) SCC 741, Supreme

         Court holds,
28. We, therefore, deem it just and legally appropriate to





             quash the proceedings initiated against the appellants Geeta
             Mehrotra and Ramji Mehrotra as the FIR does not disclose
             any material which could be held to be constituting any
             offence against these two appellants. Merely by making a
             general allegation that they were also involved in physical

             and mental torture of the complainant-respondent No. 2

             without mentioning even a single incident against them as
             also the fact as to how they could be motivated to demand
             dowry when they are only related as brother and sister of the
             complainant's husband, we are pleased to quash and set
             aside the criminal proceedings in so far as these appellants



             are concerned and consequently the order passed by the
             High Court shall stand overruled.
c) In
Manoj Kumar Sharma v. State of Chhattisgarh
, (2016) 9





         SCC 1, Supreme Court holds,
22. In view of the above discussion, we are of the





            considered opinion that the allegations made in the FIR are
            inherently improbable and the evidence collected in support
            of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence
            and make out a case against the appellants herein. Further,
            to invoke inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
            Code, the High Court must be fully satisfied that the material
            produced on record is based on sound, justifiable and
            reasonable facts. In the case on hand, malicious prosecution
            was instituted by the brother of the deceased after a period
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...18...
of five years that too on the basis of anonymous letters.
           There was no accusation against the appellants before filing




                                                                .
of the FIR. The allegations are vague and do not warrant





           continuation of criminal proceedings against the appellants.
d) In
Varala Bharath Kumar v. State of Telangana
, (2017) 9 SCC





      413, Supreme Court holds,
6. It is by now well settled that the extraordinary power under
Article 226
or inherent power under
Section 482
of the Code
           of Criminal Procedure can be exercised by the High Court,
           either to prevent abuse of process of the court or otherwise
           to secure the ends of justice. Where allegations made in the
           First Information Report/the complaint or the outcome of

           investigation as found in the Charge Sheet, even if they are

           taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not
           prima facie constitute any offence or make out the case
           against the accused; where the allegations do not disclose
           the ingredients of the offence alleged; where the


           uncontroverted allegations made in the First Information
           Report or complaint and the material collected in support of
           the same do not disclose the commission of offence alleged
           and make out a case against the accused; where a criminal




           proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or
           where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior





           motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
           view to spite him due to private and personal grudge, the
           power under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India or under
Section 482
of Code of Criminal Procedure may be
           exercised.
7. While exercising power under Section 482 or under
Article
           226
in such matters, the court does not function as a Court
           of Appeal or Revision. Inherent jurisdiction under Section
           482 of the Code though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
           carefully or with caution and only when such exercise is
           justified by the tests specifically laid down under Section 482
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...19...
itself. It is to be exercised ex debitojustitiae to do real and
     substantial justice, for the administration of which alone




                                                          .
courts exist. The court must be careful and see that its





     decision in exercise of its power is based on sound
     principles. The inherent powers should not be exercised to
     stifle a legitimate prosecution. Of course, no hard and fast
     rule can be
laid down in
regard to cases in which the High





     Court will exercise its extra ordinary jurisdiction of quashing
     the proceedings at any stage.
8. We are conscious of the fact that, Section 498A was





     added to the Code with a view to punish the husband or any
     of his relatives, who harass or torture the wife to coerce her
     or her relatives to satisfy unlawful demands of dowry.
     Keeping the afore-mentioned object in mind, we have dealt
     with the matter. We do not find any allegation of subjecting

     the complainant to cruelty within the meaning of
Section

     498A
of I.P.C. The records at hand could not disclose any
     willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive
     the complainant to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or
     danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of
     the complainant. So also, there is nothing on record to show



     that there was a demand of dowry by the appellants or any
     of their relatives, either prior to the marriage, during the
     marriage or after the marriage. The record also does not




     disclose anywhere that the husband of the complainant
     acted, with a view to coerce her or any person related to her





     to meet any unlawful demand of any property or valuable
     security.
9. The ingredients of criminal breach of trust are also not
     forthcoming from the records as against the appellants. The
     allegations contained in the complaint and the charge sheet
     do not satisfy the definition of criminal breach of trust, as
     contained in
Section 405
of the I.P.C. In view of the blurred
     allegations, and as we find that the complainant is only citing
     the incidents of unhappiness with her husband, no useful
     purpose will be served in continuing the prosecution against
     the appellants. This is a case where there is a total absence
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...20...
of allegations for the offences punishable under Section
          498A and
Section 406
of the I.P.C. In the matter on hand, the




                                                               .
allegations made in the First Information Report as well as





          the material collected during the investigation, even if they
          are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety,
          do not prima facie constitute the offences punishable under
Section 498A
and
406
of the I.P.C. against the





          accused/appellants. So also the uncontroverted allegations
          found against the appellants do not disclose the commission
          of the offence alleged and make out a case against the
          accused. The proceedings initiated against the appellants





          are liable to be quashed.
9.          In the present case, the offence under
Section 498-A
IPC

is not compoundable under
Section 320
Cr.P.C. Be that as it may, the

inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. can be invoked to

quash the FIR and subsequent proceedings.
10.         In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as

judicial precedents, a few of which have been mentioned hereinabove,




I am of the considered opinion that continuation of these proceedings





will not only cause unnecessary burden on the trial Courts, but in all

likelihood, is going to cause distressing hardship on both the victim as





well as the accused, without resulting into any fruitful purpose

whatsoever. Moreover, our trial Courts are already burdened with so

many cases and it will be a total wastage of the valuable time of the

Courts. If these types of proceedings are permitted to be continued
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...21...
and the accused are prosecuted, it will serve no purpose whatsoever.
.
Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that this is a fit case where





the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the above mentioned





FIR and consequent proceedings.
11.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State of





Himachal Pradesh (SC
); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme

Court holds as under:-
"47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is

         concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the
         order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter
         was already pending as the appellants had filed the Special



         Leave Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting
         their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having




         regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been
         entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be





         quashed, order of cognizance would automatically stands
         vitiated."
CONSEQUENCES:
12.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979)

3 SCR 639, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
...22...
"The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when
              parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and




                                                                .
weave a sense of fellowship or reunion."
13.         Consequently, this petition is allowed and FIR No.190/





2012 dated 26.11.2012, under Sections 498-A read with 34 of
IPC
, in

the file of Police Station, Nagrota Bagwan, District Kangra, Himachal





Pradesh, is quashed.       Since the FIR has been quashed, all the

consequential proceedings, if any, are also quashed and set aside.
The bail bonds are accordingly discharged.
Petition is allowed. All pending application(s), if any, also

      stand disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                   Judge.
22nd October, 2019(KS)
::: Downloaded on - 23/10/2019 20:25:01 :::HCHP
