Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 45 OF 2020
Citation: SCC 770
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/

[Cites
17
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 45 OF 2020
      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO. 4977 OF 2019)


STATE REP. BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                      .....APPELLANT(S)

                                      VERSUS

M. MURUGESAN & ANR.                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)




                          JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.   The State is aggrieved against an order passed by the High Court

     of Judicature at Madras on 24 th April, 2019 constituting a

     Heterogeneous Committee         of    named   persons   to     give   its

     recommendations on the reforms that can be brought into practice

     for   reformation,   rehabilitation     and   re-integration    of    the

     convict/accused person to society and best practices for improving

     the quality of investigation.        The Committee was mandated to

     submit report within eight weeks and that the State was directed to

     furnish data for each District. The Committee was to scrutinize the

     same and submit the final data separately along with the report.
The State was directed to provide office room for the Committee to

     conduct its meetings and to keep the documents and other
1
materials in safe custody.
2.      Such directions came to be passed in a matter pertaining to grant

        of bail under
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 1.
The High Court had admitted the accused to bail on 18 th February,

        2019 subject to certain conditions but passed an order to call for

        the details of the cases registered by the Police, final report filed,

        trial conducted and the result of such cases. The details were to

        bring to light the manner in which the entire criminal justice

        system is operating in the State. In pursuance of the directions so

        issued and the data provided, the impugned order was passed by

        the learned Single Bench.
3.      The High Court after collecting the data in respect of the criminal

        cases registered, convictions and acquittals in each District

        proceeded to write a thesis on how the criminal justice system

        should function in the State. It was observed that the central aim

        of the criminal law is to reform the offender and to rehabilitate him

        in a bid to render him useful to society. The Court held as under:
“16. The situation calls for a thorough revamping of the
                     Criminal Justice system in this State. It looks like the
                     police are caught into this Vicious cycle. That shows on
                     the poor record of convictions in serious crimes.
                     Instead of finding a complete cure for the disease,
                     police seem to be looking for temporary solutions
                     without curing the disease. Unless we agree that there
                     is a serious problem, there is no scope for
                     change/improvement.
17. “Once a Criminal Always a Criminal” is the result of
                     the present system prevailing in this state. We have
                     forgotten the fundamental purpose of Criminal Justice

1    for short, ‘Code’
2
system which is reformation, rehabilitation and re-
integration of the convict into society. If an accused is
pushed to the extremes by this system where he finds
that even if he wants to turn a new leaf in his life, this
system will not allow him, he will rather surrender to his
fate and turn out to be a hardened criminal. A welfare
state can never stoop down to such a level.
xx              xx                  xx
20.     It goes without saying that the quality of
investigation has come down drastically and the data
provided by the police, referred supra, makes it evident.
The alacrity shown by the police in registering FIR and
effecting arrest, is not seen in investigating the case,
laying final report and taking the case to its logical end.
The recent circular dated March 20 issued by DGP
states that all the police stations will henceforth have
exclusive investigation wing. As per the directions, the
investigation wing will be responsible for investigation
and prosecution of all cases registered in the station,
including cases identified by the law and order wing.
Further, the police officers attached to the investigation
wing shall not be diverted to any bandobust work
except with the prior approval of the zonal IG or
commissioner of police. This is a step on the right
direction. A conscious effort should be made by the
investigating wing in every police station with the
active coordination of the directorate of prosecution to
take every criminal case to its logical end. The police
should not be under the impression that their work gets
over with registering FIR and effecting arrest. One of
the main challenges for the prosecution in Serious
crimes is the witness turning hostile due to various
reasons. Witness protection scheme, 2018, which has
now become the law of the land in view of the
judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mahender
Chawla case (2019 (1) MWN Crl 340 (SC)) , must be
implemented effectively.       The investigation officers
must be updated on a regular basis on the March of law.
Cyber crimes have reached monumental proportions
and criminals committing these offences are clearly
having an upper hand since these criminals are
intelligent crooks and police officers require regular
training and exposure to tackle these crimes.            A
complete overhaul is required to enhance the quality of
investigation.”
3
4.     The matter before the High Court was as to whether the accused

       are entitled to be admitted to bail, that is the jurisdiction conferred

       on the Court in terms of
Section 439
of the Code. Before granting

       bail, the High Court is enjoined upon an obligation to issue notice of

       an application for bail to the Public Prosecutor if a person is

       accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of

       Session or which, though not so triable, for punishment of

       imprisonment for life.
5.     We find that the Hon’ble Single Bench has committed grave

       illegality in retaining the file after grant of bail to the accused on

       18th February, 2019. The jurisdiction of the High Court came to an

       end when an application for grant of bail under
Section 439
of the

       Code was finally decided.
6.
In
State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar & Ors.2
, the

       High Court of Punjab & Haryana after deciding a criminal appeal

       continued to pass order in respect of offenders in other cases not

       connected with the matter which was dealt with by the High Court.
This Court deprecated the invocation of jurisdiction in a matter not

       connected with the appeal and that too after passing of the final

       order. The Court held as under:
“86. In view of the law referred to hereinabove, the
                   Bench was not competent to entertain the said
                   applications and even if the same had been filed in the
                   disposed of appeal, the court could have directed to
                   place the said applications before the Bench dealing
                   with similar petitions.
2    (2011) 14 SCC 770
4
xx             xx           xx
91. There could be no justification for the Bench
                   concerned to entertain the applications filed under
Section 482
CrPC as miscellaneous applications in a
                   disposed of appeal. The law requires that the Bench
                   could have passed an appropriate order to place those
                   applications before the Bench hearing
Section 482
CrPC
                   petitions or place the matters before the Chief Justice
                   for appropriate orders.”
7.     This Court in Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar referred to a case

       reported as
Simrikhia         v. Dolley     Mukherjee and Chhabi

       Mukherjee & Anr.3
wherein the Court observed that inherent

       powers under
Section 482
of the Code cannot be exercised to do

       something which is expressly barred under the Code. It was held

       that inherent powers cannot be exercised assuming that the

       statute conferred an unfettered and arbitrary jurisdiction, nor can

       the High Court act at its whim or caprice.          The Code does not

       confer unlimited/unfettered jurisdiction on the High Court as the

       “ends of justice” and “abuse of the process of the court” have to be

       dealt with in accordance with law and not otherwise.
The High

       Court has not been given nor does it possess any inherent power to

       make any order, which in the opinion of the court, could be in the

       interest of justice as the statutory provision is not intended to by-
pass the procedure prescribed. It was also held that the High Court

       can always issue appropriate direction in exercise of its power

       under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India at the behest of an

       aggrieved person, if the court is convinced that the power of


3    (1990) 2 SCC 437
5
investigation has been exercised by an investigating officer mala

fide or the matter is not investigated at all, but even in such a case,

the High Court cannot direct the police as to how the investigation

is to be conducted but can insist only for the observance of due

process as provided in the Code. The Court held as under:
“51. The inherent power of the court under
Section 482
CrPC is saved only where an order has been passed by
          the criminal court which is required to be set aside to
          secure the ends of justice or where the proceeding
          pending before a court, amounts to abuse of the
          process of court. Therefore, such powers can be
          exercised by the High Court in relation to a matter
          pending before a criminal court or where a power is
          exercised by the court under
CrPC
. Inherent powers
          cannot be exercised assuming that the statute
          conferred an unfettered and arbitrary jurisdiction, nor
          can the High Court act at its whim or caprice. The
          statutory power has to be exercised sparingly with
          circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases.
          (
Vide Kurukshetra University v. State of Haryana
[(1977)
4 SCC 451 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 613 :
AIR 1977 SC 2229]
          and State of W.B. v. Sujit Kumar Rana
[(2004) 4 SCC 129
          : 2004 SCC (Cri) 984] .)
52. The power under
Section 482
CrPC cannot be
          resorted to if there is a specific provision in
CrPC
for the
          redressal of the grievance of the aggrieved party or
          where alternative remedy is available. Such powers
          cannot be exercised as against the express bar of the
          law and engrafted in any other provision of
CrPC
. Such
          powers can be exercised to secure the ends of justice
          and to prevent the abuse of the process of court.
However,      such     expressions      do     not    confer
          unlimited/unfettered jurisdiction on the High Court as
          the “ends of justice” and “abuse of the process of the
          court” have to be dealt with in accordance with law
          including the procedural law and not otherwise. Such
          powers can be exercised ex debito justitiae to do real
          and substantial justice as the courts have been
          conferred such inherent jurisdiction, in absence of any
          express provision, as inherent in their constitution, or
          such powers as are necessary to do the right and to
          undo a wrong in the course of administration of justice
6
as provided in the legal maxim quando lex aliquid alicui
concedit, concedere videtur id sine quo res ipsa esse
non potest. However, the High Court has not been given
nor does it possess any inherent power to make any
order, which in the opinion of the court, could be in the
interest of justice as the statutory provision is not
intended to by-pass the procedure prescribed.
(
Vide Lalit    Mohan     Mondal v. Benoyendra       Nath
Chatterjee
[(1982) 3 SCC 219 : 1982 SCC (Cri)
697] , Rameshchandra Nandlal Parikh v. State of
Gujarat [(2006) 1 SCC 732 : (
2006) 1 SCC (Cri)
481] , CBI v. Ravi Shankar Srivastava
[(2006) 7 SCC 188
:   (
2006)    3    SCC   (Cri)   233]    , Inder  Mohan
Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal
[(2007) 12 SCC 1 :
(2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 259] and Pankaj Kumar v. State of
Maharashtra [(2008) 16 SCC 117 : (2010) 4 SCC (Cri)
217] .)
53.    The High Court can always issue appropriate
direction in exercise of its power under
Article 226
of
the Constitution at the behest of an aggrieved person, if
the court is convinced that the power of investigation
has been exercised by an investigating officer mala fide
or the matter is not investigated at all. Even in such a
case, the High Court cannot direct the police as to how
the investigation is to be conducted but can insist only
for the observance of process as provided for in
CrPC
.
Another remedy available to such an aggrieved person
may be to file a complaint under
Section 200
CrPC and
the court concerned will proceed as provided in Chapter
XV
CrPC
. (See
Gangadhar Janardan Mhatre v. State of
Maharashtra
[(2004) 7 SCC 768 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 404]
and Divine Retreat Centre v. State of Kerala [(2008) 3
SCC 542 : (2008) 2 SCC (Cri) 9] .)
xx              xx                  xx
64. An inherent power is not an omnibus for opening a
Pandora's box, that too for issues that are foreign to the
main context. The invoking of the power has to be for a
purpose that is connected to a proceeding and not for
sprouting an altogether new issue. A power cannot
exceed its own authority beyond its own creation. It is
not that a person is remediless. On the contrary, the
constitutional remedy of writs is available. Here, the
High Court enjoys wide powers of prerogative writs as
compared to that under
Section 482
CrPC. To secure the
corpus of an individual, remedy by way of habeas
7
corpus is available. For that the High Court should not
                   resort to inherent powers under
Section 482
CrPC as
                   the legislature has conferred separate powers for the
                   same. Needless to mention that
Section 97
CrPC
                   empowers the Magistrates to order the search of a
                   person wrongfully confined. It is something different
                   that the same court exercising authority can, in relation
                   to the same subject-matter, invoke its writ jurisdiction
                   as well. Nevertheless, the inherent powers are not to
                   provide universal remedies. The power cannot be and
                   should not be used to belittle its own existence. One
                   cannot concede anarchy to an inherent power for that
                   was never the wisdom of the legislature. To confer
                   unbridled inherent power would itself be trenching upon
                   the authority of the legislature.”
8.     This Court in a judgment reported as
Sangitaben Shaileshbhai

       Datanta v. State of Gujarat4
was examining a question where a

       court after grant of bail to an accused ordered the accused and

       their relatives to undergo scientific test viz. lie detector, brain

       mapping and Narco-Analysis. This Court held that direction of the

       court to carry out such tests is not only in contravention to the first

       principles of criminal law jurisprudence but also violates statutory

       requirements. The Court held as under:
“7. Having heard the counsels for the parties, it is
                   surprising to note the present approach adopted by the
                   High Court while considering the bail application. The
                   High Court ordering the abovementioned tests is not
                   only in contravention to the first principles of criminal
                   law     jurisprudence   but   also   violates   statutory
                   requirements. While adjudicating a bail application,
Section 439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is
                   the guiding principle wherein Court takes into
                   consideration, inter alia, the gravity of the crime, the
                   character of the evidence, position and status of the
                   accused with reference to the victim and witnesses, the
                   likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice and
                   repeating the offence, the possibility of his tampering
                   with the witnesses and obstructing the course of justice

4    2018 SCC OnLine SC 2300
8
and such other grounds. Each criminal case presents its
                   own peculiar factual matrix, and therefore, certain
                   grounds peculiar to a particular case may have to be
                   taken into account by the court. However, the court has
                   to only opine as to whether there is prima facie case
                   against the accused. The court must not undertake
                   meticulous examination of the evidence collected by
                   the police, or rather order specific tests as done in the
                   present case.
8. In the instant case, by ordering the abovementioned
                   tests and venturing into the reports of the same with
                   meticulous details, the High Court has converted the
                   adjudication of a bail matter to that of a mini-trial
                   indeed. This assumption of function of a trial court by
                   the High Court is deprecated.”
9.     In another judgment reported as Reserve Bank of India v.
General Manager, Cooperative Bank Deposit A/C HR. Sha &

       Ors.5, Reserve Bank of India challenged an order passed on an

       application under
Section 439
of the Code, wherein an argument

       was raised that the poor depositors are not paid by the Bank out of

       the amount which has been received by the Bank.                 The Court

       issued directions that the Bank should start distributing the amount

       which is so far recovered by them from the accused. The Bank was

       directed to furnish details of the money paid to the poor depositors.
The accused as well as the Investigating Officer and the

       Administrator of the Bank were directed to remain present in the

       Court. This Court found that such directions are beyond the scope

       of an application for bail filed by the accused under
Section 439
of

       the Code. The Court held as under:
“6. We are of the opinion that the far-reaching
                   consequences of the directions of the High Court are in

5    (2010) 15 SCC 85
9
a way beyond the scope of an application for bail filed
                    by an accused under
Section 439
of the Code of
                    Criminal Procedure and the High Court, as much as
                    anyone else, must stay confined to the issues relevant
                    to the matter before it. It was thus not open to the High
                    Court to pass orders which could affect the working of
                    banks all over the country.”
10.
In
Santosh Singh v. Union of India & Anr.6
while dealing with a

        public interest litigation petition filed by a petitioner who was

        deeply distressed with the rapidly degrading moral values in the

        society touching every aspect of life where making money has

        become the sole motto of society, this Court held as under:
“18. While there can be no dispute about the need of
                    providing value-based education, what form this should
                    take and the manner in which values should be
                    inculcated ought not to be ordained by the court. The
                    court singularly lacks the expertise to do so. The
                    petitioner has a grouse about what she describes as the
                    pervading culture of materialism in our society. The
                    jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
is not a
                    panacea for all ills but a remedy for the violation of
                    fundamental rights. The remedies for such perceived
                    grievances as the petitioner has about the dominant
                    presence of materialism must lie elsewhere and it is for
                    those who have the competence and the constitutional
                    duty to lay down and implement educational policies to
                    deal with such problems.
19. There is a tendency on the part of public interest
                    petitioners to assume that every good thing which
                    society should aspire to achieve can be achieved
                    through the instrumentality of the court. The judicial
                    process provides remedies for constitutional or legal
                    infractions. Public interest litigation allows a relaxation
                    of the strict rules of locus standi. However, the court
                    must necessarily abide by the parameters which govern
                    a nuanced exercise of judicial power. Hence, where an
                    effort is made to bring issues of governance before the
                    court, the basic touchstone on which the invocation of
                    jurisdiction must rest is whether the issue can be
                    addressed within the framework of law or the

6     (2016) 8 SCC 253
10
Constitution. Matters of policy are entrusted to the
               executive arm of the State. The court is concerned with
               the preservation of the rule of law.
xx              xx                   xx
23. It is unrealistic for the court to assume that it can
               provide solutions to vexed issues which involve drawing
               balances between conflicting dimensions that travel
               beyond the legal plane. Courts are concerned with
               issues of constitutionality and legality. It is difficult to
               perceive how matters to which solutions may traverse
               the fields of ideology, social theory, policy-making and
               experimentation can be regulated by this Court such as
               by issuing a mandamus to enforce a scheme of
               instruction in a particular subject in school education.
Should a subject be taught at all? Should a set of values
               or a line of enquiry and knowledge be incorporated as a
               separate subject of discourse in an educational system?
               Would a horizontal integration of a given set of values
               across existing subjects better achieve a desirable
               result? Is it at all desirable to impose another subject of
               study upon the already burdened school curriculum?
24. These are vexed issues to which more than one
               solution may appear just. That is exactly the reason
               why a resolution of such matters must rest with those
               who have the responsibility to teach and govern over
               matters of education. Every good that is perceived to
               be in the interest of society cannot be mandated by the
               court. Nor is the judicial process an answer to every
               social ill which a public interest petitioner perceives. A
               matter such as the present to which a solution does not
               rest in a legal or constitutional framework is incapable
               of being dealt with in terms of judicially manageable
               standards.”
11.   We find that learned Single Judge has collated data from the State

      and made it part of the order after the decision of the bail

      application as if the Court had the inherent jurisdiction to pass any

      order under the guise of improving the criminal justice system in

      the State. The jurisdiction of the Court under
Section 439
of the

      Code is limited to grant or not to grant bail pending trial.            Even
11
though the object of the Hon’ble Judge was laudable but the

      jurisdiction exercised was clearly erroneous.            The effort made by

      the Hon’ble Judge may be academically proper to be presented at

      an appropriate forum but such directions could not be issued under

      the colour of office of the Court.
12.   In view of the above, we find that the order passed by the High

      Court on 24th April, 2019 is not sustainable in law and the same is

      set aside. Consequently, the appeal is allowed.
.............................................J.
                                                          (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                           .............................................J.
                                                                (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 15, 2020.
12
