Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 32 of 2021
Citation: SCC 698,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/28569945/

[Cites
34
, Cited by
8
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Lekh Ram vs State Of H.P on 4 February, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA
                                                  Cr. MMO No. 32 of 2021
                                                  Reserved on: 27.01.2021




                                                                          .
Date of Decision: 4th Feb 2021





    Lekh Ram                                                               ...Petitioner
                                   Versus





    State of H.P.                                                         ...Respondent

    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1NO
    ___________________________________________________________________

    For the petitioner:    Mr. Umesh Kanwar, Advocate.
For the respondent: Ms. Seema Sharma, Deputy Advocates General, with Mr.

                        Shriyak Sharda, Additional Assistant Advocate General
                        and Mr. Manoj Bagga, Assistant Advocate General for
                        respondent No.1/State.
Mr. Vinod K. Gupta, Advocate, for the complainant,


                           Kanta Devi.
THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE

        FIR No.   Dated         Police Station    Sections




        134       10.07.2020    Bharari, District 307, 326 and 504 of
IPC
Bilaspur, HP





    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Petitioner, who was arraigned as accused in the FIR mentioned above,





    has come up before this Court under
Section 482
, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
    for quashing the proceedings because they are husband and wife and have
    compromised the matter.
2.              Learned counsel for the petitioner on instructions prays that the matter
    stands compounded in terms of the compromised deed, Annexure P-3. Ld. Counsel
    for the complainant also admits the compromise. The accused and victim-
    complainant have filed a joint petition for quashing of FIR. On 27.1.2021, both
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the
    judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
2
husband and wife, that is petitioner No.1 Lekh Ram and petitioner No.2, Kanta Devi,
    reached this Court voluntarily and     made their statements on oath. The victim,
    Kanta Devi, has stated on oath that she has compromised the entire matter with her




                                                                         .
husband vide compromise deed, Annexure P-3 and made this statement without any





    coercion, duress and pressure. Similarly, statement of husband Lekh Ram, petitioner
    No.1, was also recorded on oath and he also narrated the same facts.
3.             The facts relevant to decide the present petition are that on 9.7.2020,
    ward member of panchayat informed the police about the victim, brought for medical
    in CHC Bharari, District Bilaspur. Based on this telephonic information, investigator





    reached the hospital and recorded statement of the victim under
Section 154
of
    Cr.P.C, which led to registration of aforesaid FIR. She stated that her husband Lekh
    Ram stood retired from BBMB and her children are married. On 09.07.2020 at 9:00

    pm, her husband came under intoxication and switched off all the lights of the house

    as well as of the gate. On this, she called the Ward Member. The moment the Ward
    Member came, Lekh Ram also came inside and started hurling obscene abuses. After
    that he gave a blow of Darat on her head. In the MLC, Doctor declared injuries as


    grievous in nature and replaced
Section 324
IPC with
Section 326
of IPC. As per
    Radiologist's report, there was soft tissue swelling, which was grievous in nature and
    dangerous to life.
4.             On 27.1.2021 the victim was present in the Court along with her





    husband Lekh Ram. Her identity is not in dispute. This Court noticed her orientation
    to place and time; she appeared in a perfect mental and physical state, there was no





    sign of fear, and she was quietly sitting in the Courtroom. Her statement was also
    recorded, on oath, in which she says that she has compromised the entire matter with
    the accused without any coercion, duress, pressure, or any wrong tactics. She further
    states that she made the statement in her conscious state of mind and admitted that
    she is aware that this stand would result in the quashing of F.I.R. against the
    petitioner.
5.             Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District Magistrate
    as a routine procedure. However, the High Court's inherent jurisdiction under
Section
    482
of the CRPC, to intervene in such kind of matter, and it is not the requirement of
    law that the cancellation has to be approved only through the District Magistrate.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
3
Inherent Jurisdiction of the High Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be
    exercised, depending upon the facts and circumstances. The parties are likely to live
    together for a lifetime, and intervention would create a cordial environment for




                                                                            .
peaceful relations between them.
6.               Yuvan Noah Harari, in "Sapiens- A Brief History of Humankind",
    (London: Vintage, 2011), p-427-428, wrote about the impact of happy married life,





    as follows:
"Family and community seem to have more impact on our happiness
           than money and health. People with strong families who live in tight-
           knit and supportive communities are significantly happier than people





           whose families are dysfunctional and who have never found (or never
           sought) a community to be part of. Marriage is particularly important.
           Repeated studies have found that there is a very close correction
           between good marriages and high subjective well-being, and between
           bad marriages and misery. This holds true irrespective of economic or

           even physical conditions. An impecunious invalid surrounded by a

           loving spouse, a devoted family and a warm community may well feel
           better than an alienated billionaire, provided that the invalid's poverty
           is not too severe and that his illness is not degenerative or painful."
ANALYSIS:
7.               The following aspects would be relevant to conclude this petition: -
a)       On 27.1.2021 this Court had recorded the statements of Kanta Devi and




                  Lekh Ram, wherein they testified about compromise and prayed for





                  quashing of FIR.
b)       The complainant has resolved all disputes with the accused.
c)       The victim and the accused have amicably settled the matter between





                  them in terms of the compromise deed (Annexure P-3). The parties do
                  not dispute this compromise deed.
d)       Accused was the first offender.
         e)       In the given facts, the occurrence was limited and confined between
relatives and does not affect public peace or tranquillity.
f)       The accused is facing prosecution for the last one year.
g)       The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will, and the purpose of
                  criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to work for bringing
                  peace and happiness in society.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
4
h)    Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to maintain the stand
                they have taken in this compromise, which is expected to result in the
                accused's acquittal.
.
i)    The accused and the victim are living happily as husband and wife. The





                denial of relief may bring bitterness at fag end of their lives.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
8.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698,
    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the
    propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need





    not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds,
                .... This argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as
                merely because an accused has a right to plead at the time of

                framing of charges that there is no sufficient material for such
                framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal

                Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even
                at an earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the Magistrate
                takes cognizance of the offence and summons the accused to
                appear to contend that the very issuance of the order of taking
                cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said


                to have been made out on the allegations made in the complaint
                petition. It has been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the interest of




                justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue even
                where the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out
                any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of





                court, and therefore, there cannot be any dispute that in such
                case power under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
9.
In
Girish     Sarwate      v.    State    of    A.P.
,     2005(1)
    R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court
    observed that the High Court need not wait for completion of investigation
    and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
NON-COMPOUNDABLE OFFENCES CAN BE QUASHED:
10.            In the present case, the offence under
Section 367
and
307
of IPC are
    not compoundable under
Section 320
CrPC. However, the following precedents are
    relevant:
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
5
a)   In
State of Madhya Pradesh v Laxmi Narayan, Cr.A No.
349 of 2019,
    decided on 5th of March, 2019, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,




                                                                  .
[13]. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of





         this Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed
         and held as under:
i) that the power conferred under
Section 482
of the





               Code to quash the criminal proceedings for the non-
compoundable offences under
Section 320
of the
               Code can be exercised having overwhelmingly and
               predominantly the civil character, particularly those
               arising out of commercial transactions or arising out





               of matrimonial relationship or family disputes and
               when the parties have resolved the entire dispute
               amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those
               prosecutions which involved heinous and serious

               offences of mental depravity or offences like

               murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
               private in nature and have a serious impact on
               society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised for
               the offences under the special statutes


               like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences
               committed by public servants while working in that
               capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
               compromise between the victim and the offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms
               Act etc. would fall in the category of heinous and





               serious offences and therefore are to be treated as
               crime against the society and not against the
               individual alone, and therefore, the criminal





               proceedings for the offence under
Section 307
IPC
               and/or the
Arms Act
etc. which have a serious
               impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise
               of powers under Section 482 of the Code, on the
               ground that the parties have resolved their entire
               dispute amongst themselves. However, the High
               Court would not rest its decision merely because
               there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or
               the charge is framed under this provision. It would
               be open to the High Court to examine as to whether
               incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is there for the
               sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
               evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the
               charge under
Section 307
IPC. For this purpose, it
               would be open to the High Court to go by the nature
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
6
of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted
              on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
              weapons used etc. However, such an exercise by the
              High Court would be permissible only after the




                                                                 .
evidence is collected after investigation and the





              charge sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during
              the trial. Such exercise is not permissible when the
              matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the
              ultimate conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of





              the decision of this Court in the case of Narinder
              Singh (supra) should be read harmoniously and to be
              read as a whole and in the circumstances stated
              hereinabove;
v) while exercising the power under Section 482 of





              the Code to quash the criminal proceedings in
              respect of non-compoundable offences, which are
              private in nature and do not have a serious impact on
              society, on the ground that there is a
              settlement/compromise between the victim and the

              offender, the High Court is required to consider the

              antecedents of the accused; the conduct of the
              accused, namely, whether the accused was
              absconding and why he was absconding, how he had
              managed with the complainant to enter into a
              compromise etc.



         [14]. In so far as the present case is concerned, the High Court
         has quashed the criminal proceedings for the offences
         under
Sections 307
and
34
IPC mechanically and even when the




         investigation was under progress. Somehow, the accused
         managed to enter into a compromise with the complainant and





         sought quashing of the FIR on the basis of a settlement. The
         allegations are serious in nature. He used the fire arm also
         in commission of the offence. Therefore, the gravity of the





         offence and the conduct of the accused is not at all considered
         by the High Court and solely on the basis of a settlement
         between the accused and the complainant, the High Court has
         mechanically quashed the FIR, in exercise of power
         under Section 482 of the Code, which is not sustainable in the
         eyes of law. The High Court has also failed to note the
         antecedents of the accused."
b)   In
Kailash Chand v State of Rajasthan
, 2018(4) R.C.R (Criminal) 292,
    Supreme Court holds,
8. Though the offences under
sections 307
and
326
of the
              IPC are non-compoundable, having regard to the fact that
              the incident in the present case did not have an impact on
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
7
the society in general, and having regard to the fact that
               the dispute between the parties has been settled amicably
               and there is no likelihood of the repetition of such
               incident,     we      allow     the      application     for




                                                                  .
compromise/compounding of offence and set aside the





               orders of conviction and sentence passed by the courts
               below against the appellant by exercising our jurisdiction
               under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India. The
               appellant is ordered to be acquitted of the charges levelled





               against him. Since the appellant is confined in jail, he is
               ordered to be released from custody forthwith if not
               required in any other case.
c)   In
Narinder Singh v State of Punjab
, 2014 (2) R.C.R. (Criminal) 482,
    Supreme Court holds,
31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down

         the following principles by which the High Court would be

         guided in giving adequate treatment to the settlement between
         the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of the
         Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the
         proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction to
         continue with the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is
               to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
               Court to compound the offences under Section 320




               of the Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the
               Code, the High Court has inherent power to quash





               the criminal proceedings even in those cases which
               are not compoundable, where the parties have settled
               the matter between themselves. However, this power
               is to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement
               and on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
               proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
               would be to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
                      any Court. While exercising the power
                      the High Court is to form an opinion on
                      either of the aforesaid two objectives.
(III) Such a power is not be exercised in those
               prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
               offences of mental depravity or offences like
               murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
               private in nature and have a serious impact on
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
8
society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
        committed under special statute like the
Prevention
        of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by
        Public Servants while working in that capacity are




                                                           .
not to be quashed merely on the basis of





        compromise between the victim and the offender.
        (IV) On the other, those criminal cases having
        overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
        particularly those arising out of commercial





        transactions or arising out of matrimonial
        relationship or family disputes should be quashed
        when the parties have resolved their entire disputes
        among themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to





        examine as to whether the possibility of conviction
        is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal
        cases would put the accused to great oppression and
        prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to
        him by not quashing the criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under
Section 307
IPC would fall in

        the category of heinous and serious offences and
        therefore is to be generally treated as crime against
        the society and not against the individual alone.
        However, the High Court would not rest its decision
        merely because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
        provision. It would be open to the High Court to
        examine as to whether incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has




        collected sufficient evidence, which if proved,
        would lead to proving the charge under
Section 307
IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
        Court to go by the nature of injury sustained,
        whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate





        parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc.
        Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the
        victim can generally be the guiding factor. On the
        basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can
        examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of
        conviction or the chances of conviction are remote
        and bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept
        the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings
        whereas in the later case it would be permissible for
        the High Court to accept the plea compounding the
        offence based on complete settlement between the
        parties. At this stage, the Court can also be swayed
        by the fact that the settlement between the parties is
        going to result in harmony between them which may
        improve their future relationship.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
9
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its power
              under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
              settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the
              settlement is arrived at immediately after the alleged




                                                                   .
commission of offence and the matter is still under





              investigation, the High Court may be liberal in
              accepting the settlement to quash the criminal
              proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason
              that at this stage the investigation is still on and even





              the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those
              cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is
              yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy stage,
              the High Court can show benevolence in exercising
              its powers favourably, but after prima facie





              assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned
              above. On the other hand, where the prosecution
              evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion
              of the evidence the matter is at the stage of
              argument, normally the High Court should refrain

              from exercising its power under Section 482 of the

              Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a
              position to decide the case finally on merits and to
              come a conclusion as to whether the offence under
Section 307
IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in
              those cases where the conviction is already recorded


              by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
              stage before the High Court, mere compromise
              between the parties would not be a ground to accept
              the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who




              has already been convicted by the trial court. Here
              charge is proved under
Section 307
IPC and





              conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime
              and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a
              convict found guilty of such a crime.
d)   In
Yogendra Yadav v State of Jharkhand
, 21.7.2014, Supreme Court
         holds,
4. Now, the question before this Court is whether this
              Court can compound the offences under
Sections 326
and
307
of the IPC which are non-compoundable. Needless to
              say that offences which are non-compoundable cannot be
              compounded by the court. Courts draw the power of
              compounding offences from Section 320 of the Code. The
              said provision has to be strictly followed (
Gian Singh v.
              State of Punjab
, 2012(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 543 : 2012(4)
              Recent Apex Judgments (R.A.J.)
549 : (2012)10 SCC
303). However, in a given case, the High Court can quash
              a criminal proceeding in exercise of its power under
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
10
section 482 of the Code having regard to the fact that the
               parties have amicably settled their disputes and the victim
               has no objection, even though the offences are non-
               compoundable. In which cases the High Court can




                                                                  .
exercise its discretion to quash the proceedings will





               depend on facts and circumstances of each case. Offences
               which involve moral turpitude, grave offences like rape,
               murder etc. cannot be effaced by quashing the proceedings
               because that will have harmful effect on the society. Such





               offences cannot be said to be restricted to two individuals
               or two groups. If such offences are quashed, it may send
               wrong signal to the society. However, when the High
               Court is convinced that the offences are entirely personal
               in nature and, therefore, do not affect public peace or





               tranquillity and where it feels that quashing of such
               proceedings on account of compromise would bring about
               peace and would secure ends of justice, it should not
               hesitate to quash them. In such cases, the prosecution
               becomes a lame prosecution. Pursuing such a lame

               prosecution would be waste of time and energy. That will

               also unsettle the compromise and obstruct restoration of
               peace.
e)   In DimpeyGujraj v Union Territory, 2013 (11) SCC 497, Supreme


    Court holds,
5.
In light of the above observations of this court in
Gian
               Singh v. State of Punjab and another
, 2012(4)




               R.C.R.(Criminal) 543 : 2012(4) Recent Apex Judgments
               (R.A.J.) 549 : 2012(5) CTC 526 (SC) we feel that this is a





               case where the continuation of criminal proceedings
               would tantamount to abuse of process of law because the
               alleged offences are not heinous offences showing
               extreme depravity nor are they against the society. They





               are offences of a personal nature and burying them would
               bring about peace and amity between the two sides. In the
               circumstances of the case, FIR No. 163 dated 26/10/2006
               registered under
Section 147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
307
,
452
and
506
of the Indian Penal Code at Police Station Sector 3,
               Chandigarh and all consequential proceedings arising
               therefrom including the final report presented under
               Section 173 of the Code and charges framed by the trial
               court are hereby quashed.
f)   In
Mahesh Chand v State of Rajasthan
, 1990 SCC 781, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds as under:
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:36 :::HCHP
11
2. The accused were acquitted by the trial court, but they were
               convicted by the High Court for the offence under
section 307
Indian Penal Code This offence is not compoundable under law.
The parties, however. want to treat it a special case, in view of




                                                                        .
the peculiar circumstances of the case. It is said and indeed not





               disputed that one of the accused is a lawyer practising in the
               lower court. There was a counter case arising out of the same
               transaction. It is said that this case has already been
               compromised. The decision of this Court in
Suresh Babu v. State





               of Andhra Pradesh
, 1987(2) JT 361, has been also referred to in
               support of the plea for permission to compound the offence.
g)   In
Y. Suresh Babu v State of A.P.
, 2005 (1) SCC 347, Hon'ble Supreme





          Court, while dealing with
section 326
of IPC, which was non-compoundable
          offence, permitted the parties to compound the offence.
h)   In
Ram Prasad v State of Uttar Pradesh
, (1982) 2 SCC 149, Supreme
          Court holds,


               The appellants, who are the accused and the complainant, Shri
               Ram, who was the person injured as a result of firing, have
               appeared before us and stated that they wish to compound the
               offence. The offence for which both the appellants have been


               convicted is one under Section 307 read with
Section 34
of the
               Indian Penal Code, but having regard to the nature of the injury
               sustained by Shri Ram, we think that the proper offence for
               which the appellants should have been convicted was under
Section 324 read with Section 34. Shri Ram received only one
               injury on the shoulder and that was also in the nature of simple





               hurt. We would, therefore, convert the conviction of the
               appellants to one under Section 324 read with Section 34. Since
               the parties belong to the same village and desire to compound
               the offence, we think, in the larger interest of peace and





               harmony between the parties and having regard to the nature of
               the injury, that it would be proper to allow the parties to
               compound the offence.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
11.            The law is almost settled by larger benches judgements of Supreme
    Court that the offences, those are not listed as compoundable, under
Section 320
CrPC, can also be compounded, and the procedure to follow would be by quashing
    the FIR, and consequent proceedings.
a)   In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three-member
          Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
12
6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of
     the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a
     proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any
     Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily,




                                                               .
criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person must





     be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
     would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an
     interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to
     lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of





     this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
     categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and
     should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be
     cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take the
     view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings





     against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the
     process of the Court or that the quashing of the impugned
     proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal
     proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have
     been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears

     that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of

     the said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in
     quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the
     requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this
     category. Cases may also arise where the allegations in the First
     Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at


     their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute
     the offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating
     evidence arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the complaint
     or the First Information Report to decide whether the offence




     alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate
     for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to





     allow the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the
     accused person. A third category of cases in which the inherent
     jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may





     also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations
     made against the accused person do constitute an offence
     alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support
     of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to
     prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is
     important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where
     there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
     manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made
     and cases where there is legal evidence which on its
     appreciation may or may not support the accusation in question.
     In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High Court
     would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in
     question is reliable or not. That is the function of the trial
     magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to
     invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
13
a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation made
         against the accused would not be sustained. Broadly stated that
         is the nature and scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High
         Court under S. 561-A in the matter of quashing criminal




                                                                   .
proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the





         point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom
         184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal
         786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR
         1954 Punj 193), NripendraBhusan Roy v. GobinaBandhu





         Majumdar, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v.
         SivaramaSubramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39).
b)   In MadhavraoJiwaji Rao Scindia v SambhajiraoChandrojiraoAngre,





    1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds:
7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at
         the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by
         the court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made
         prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take

         into consideration any special features which appear in a

         particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the
         interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue. This is so
         on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique
         purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an
         ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is


         likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to
         continue, the court may while taking into consideration the
         special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it
         may be at a preliminary stage.
c)   A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian Singh v. State





    of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on quashing on account of
    compromise/compounding, in the following terms:
[53]. Section 482 of the Code, as its very language suggests,
         saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by
         virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the process
         of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It begins
         with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which means that the
         provision is an overriding provision. These words leave no
         manner of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code limits
         or restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise of
         such power is provided in Section 482 itself i.e., to prevent
         abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends
         of justice. As has been repeatedly stated that Section 482 confers
         no new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards existing
         inherent powers possessed by High Court necessary to prevent
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
14
abuse of the process of any Court or to secure the ends of
     justice. It is equally well settled that the power is not to be
     resorted to if there is specific provision in the Code for the
     redress of the grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be




                                                               .
exercised very sparingly and it should not be exercised as





     against the express bar of law engrafted in any other provision
     of the Code.
[57]. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground





     of settlement between an offender and victim is not the same
     thing as compounding of offence. They are different and not
     interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of
     offences given to a court under Section 320 is materially
     different from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High





     Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of
     offences, power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the
     provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is guided
     solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the
     formation of opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal

     offence or criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided

     by the material on record as to whether the ends of justice would
     justify such exercise of power although the ultimate
     consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
[58]. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having


     regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and victim
     has been settled although offences are not compoundable, it
     does so as in its opinion, continuation of criminal proceedings
     will be an exercise in futility and justice in the case demands




     that the dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace is
     restored; securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding





     factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful effect on
     the public and consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers
     and threatens well-being of society and it is not safe to leave the





     crime- doer only because he and the victim have settled the
     dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation,
     yet certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
     or without permission of the Court. In respect of serious
     offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of
     mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of moral
     turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption
     Act
or the offences committed by public servants while working
     in that capacity, the settlement between offender and victim can
     have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which
     overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour having
     arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership
     or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
     matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family
     dispute, where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
15
and victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
         irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made
         compoundable, the High Court may within the framework of its
         inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal




                                                                   .
complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that on the face of such





         settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of offender being
         convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice
         shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated. The
         above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will





         depend on its own facts and no hard and fast category can be
         prescribed."
d)   In ParbatbhaiAahir v State of Gujarat,(2017) 9 SCC 641, a three





    Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for
    quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on

         the subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
         16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High

         Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to
         secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer new
         powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in
         the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
         quash a First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the
         ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the
         offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of




         jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
         compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by





         the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
         1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if
         the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
         complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under
         Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
         justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
         16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
         ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends
         of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
         16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
         Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the
         offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately
         on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
         elaboration of principles can be formulated;
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
16
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while
               dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High
               Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
               offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental




                                                                         .
depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot





               appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the
               victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
               speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon
               society. The decision to continue with the trial in such cases is





               founded on the overriding element of public interest in
               punishing persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be
               criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant





               element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so
               far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
               16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
               commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar

               transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
               situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the

               dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
               proceeding if in view of the compromise between the disputants,
               the possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of


               a criminal proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice;
               and

               16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in




               propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving
               the financial and economic well-being of the state have





               implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute
               between private disputants. The High Court would be justified
               in declining to quash where the offender is involved in an
               activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour.
The consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or
               economic system will weigh in the balance.
12.            In the present case, the offences are not compoundable under
section
    320
CrPC. Be that as it may, in the peculiar facts and circumstances, this Court is
    inclined to invoke the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC to quash the FIR
    and all subsequent proceedings.
13.            This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of
    Criminal Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter. Given the entirety of the case
    and judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the continuation of these
    proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
17
14.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal
    Pradesh
, 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under: -
.
[47]. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is
                     concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the
                     order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was





                     already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave
                     Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting their
                     petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to
                     these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In
                     any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of





                     cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
15.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR 639,
    at p 642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of Justice arises

    propitiously when parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of

    fellowship or reunion.
16.                 Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit case where the
    inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure is invoked to quash the proceedings mentioned above.The FIR mentioned



    above is quashed and all the consequential proceedings, are also quashed and set
    aside. The bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All pending application(s), if any,




    stand closed.
Petition dismissed.
Anoop Chitkara,
                                                                                Vacation Judge.
February 4, 2021
          (R.Atal)
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:37 :::HCHP
