Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 1
ILR 2016
Citation: SCC 83] . In the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/30099792/

[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Sri Kuppalli Rishwanath vs Smt Nagarathna R K on 9 November, 2021
Author:
M. Nagaprasanna
Bench:
M. Nagaprasanna
1



      IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

       DATED THIS THE 09TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2021

                         BEFORE

        THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA

            CRIMINAL PETITION No.6024 OF 2018
                          C/W
            CRIMINAL PETITION No.6022 OF 2018
            CRIMINAL PETITION No.6023 OF 2018

BETWEEN

SRI KUPPALLI RISHWANATH
S/O LATE LINGAPPA NAIK,
AGED ABOUT 52 YEARS
LECTURER,
KANNADA DIVISION,
GOVERNMENT FIRST AID COLLEGE,
KUVEMPU NAGAR,
MYSURU,
R/AT NO.1421, SOUPARNIKA,
3RD CROSS, 1ST MAIN,
NEAR JYOTHI CIRCLE,
MYSURU - 17.
                                     ... COMMON PETITIONER
(BY SRI T.PRAKASH, ADVOCATE (PHYSICAL HEARING))

AND

SMT.NAGARATHNA R.K.,
W/O LATE R.KRISHNARAJU,
AGED ABOUT 50 YEARS
R/AT NO.1473, IV CROSS, 2ND STAGE,
3RD MAIN, VIJAYANAGAR,
MYSURU - 17.                       ... COMMON RESPONDENT

(RESPONDENT SERVED)
                               2



    CRIMINAL PETITION No.6024/2018 IS FILED UNDER SECTION
482 OF CR.P.C. PRAYING TO QUASH THE IMPUGNED ORDER
DATED 07.07.2018 IN C.C.NO.788/2015 PENDING ON THE FILE OF
THE  IV   JMFC,    MYSURU     REGARDING   DIRECTING    THE
ACCUSED/PETITIONER TO LEAD ORAL EVIDENCE.

     CRIMINAL PETITION NO.6022/2018 IS FILED UNDER
SECTION 482 OF CR.P.C.PRAYING TO QUASH THE IMPUGNED
ORDER DATED 07.07.2018 IN C.C.NO.774/2015 PENDING ON THE
FILE OF THE IV JMFC, MYSURU REGARDING DIRECTING THE
ACCUSED/PETITIONER TO LEAD ORAL EVIDENCE.

     CRIMINAL PETITION NO.6023/2018 IS FILED UNDER
SECTION 482 OF CR.P.C.PRAYING TO QUASH THE IMPUGNED
ORDER DATED 07.07.2018, REGARDING DIRECTING THE
ACCUSED/PETITIONER TO LEAD ORAL EVIDENCE.

   THESE CRIMINAL PETITIONS COMING ON FOR ADMISSION
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:

                              ORDER
These petitions are preferred calling in question common

order    dated   07-07-2018   passed   in   C.C.No.788   of   2015,

C.C.No.774 of 2015 and 782 of 2015 by the JMFC, IV Court,

Mysuru insofar as it directs the accused/petitioner to lead only

oral evidence. Since parties to the lis and the issue raised are

common in all these petitions they are taken up together for

disposal.
3
2. Brief facts leading to the filing of the present petitions,

as borne out from the pleadings are as follows:
The     complainant/respondent     in   all   these   petitions

registers (i) PCR in PCR Nos. 1030 of 2010 which is numbered

as C.C.No. 606 of 2011; (ii) PCR in PCR No.909 of 2010 which is

numbered as C.C.No.422 of 2011 and (iii) PCR in PCR No.640 of

2010 which is numbered as C.C.No.1784 of 2010 respectively

and were clubbed together and taken up for consideration by the

learned Magistrate in C.C.No.1784 of 2010.
3. All these cases were taken up by the criminal Court

together in the light of the facts being similar, parties to the

dispute were the same and the transactions agitated being

issuance of cheques and the proceedings instituted are under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
4. Heard Sri.T.Prakash, learned counsel appearing for

petitioner.
4
5. The issue before this Court, as contended by the learned

counsel appearing for the petitioner, is the order dated

7-07-2018 by which a memo was filed by the complainant

seeking for a direction that the accused has to lead oral

evidence.      This memo was allowed by the criminal Court by

directing that the accused shall lead only oral evidence and not

by way of an affidavit.
6. Whether the parties to the lis should lead evidence by

way of affidavits or oral evidence is no longer res integra and

need not detain this Court for long. A Co-ordinate Bench of this

Court referring to plethora of judgments of the Apex Court has

in the case of AFZAL PASHA v. MOHAMED AMEERJAN1 has

held as follows:
"4. On the other hand, the Learned Counsel for the
         respondent would submit that the Trial Court has rightly
         rejected the application in the light of the judgment of the
         Supreme Court in the case of
Mandvi Co-Operative Bank
         Limited v. Nimesh B. Thakore
[(2010) 3 SCC 83] . In the
         said case, the Apex Court had not agreed with the High
         Court which had held that
Section 145(1)
did confer a
         right on the complainant to give evidence on affidavit. But
1
ILR 2016 KAR 4145
5
there was no similar right conferred on the accused. That
the Legislature apparently had posited, that the immunity
conferred on the accused from being compelled to be a
witness against himself under
Article 20(3)
of the
Constitution of India, did not warrant the incorporation of
the word 'accused' with the word 'complainant' in sub-
Section 145
of the NI Act. The High Court had gone on to
hold that, merely because,
Section 145
did not expressly
permit the accused to give evidence on affidavit, it did not
mean that the Magistrate could not allow the accused to
do so by applying the same analogy, unless there was
just and reasonable ground to refuse such permission. It
was held that there was no express bar on the accused
to give evidence on affidavit, either in the
NI Act
or the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (Hereinafter referred to
as the '
CrPC
', for brevity). The accused was permitted to
tender evidence by way of affidavit.
Taking exception to the above reasoning of the High
Court, the Apex Court held as follows:
"46. On this issue, we are afraid that the High Court
  overreached itself and took a course that amounts to
  taking-over the legislative functions. On a bare
  reading of
section 143
(sic
Section 145
) it is clear that
  the legislature provided for the complainant to give his
  evidence on affidavit and did not provide for the
  accused to similarly do so. But the High Court thought
  that not mentioning the accused along with the
  complainant in sub-section (1) of
section 145
was
  merely an omission by the legislature that it could fill
  up without difficulty. Even though the legislature in
  their wisdom did not deem it proper to incorporate the
  word 'accused' with the word 'complainant' in
section
  145(1)
, it did not mean that the Magistrate could not
  allow the accused to give his evidence on affidavit by
  applying the same analogy unless there was a just
  and reasonable ground to refuse such permission.
6
47. There are two errors apparent in the reasoning of
   the High Court. First, if the legislature in their wisdom
   did not think "it proper to incorporate a word 'accused'
   with the word 'complainant' in
section 145(1)
.......", it
   was not open to the High Court to fill up the self
   perceived blank. Secondly, the High Court was in error
   in drawing an analogy between the evidences of the
   complainant and the accused in a case of dishonoured
   cheque. The case of the complainant in a complaint
   under
section 138
of the Act would be based largely
   on documentary evidence.
48. The accused, on the other hand, in a large number
    of cases, may not lead any evidence at all and let the
    prosecution stand or fall on its own evidence. In case
    the defence does lead any evidence, the nature of its
    evidence may not be necessarily documentary; in all
    likelihood the defence would lead other kinds of
    evidences to rebut the presumption that the issuance
    of the cheque was not in the discharge of any debt or
    liability. This is the basic difference between the
    nature of the complainant's evidence and the evidence
    of the accused in a case of dishonoured cheque. It is,
    therefore, wrong to equate the defence evidence with
    the complainant's evidence and to extend the same
    option to the accused as well."
5. In the light of the above, the point for consideration
before this Court is whether it would be impermissible for
the accused to tender evidence by way of affidavit having
regard to the tenor of
Section 145
of the NI Act.
It is seen that
Sections 143
to
147
of the NI Act were
inserted by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment &
Miscellaneous Provisions)Act, 2002. One of the objects to
bring about the new Legislation mentioned in the Objects
and Reasons of the Act of 2002 was to provide for
7
summary trial of the cases under the Act, with a view to
speed up the disposal of cases.
Section 143
provides for
the cases under the
NI Act
being tried summarily. Hence
Sections 262
to
265
of the CrPC would be applicable.
Section 145
of the NI Act, provides for a departure in the
manner of tendering evidence at the trial, and permits
evidence by way of affidavit.
The said Section is extracted hereunder for ready
reference:
"145. Evidence on affidavit.-- (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
1973, the evidence of the complainant may be given by
him on affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions be
read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding
under the said Code.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the
application of the prosecution or the accused, summon
and examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as
to the fact contained therein."
Sub-Section (1) contemplates an option which the
complainant has of tendering his evidence by way of an
affidavit. The omission of reference to the accused is for
an obvious reason as shall be presently pointed out.
Sub-Section (2) would indicate that there could be
affidavit evidence of both witnesses for the complainant
and also witnesses for the accused. For otherwise, there
would be no need to refer to an "application of the
prosecution" to "examine any person giving evidence on
affidavit..."
8
This is in consonance with the procedure prescribed for a
Summary trial (which is the same as is specified for the
trial of a Summons case, under the
CrPC
. See:
Section
262
CrPC). The procedure prescribed there under does
not contemplate the accused standing as a witness.
Though he may examine witnesses on his behalf.
Chapter XXTV of the
CrPC
contains the General
Provisions as to Enquiries and Trials. Section 315 thereof
reads as follows:--
"315. Accused person to be competent witness.--
(1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal
Court shall be a competent witness for the defense and
may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges
made against him or any person charged together with
him at the same trial:
Provided that--
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on
      his own request in writing;
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made
      the subject of any comment by any of the parties or
      the Court or give rise to any presumption against
      himself or any person charged together with him at
      the same trial

(2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted
in any Criminal Court under
section 98
, or
section 107
, or
section 108
, or
section 109
, or
section 110
, or under
Chapter IX or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter X,
may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings:
9
Provided that in proceedings under
section 108
,
section 109
or
section 110
, the failure of such
      person to give evidence shall not be made the
      subject or any comment by any of the parties or the
      Court or give rise to any presumption against him
      or any other person proceeded against together
      with him at the same inquiry."
Therefore, it is clear that having regard to the Scheme of
the
CrPC
, the Legislature in its wisdom has left it open to
the accused to exercise the option of examining himself as
a witness for an offence punishable under
Section 138
of
the NI Act, in deliberately omitting any reference to the
evidence of the accused by way of affidavit For it would
run against a first principle in criminal law namely, that
an accused shall not be called as a witness except on his
own request in writing. The evidence on behalf of the
accused would include that of the accused, subject to
Section 315
CrPC. If the evidence of the witnesses could
be by way of affidavit in terms of
Section 145
NI Act, the
evidence of the accused could also be way of affidavit.
A closer scrutiny of
Section 145
would indicate that the
same is intended to ensure that the trial is concluded as
expeditiously as possible. The said provision does not in
any manner affect the right of the accused to cross
examine the complainant and his witnesses. The said
provision enables even the defence evidence to be led by
affidavits. Thus, the said provision is purely procedural in
nature.
In this behalf, the Apex Court has
in
Shreenath v. Rajesh
[(1998) 4 SCC 543 : AIR 1998 SC
1827] , has held that in interpreting any procedural law,
where more than one interpretation is possible, the one
which curtails the procedure without eluding the justice,
is to be adopted. The procedural law is always
subservient to and is in aid to justice.
Ksl
Industries v. Khandelwal
[2006 (1) Mh.LJ (Cri) 86] .
10
The Apex Court in
Mandvi Co-Operative Bank
Limited
(supra), has not examined the matter in the above
perspective.
On the other hand, the view taken and the directions
issued in a more recent decision of the Apex Court, in the
case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra) does contemplate
evidence by affidavit by the accused. The relevant portion
is extracted hereunder:
"DIRECTIONS:
21. Many of the directions given by the various High
Courts, in our view, are worthy of emulation by the
Criminal Courts all over the Country dealing with cases
under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, for
which the following directions are being given
      (1) Metropolitan Magistrate/Judicial Magistrate
      (MM/JM), on the day when the complaint under
Section 138
of the Act is presented, shall scrutinize
      the complaint, and if the cmplaint is accompanied
      by the affidavit, and the affidavit and the
      documents, if any, are found to be in order, take
      cognizance and direct issuance of summons.
(2) The MM/JM should adopt a pragmatic and
      realistic approach while issuing summons.
Summons must be properly addressed and sent by
      post as well as by e-mail address got from the
      complainant. The court, in appropriate cases, may
      take the assistance of the police or the nearby court
      to serve notice on the accused. For notice of
      appearance, a short date be fixed. If the summons
      is received back un-served, immediate follow up
      action be taken.
11
(3) The court may indicate in the summons that if
      the accused makes an application for compounding
      of offences at the first hearing of the case and, if
      such an application is made, the court may pass
      appropriate orders at the earliest.
(4) The court should direct the accused, when he
      appears to furnish a bail bond, to ensure his
      appearance during trial and ask him to take notice
      under
Section 251
Cr.P.C. to enable him to enter
      his plea of defence and fix the case for defence
      evidence, unless an application is made by the
      accused under
Section 145(2)
for re-calling a
      witness for cross-examination.
(5) The Court concerned must ensure that
      examination-in-chief, cross-examination and re-
      examination of the complainant must be conducted
      within three months of assigning the case. The
      court has option of accepting affidavits of the
      witnesses, instead of examining them in court. The
      witnesses to the complaint and accused must be
      available for cross-examination as and when there
      is direction to this effect by the court.
22. We, therefore, direct all the criminal courts in the
Country dealing with
Section 138
cases to follow the
abovementioned procedures for speedy and expeditious
disposal of cases falling under
Section 138
of the
Negotiable Instruments Act. The writ petition is,
accordingly, disposed of as above."
Incidentally, in the above judgment, the Supreme Court
has referred to with approval the views expressed in the
following decisions, in stating thus:--
"22. We notice, considering all those aspects, few
       High Courts of the Country have laid down certain
12
procedures for speedy disposal of cases under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
      Reference, in this connection, may be made to the
      judgments of the Bombay High Court in
Ksl And
      Industries     Ltd. v. Mannalal    Khandelwal
[2005
      Cri.LJ 1201 (Bom)] , Indo International Ltd. v. State
      of    Maharashtra [2006       Cri.LJ    208] ,   and
      Harischandra Biyani v. Stock Holding Corporation
      of India Ltd., [(2006) 4 Mh.LJ 381] , the judgment of
      the Calcutta High Court in
Magma Leasing
      Limited v. State of West Bengal
[(2007) 3 CHN 574]
      , and the judgment of the Delhi High Court
      in Rajesh Agarwal v. State [ILR (2010) 6 Del 610] .
In
KSL      and       Industries     Ltd. v. Mannalal
Khandelwal
(supra), a Division Bench of the Bombay
High Court in order to accomplish the underlying object of
the Act, has issued certain directions, one of which reads
as follows:--
"(b) The Court concerned must ensure that examination-
in-chief cross-examination and reexamination of the
complainant must be concluded within three months of
assigning the case. The Court has option of accepting
affidavits of the witnesses, instead of examining them in
Court. Witnesses to the complaint and accused must
be available for cross-examination as and when
there is direction to this effect by the Court."
(emphasis supplied)
In
Harischandra Biyani v. Stock Holding Corporation of
India Ltd.
(supra), the Bombay High Court has again
applied and followed the decision in
Ksl And Industries
Ltd. v. Mannalal Khandelwal
(supra).
In
Magma Leasing Ltd. v. State of West Bengal
(supra),
there is a reference to
Ksl and Industries Ltd. v. Mannalal
Khandelwal
(supra), and the same has been referred to
13
and relied upon in holding that
Section 145
enables the
     accused or defence to lay evidence by affidavit.
Hence, in keeping with judicial propriety, the later
     judgment of the Apex Court can safely be applied when
     the divergent view is that of a co-ordinate bench of the
     same Court.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed. The Trial Court is
     directed to receive the affidavit evidence of the petitioner
     on his request, in accordance with
Section 315
CrPC and
     proceed with the pending case in accordance with law."
This Court in the afore-extracted judgment holds in favour of the

accused therein and directs the criminal Court to receive

affidavit evidence of the accused on his request.
7. The petitioner/accused, in the cases at hand, also seeks

to submit affidavit evidence. Therefore, in the light of the law
laid

down by
the
Co-ordinate Bench
(supra), the order of the criminal

Court directing that the petitioner shall lead only oral evidence is

rendered unsustainable. Therefore, the petitioner would be at

liberty to submit affidavit evidence and the same shall be taken

on record and trial be proceeded further. It is made clear that

the petitioner who has now called in question the order directing
14
leading of oral evidence will be precluded from later on

contending that oral evidence was necessary to be led in the

matter.
8. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
ORDER
(a)   These Criminal Petitions are allowed and the
              impugned order dated 07-07-2018 passed by the
              JMFC, IV Court, Mysuru stands quashed.
(b)   The petitioner is permitted to submit affidavit
              evidence in the subject trial and the criminal Court
              shall take the same on record and consider the
              matters on their merit.
Sd/-
JUDGE



bkp
CT:MJ
