Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 89, (2020) 1 CRIMES 261
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/31490998/

[Cites
24
, Cited by
9
]
Delhi High Court
Innocent Uzoma vs State on 14 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 89, (2020) 1 CRIMES 261
Author:
Vibhu Bakhru
Bench:
Vibhu Bakhru
THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%                                  Judgment delivered on: 14.01.2020

+       CRL.A. 139/2017 & CRL. M. (BAIL) NO.1401/2018

INNOCENT UZOMA                                            ..... Appellant
                          versus

STATE                                                   ..... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner        : Mr. J. S. Kushwaha
For the Respondent        : Mr. Amit Gupta, APP for State.

CORAM
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU

                             JUDGMENT
VIBHU BAKHRU, J

Introduction
1.      The appellant has filed the present appeal impugning a judgment
dated 23.12.2016 passed by the ASJ, Special Judge (NDPS), Saket
Courts, whereby the appellant was convicted under
Section 21(b)
of the
Narcotics, Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereafter the
'
NDPS Act
') and
Section 14(a)
of the Foreigners Act, 1946. By an order
dated 26.12.2016, the appellant was sentenced to undergo four years of
rigorous imprisonment and a fine of ₹50,000/- for the offence under
Section 21
of the NDPS Act. And, in default of payment of the said fine,
to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of three months.
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 1 of 33
He was further sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period
three years and a fine of ₹10,000/- for the offence under
Section 14(a)
of the Foreigners Act, 1946. And, in default of payment of the said fine,
to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one month. Both
sentences were ordered to run concurrently.
2.      The Trial Court had found that the appellant was guilty of being
found in possession of 25 grams of cocaine. The principal controversy
to be addressed in this appeal is whether the appellant's search
conducted by police officials - which yielded 25 grams of cocaine -
was not compliant with the provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act,
as it was not conducted in the presence of Gazetted Officer/Magistrate.
Context
3.      Briefly, the case of the prosecution is that on 04.06.2015, SI Shiv
Darshan Singh, Narcotic Cell, Crime Branch, Daryaganj was informed
by a secret informer that a person namely Innocent, resident of the Arjun
Nagar area, is a supplier of cocaine in Delhi and would be coming to
Sudarshan Marg, Gautam Nagar, Delhi between 06:30 pm and 07:00
pm to supply cocaine. A raiding party was constituted, which reached
the spot at about 06:30 pm. At 06:55 pm, the informer pointed towards
the accused who was wearing black t-shirt and green capris. When the
accused was 5-7 steps away from the police officials, he became
suspicious and started going back. At this moment, he was apprehended
by the raiding team.
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 2 of 33
4.      SI Shiv Darshan informed the accused that his search was going
to be conducted. He also explained to the accused his legal right to be
searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted officer. However, the
appellant declined the offer of being searched before a Gazetted
Office/Magistrate. SI Shiv Darshan asked some passersby to join the
proceedings, but none agreed. On search of the accused, a semi-
transparent polythene pouch tied with a rubber band was recovered
from the left pocket of the accused's capris. It contained a white
coloured substance. Upon testing using the field-testing kit, the said
substance, which weighed 25 grams, tested positive for cocaine.
5.      Thereafter, SI Shiv Darshan prepared the rukka and sent HC
Satyawan to PS, Crime Branch for registration of an FIR. After
registration of the FIR, investigation was assigned to SI Rajveer Singh.
Investigation revealed that the appellant's name was Innocent Uzoma.
He was a Nigerian national and had entered India on a
seminar/conference visa, which was valid up to 19.11.2014. He had
overstayed the term of his visa and was thus, an illegal migrant.
6.      Charges for commission of offences under
Section 21(b)
of the
NDPS Act and
Section 14(a)
of the Foreigners Act, 1946 were framed
against the accused, to which he claimed not guilty. Accordingly, the
matter was set down for trial.
7.      The Trial Court found that the prosecution had established,
beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant was found in possession of
25 gms of cocaine and thus, found him guilty of the offence under
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 3 of 33
Section 21(b)
of the NDPS Act. Further, the Trial Court also found that
the appellant was guilty of exceeding his stay in India beyond the term
of the visa issued to him and therefore, was guilty of the offence under
Section 14(a)
of the Foreigners Act, 1946.
Evidence
8.      The prosecution examined twelve witnesses, while the defence
chose to not examine any witnesses.
9.      HC Raj Kumar, PS Crime Branch deposed as PW-1. He stated
that on 04.06.2015, he was working as a duty officer at Crime Branch
from 08:00 pm to 08:00 am. At about 11:15 pm, HC Satyawan came
along with HC Sanjeev Kumar and a rukka. The same was for
registration of FIR sent by SI Shiv Darshan. He, thereafter, lodged DD
No. 27 in this regard. On the basis of the rukka, he got a computerized
FIR recorded. PW-1 then identified his endorsement on the same. In his
cross-examination, he stated that he started recording the FIR at 11:15
pm and informed the FIR number to the SHO at the same time. He
concluded recording the same at about 12:35 am.
10.     HC Narender, Narcotic Cell, Daryaganj deposed as PW-2. He
deposed that he had taken the sample parcels on 08.06.2015 and had
deposited the same with the FSL. The acknowledgement slip issued by
FSL was handed over to him by HC Jag Narayan. In his cross-
examination, he denied having been authorized by the inspector in
writing to collect the samples from the aforesaid MHC (M).
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 4 of 33
11.     HC Jag Narayan, PS Crime Branch, Malviya Nagar deposed as
PW-3. He deposed that at about 11:35 pm, Insp. Ravinder Kumar
Sharma had called him along with register no. 19 to his office. He made
entry in the said register at serial no. 2319 and deposited the pullanda
in the malkhana. In his cross-examination, he stated that the SHO had
already written the FIR number on the pullandas when PW-3 was called
by him at about 11:35 pm. He completed recording the requisite
information in register no. 19 at about 12:00 am.
12.     Ct. Rajeev Kumar, Narcotics Cell, Crime Branch deposed as PW-
4. He deposed that on 05.06.2015, the report under Section 57 of the
NPDS Act regarding the seizure of the contraband and arrest of the
accused was received in his office and he made entry in the diary
register vide Ex. PW4/C and Ex. PW4/D.
13.     HC Satyawan, Sector-16, Rohini deposed as PW-5. He deposed
that on 04.06.2015, he was posted at Narcotic Cell, Daryaganj. He,
along with other officials, constituted a raiding party and left for the
spot at about 05:30 pm. At the Shantivan red light and near AIIMS
Metro Station, they requested passersby to join the raiding party,
however, no one agreed to do so. After apprehending the accused, PW-
5 stated that the accused was made aware of his legal rights and was
informed that if he so wanted, his search would be conducted before a
Gazetted officer or a Magistrate. SI Shivdarshan gave a written notice
under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act to the accused. The accused informed
the team that he was illiterate and could not read and write. Thereafter,
SI Shivdarshan recorded his response to the notice on the basis of
Crl.A. 139/2017                                               Page 5 of 33
whatever was told to him by the accused. He stated that on search of the
accused, a polythene bag was recovered which contained white powder,
from the left side pocket of the accused's capris. The same tested
positive for cocaine using the field-testing kit. It weighed 25 gms. In his
cross-examination, he stated that the secret information was given to SI
Shivdarshan at about 04:30 pm on 04.06.2015. The informer informed
SI Shivdarshan that Innocent Uzoma used to supply cocaine only in
South Delhi. However, the informer did not give any information
regarding the persons to whom the accused supplied the said
contraband. In his cross-examination, he deposed that the information
of the contents of the notice under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act was
informed to the accused in English language. The said notice was given
to the accused at about 07:30 pm. The same was prepared near the street
light near the transformer. PW-5 stated that a mobile phone was
recovered from the left side pocket of the accused's capris. He stated
that the seizure memo was not prepared in his presence, as he had taken
the tehrir for registration of the FIR. The rukka was prepared while
sitting on the footpath, where the accused was sitting with the police
officials. PW-5 stated that he was not carrying his mobile phone that
day, but SI Shivdarshan was carrying the same. SI Shivdarshan
informed Inspector Vivek Pathak about the seizure and arrest at about
07:15 pm.
14.     HC Laxman Prasad, AHTU, Crime Branch, Sector-16, Rohini
deposed as PW-7. He stated that on 04.06.2015 at about 04:25 pm, SI
Shivdarshan told him and HC Satyawan about the secret information
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 6 of 33
that the accused would come to the spot to supply cocaine. When they
reached the spot, they saw one Nigerian person coming from the side of
Yusuf Sarai on foot wearing green coloured capris and a black coloured
t-shirt. The accused was apprehended by the raiding team at about 07:00
pm. Thereafter, SI Shivdarshan introduced himself and other members
of the raiding party to the accused, who identified himself as Innocent
Uzoma. SI Shivdarshan informed the accused about his legal right to be
searched before a Gazetted officer or a Magistrate. A notice under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act was prepared by SI Shivdarshan and a
carbon copy of the same was given to the accused. Since the accused
was illiterate, SI Shivdarshan read the contents of the same out to the
accused. The accused's refusal was written on the said notice as was
dictated to SI Shivdarshan by the accused. PW-7 stated that thereafter,
the accused's search was conducted, consequent to which, a transparent
polythene containing cocaine was found from the left side pocket of the
capris worn by the accused. In his cross-examination, PW-7 affirmed
that the IO had not asked any shopkeeper or permanent employee of the
Metro Station to join the raid. He could not recollect whether a mobile
phone was recovered from the possession of the accused on his search.
He stated that neither the raiding team nor the IO had their mobile
phones with them, as they had left the same in the office. All documents
were prepared by the IO while sitting on the footpath.
15.     Inspector Vivek Pathak, STF, Malviya Nagar Crime Branch
deposed as PW-8. He deposed that at about 04:45, SI Shiv Darshan
along with an informer came to his office and thereafter, PW-8 was
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 7 of 33
informed that the accused would be coming to the spot to deliver a
consignment of Cocaine. In his cross-examination, PW-8 stated that the
informer had not disclosed the complete address of the accused. He
stated that during investigation, the accused was highly uncooperative
and even refused to disclose his address.
16.     SI Shiv Darshan, STF, Crime Branch deposed as PW-10. He
deposed that on 04.06.2015, he was posted at the Narcotics Cell, Crime
Branch, Daryaganj. An informer came in at about 04:30 pm and told
him that the accused will deliver cocaine between 06:30 pm and 07:00
pm at Sudarshan Marg, Gautam Nagar behind AIIMS near
Transformer, near Plot no. 112-A. He constituted a raiding party. On
the way, he had asked four to five passersby to join the proceedings, but
none agreed to do so. Thereafter, on the basis of information given by
the secret informer, they apprehended the accused at about 07:00 pm.
PW-10, thereafter, informed the accused of his legal rights and his right
to be searched before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate. PW-10 stated
that the accused informed him that he can read and understand English,
but cannot write the same. PW-10 then prepared a notice under
Section
50
of the NDPS Act. On the accused being searched, 25 gms of cocaine
was found in his pocket. Thereafter, HC Satyavan and HC Sanjeev
Kumar left the spot at about 11:00 pm.
17.     In his cross-examination, PW-10 stated that he had inquired from
the secret informer as to who the accused used to supply Cocaine to in
Delhi. He affirmed that none of the members of the raiding party were
carrying their phones on that day. Further, he stated that he prepared the
Crl.A. 139/2017                                               Page 8 of 33
notice under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act while sitting on the footpath
and the seizure memo was prepared by him on the bonnet of the Gypsy,
under the light of the electric pole. No mobile phone was recovered
from the possession of the accused.
18.     SI Rajveer Singh, Parliament House Security deposed as PW-12.
He deposed that on the intervening night of 04.06.2015 and 05.06.2015
at about 01:15 am, HC Satyawan handed him a computerized copy of
FIR No. 84/15 dated 04.06.2015 and an original rukka. In his cross-
examination, he stated that he came to know about the case through HC
Satyawan. He affirmed that no mobile phone was recovered from the
accused during his search.
Submissions
19.     At the outset, Mr. Kushwaha, learned counsel appearing for the
appellant clarified that he does not wish to contest the appellant's
conviction under
Section 14(a)
of the Foreigners Act, 1946. He stated
that the appellant was sentenced to three years of rigorous imprisonment
and a fine of ₹10,000/- for committing the offence under
Section 14
of
the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the appellant has served the said sentence.
He limited the challenge in the present appeal to the appellant's
conviction under
Section 21(b)
of the NDPS Act. He submitted that
although the appellant had almost completed the sentence awarded for
the commission of the said offence, the appellant, nonetheless, wished
to contest his conviction as he was not guilty of committing any such
offence.
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 9 of 33
20.     The learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the appellant's
conviction on, essentially, three grounds. First, that the public witnesses
had not been joined in the search and seizure proceedings, despite the
raiding party having sufficient time to do so. He submitted that this
raised doubts as to the case set up by the prosecution. Second, there
were inconsistencies in the testimonies of various witnesses. It was
pointed out that whereas PW 7 deposed that cocaine was recovered from
the left pocket of the accused, PW 10 testified that cocaine was
recovered from the right pocket of the half trousers worn by the
appellant. In addition, PW 5 had deposed that a mobile phone had been
recovered from the left side pocket of the green coloured capris worn
by the accused, but the same was denied by PW 10, in his cross-
examination. Mr. Kushwaha also pointed out that according to PW 7,
none of the members of the raiding team were carrying any mobile
phones when they left the office. He submitted that it was impossible to
believe that the entire raiding team would not carry any mobile phones.
He submitted that investigation into the call details of the mobile phones
of the raiding team would disclose that they were not present at the spot,
from where the appellant was allegedly apprehended. Third, he
submitted that mandatary provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act
were not complied with, as the notice allegedly served did not state that
a search before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate shall be arranged.
Further, the search was not conducted in the presence of a Gazetted
Officer or a Magistrate. He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court
in
Arif Khan @ Agha Khan v. State of Uttarakhand
: (2018) 18 SCC
380 in support of his contention.
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 10 of 33
Discussion and Conclusion
21.     This Court is not persuaded to accept that the appellant is liable
to be acquitted on account of the inconsistencies in the testimony of the
witnesses. Whereas PW 7 had deposed that "one semi-transparent
polythene tied with rubber band was recovered from the left pocket of
the Capri pant, containing some white powder"; PW10 stated, in his
cross-examination, that "he had checked both the pockets of green
coloured capri. Beside the contraband, there was a purse in the right
side of the pocket". Although on first blush, it does appear that there is
a contradiction as to whether the contraband was recovered from the
right pocket of the capris or the left pocket of the capris, worn by the
appellant at the material time. However, on a closer examination, it is
apparent that there is no contradiction in the testimony of PW7 and
PW10 in this regard. In his examination in chief, PW 10 had deposed
that "on the formal search the accused, on which one semi-transparent
polythene was recovered from the left pocket of Capri of accused, tied
with rubber band containing white powder". This is consistent with the
testimony of PW7. The statement made in the cross-examination must
be read in its context. PW10 had clarified that he had checked both the
pockets and besides the contraband, a purse was recovered from the
right pocket of the trousers worn by the appellant. This ought not to be
read to mean that the contraband was recovered from the right pocket
of the capris worn by the appellant.
22.     Insofar as the recovery of mobile phone is concerned, there is
inconsistency in the testimony of PW 5 and other witnesses. PW 5 had
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 11 of 33
stated that a mobile phone was recovered from the left side pocket of
the capris worn by the appellant. However, PW 7 and PW 12 had denied
that any mobile phone had been recovered from the appellant. PW 7, in
his cross-examination, stated that he could not recall whether any
mobile phone had been recovered from the appellant. Although
discrepancy in this regard cannot be ignored as being irrelevant, this
Court is unable to accept that it raises any doubt as to the possession of
the contraband (25 grams of cocaine) by the appellant at the material
time.
23.     Insofar as not joining any independent witnesses is concerned,
there is considerable merit in this contention. It was apposite for the
raiding team to include public witnesses. The testimony that certain
passersby at a red light and at the spot were asked to join the
proceedings does reflect the casual approach of the concerned officials.
The raiding team had sufficient time to ensure that independent
witnesses are joined in the proceedings. The appellant was apprehended
from a crowded spot and there were number of establishments nearby
and, thus, there would be no dearth of public witnesses. Having stated
the above, this Court is unable to accept that the testimonies of the
police witnesses must be disregarded on account of not including of
public witnesses in the proceedings. The testimonies of the raiding team
- H.C. Laxman Prasad (PW 7), H.C. Satyawa (PW 5) and SI Shiv
Darshan (PW 10) - are consistent with regard to recovery of cocaine
from the appellant. There is also no doubt that samples drawn from the
Crl.A. 139/2017                                               Page 12 of 33
substances recovered were not tampered with and examination of the
same had revealed the substance to be cocaine.
24.     The only question that remains to be addressed is whether the
provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act were complied with. The
learned counsel appearing for the appellant had contended that the
notice under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act served on the appellant was
defective and further that the search was not conducted before a
Magistrate or a Gazette Officer.
25.     The notice served on the appellant, inter alia, stated as under:-
".... Before conducting your search it is your legal right that your
search could be taken before a Magistrate or a Gazetted officer for
which arrangement can be made....". Mr. Kushwaha contended that the
use of the word 'can' in the aforementioned sentence rendered the
notice defective and not compliant with
Section 50
of the NDPS Act.
He submitted that sub-section (1) of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act used
the word 'shall' and it was expressly indicated that the officer
authorized under
Section 42
of the Act 'shall' take the person to the
nearest Gazetted Officer or to the nearest Magistrate.
26.     The aforesaid contention is unmerited. It is not disputed that the
provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act are mandatory and must be
strictly complied. The Supreme Court in
The State of Punjab v. Baldev
Singh
: 1999 6 SCC 172 had explained that it is imperative that a person
proposed to be searched be informed of his right under Sub-Section (1)
of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act of being taken to the nearest Gazetted
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 13 of 33
Officer or the nearest Magistrate for conducing his/her search. In the
present case, the notice issued under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act (Ex.
PW 5/A) clearly informed the appellant of such right. The use of the
word 'can' in the statement 'before conducting a search it is your legal
right that a search can be conducted for which arrangement 'can be
made' instead of the word 'shall'' is irrelevant, because the appellant
was duly communicated that he had a legal right to be searched before
a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer.
27.     The next question to be addressed is whether there was non-
compliance of the provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act as the
appellant was not searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted officer. It
is contended on behalf of the appellant that notwithstanding that the
appellant had not opted to be searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted
Officer, it was, nonetheless, imperative that the search be conducted
before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer and failure in this regard
rendered the appellant liable to be acquitted of the offence of possessing
cocaine, since the said charge rested solely on the allegation that the
search of the appellant had revealed that he was in possession of 25
grams of cocaine.
28.     Before proceeding further, it would be relevant to refer to
Section
50
of the NDPS Act, which is set out below:-
"50. Conditions under which search of persons shall be
        conducted.--(1) When any officer duly authorised under
Section 42
is about to search any person under the
        provisions of
Section 41
,
Section 42
or
Section 43
, he shall,
        if such person so requires, take such person without
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 14 of 33
unnecessary delay to the nearest gazetted officer of any of
        the departments mentioned in
Section 42
or to the nearest
        Magistrate.
(2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the
        person until he can bring him before the gazetted officer or
        the Magistrate referred to in sub-section (1).
        (3) The gazetted officer or the Magistrate before whom any
        such person is brought shall, if he sees no reasonable ground
        for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise
        shall direct that search be made.
(4) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a
        female.
(5) When an officer duly authorised under
Section 42
has
        reason to believe that it is not possible to take the person to
        be searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate
        without the possibility of the person to be searched parting
        with possession of any narcotic drug or psychotropic
        substance, or controlled substance or article or document, he
        may, instead of taking such person to the nearest Gazetted
        Officer or Magistrate, proceed to search the person as
        provided under
Section 100
of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973.
(6) After a search is conducted under sub-section (5), the
        officer shall record the reasons for such belief which
        necessitated such search and within seventy-two hours send
        a copy thereof to his immediate official superior."
29.
In
State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh
: 1999 6 SCC 172, the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme had, inter alia, held as under: -
"57. On the basis of the reasoning and discussion above,
        the following conclusions arise:
(1) That when an empowered officer or a duly authorised
        officer acting on prior information is about to search a
        person, it is imperative for him to inform the person
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 15 of 33
concerned of his right under sub-section (1) of
Section 50
of being taken to the nearest gazetted officer or the nearest
        Magistrate for making the search. However, such
        information may not necessarily be in writing.
        (2) That failure to inform the person concerned about the
        existence of his right to be searched before a gazetted
        officer or a Magistrate would cause prejudice to an
        accused.
(3) That a search made by an empowered officer, on prior
        information, without informing the person of his right that
        if he so requires, he shall be taken before a gazetted officer
        or a Magistrate for search and in case he so opts, failure to
        conduct his search before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate,
        may not vitiate the trial but would render the recovery of
        the illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction and
        sentence of an accused, where the conviction has been
        recorded only on the basis of the possession of the illicit
        article, recovered from his person, during a search
        conducted in violation of the provisions of
Section 50
of
        the Act.
(4) That there is indeed need to protect society from
        criminals. The societal intent in safety will suffer if persons
        who commit crimes are let off because the evidence against
        them is to be treated as if it does not exist. The answer,
        therefore, is that the investigating agency must follow the
        procedure as envisaged by the statute scrupulously and the
        failure to do so must be viewed by the higher authorities
        seriously inviting action against the official concerned so
        that the laxity on the part of the investigating authority is
        curbed. In every case the end result is important but the
        means to achieve it must remain above board. The remedy
        cannot be worse than the disease itself. The legitimacy of
        the judicial process may come under a cloud if the court is
        seen to condone acts of lawlessness conducted by the
        investigating agency during search operations and may also
        undermine respect for the law and may have the effect of
        unconscionably compromising the administration of
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 16 of 33
justice. That cannot be permitted. An accused is entitled to
        a fair trial. A conviction resulting from an unfair trial is
        contrary to our concept of justice. The use of evidence
        collected in breach of the safeguards provided by
Section
        50
at the trial, would render the trial unfair.
        (5) That whether or not the safeguards provided in
Section
        50
have been duly observed would have to be determined
        by the court on the basis of the evidence led at the trial.
Finding on that issue, one way or the other, would be
        relevant for recording an order of conviction or acquittal.
        Without giving an opportunity to the prosecution to
        establish, at the trial, that the provisions of
Section 50
and,
        particularly, the safeguards provided therein were duly
        complied with, it would not be permissible to cut short a
        criminal trial.
(6) That in the context in which the protection has been
        incorporated in
Section 50
for the benefit of the person
        intended to be searched, we do not express any opinion
        whether the provisions of
Section 50
are mandatory or
        directory, but hold that failure to inform the person
        concerned of his right as emanating from sub-section (1) of
Section 50
, may render the recovery of the contraband
        suspect and the conviction and sentence of an accused bad
        and unsustainable in law.
(7) That an illicit article seized from the person of an
        accused during search conducted in violation of the
        safeguards provided in
Section 50
of the Act cannot be used
        as evidence of proof of unlawful possession of the
        contraband on the accused though any other material
        recovered during that search may be relied upon by the
        prosecution, in other proceedings, against an accused,
        notwithstanding the recovery of that material during an
        illegal search.
(8) A presumption under
Section 54
of the Act can only be
        raised after the prosecution has established that the accused
        was found to be in possession of the contraband in a search
        conducted in accordance with the mandate of
Section 50
.
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 17 of 33
An illegal search cannot entitle the prosecution to raise a
        presumption under
Section 54
of the Act.
(9) That the judgment in Pooran Mal case [(1974) 1 SCC
        345 : 1974 SCC (Tax) 114] cannot be understood to have
        laid down that an illicit article seized during a search of a
        person, on prior information, conducted in violation of the
        provisions of
Section 50
of the Act, can by itself be used as
        evidence of unlawful possession of the illicit article on the
        person from whom the contraband has been seized during
        the illegal search.
(10) That the judgment in Ali Mustaffa case [(1994) 6 SCC
        569 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 32] correctly interprets and
        distinguishes the judgment in Pooran Mal case [(1974) 1
        SCC 345 : 1974 SCC (Tax) 114] and the broad
        observations made in Pirthi Chand case [(1996) 2 SCC 37
        : 1996
SCC (Cri) 210] and Jasbir Singh
case [(1996) 1 SCC
        288 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 1] are not in tune with the correct
        exposition of law as
laid down in
Pooran Mal case [(1974)
        1 SCC 345 : 1974 SCC (Tax) 114] ."
30.     There is no dispute that it was necessary for an authorized officer
to inform the person concerned, before he is searched, about his right
that if he so requires, he shall be searched before a Gazetted Officer or
a Magistrate. Failure to comply with the same would render the
recovery of the illicit articles suspect and vitiate the conviction of the
accused, if he is convicted only on the basis of possessing the
contraband recovered during the search conducted without informing
him of his rights.
31.
In
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
: (2011) 1
SCC 609, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the
question whether compliance of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act would be
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 18 of 33
sufficient. The Court answered in the negative and held that the
obligations of the authorized officer under
Section 50 (1)
of the NDPS
Act is mandatory and requires strict compliance. The relevant extract of
the said decision
is set out below:-
"29. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the
        firm opinion that the object with which the right under
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act, by way of a safeguard,
        has been conferred on the suspect viz. to check the misuse
        of power, to avoid harm to innocent persons and to
        minimise the allegations of planting or foisting of false
        cases by the law enforcement agencies, it would be
        imperative on the part of the empowered officer to
        apprise the person intended to be searched of his right to
        be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate. We
        have no hesitation in holding that insofar as the obligation
        of the authorised officer under sub-section (1) of
Section
        50
of the NDPS Act is concerned, it is mandatory and
        requires strict compliance. Failure to comply with the
        provision would render the recovery of the illicit article
        suspect and vitiate the conviction if the same is recorded
        only on the basis of the recovery of the illicit article from
        the person of the accused during such search. Thereafter,
        the suspect may or may not choose to exercise the right
        provided to him under the said provision.
30. As observed in Presidential Poll, In re [(1974) 2 SCC
        33] : (SCC p. 49, para 13)
                  "13. ... It is the duty of the courts to get at
                  the real intention of the legislature by
                  carefully attending [to] the whole scope of
                  the provision to be construed. 'The key to
                  the opening of every law is the reason and
                  spirit of the law, it is the animus
                  imponentis, the intention of the law maker
                  expressed in the law itself, taken as a
                  whole."
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                   Page 19 of 33
31. We are of the opinion that the concept of "substantial
        compliance" with the requirement of
Section 50
of the
        NDPS Act introduced and read into the mandate of the
        said section in Joseph Fernandez [(2000) 1 SCC 707 :
2000 SCC (Cri) 300] and Prabha Shankar Dubey [(2004)
        2 SCC 56 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 420] is neither borne out from
        the language of sub-section (1) of
Section 50
nor it is in
        consonance with the dictum
laid down in
Baldev Singh
case [(1999) 6 SCC 172 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 1080] .
Needless to add that the question whether or not the
        procedure prescribed has been followed and the
        requirement of
Section 50
had been met, is a matter of
        trial. It would neither be possible nor feasible to lay down
        any absolute formula in that behalf.
32. We also feel that though
Section 50
gives an option
        to the empowered officer to take such person (suspect)
        either before the nearest gazetted officer or the Magistrate
        but in order to impart authenticity, transparency and
        creditworthiness to the entire proceedings, in the first
        instance, an endeavour should be to produce the suspect
        before the nearest Magistrate, who enjoys more
        confidence of the common man compared to any other
        officer. It would not only add legitimacy to the search
        proceedings, it may verily strengthen the prosecution as
        well.
33. Accordingly, we answer the reference in the manner
        aforesaid. The appeals shall, now, be placed before the
        appropriate Bench for disposal."
32.     In terms of
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act where an officer is
about to search a person under the provisions of
Sections 41
,
42
or 43
of the
NDPS Act
, he shall, if such person requires, take such person
without unnecessarily delay to the nearest Gazetted Officer or the
nearest Magistrate. Whilst it is clear that the authorized officer is
required      to   take   the   person    concerned     to    the      nearest
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 20 of 33
Magistrate/Gazetted Officer if the person so requires; it is difficult to
interpret
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act to read that it is mandatory that
in all cases, search must be conducted before a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate. Clearly, if
Section 50(1)
of NDPS Act is read to mean that
it is necessary in all cases that a search be conducted before a Magistrate
or a Gazetted Officer, there would be no purpose in informing the
suspect of his right to be searched before such officers. The entire object
of informing the suspect, who is proposed to be searched, about his/her
right is to enable him to exercise this right - the right to be searched
before a Magistrate or a Gazette Officer.
In
Vijaysinh Chandubha
Jadeja
(supra), the Supreme Court had also observed that the
obligations of the authorized officer under
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS
Act is mandatory and requires strict compliance. Failure to comply with
the said provision would render the recovery of the illicit article suspect
and vitiate the conviction. However, the Court had also observed that
"Thereafter, the suspect may or may not choose to exercise the right
provided to him under the said proviso".
33.
In
Ashok Kumar Sharma v. State of Rajasthan
: (2013) 2 SCC
67, the Supreme Court considered a case where the authorized officer
had merely informed the accused (appellant therein) that he can be
searched before any Magistrate or Gazetted Officer, if he so wished.
The Supreme Court held that the same did not comply with the
mandatory procedure of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act and, thus, vitiated
the entire proceedings. The Court reasoned that the accused was only
informed that he could be searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 21 of 33
Officer if he so wished, however, the fact that the accused had a right
under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act to be searched before the Gazetted
Officer or a Magistrate was not made known to him. The relevant
extract of
the said decision
, is set out below: -
"7. We are in this case concerned only with the
          question whether PW 1, the officer who had conducted
          the search on the person of the appellant had followed
          the procedure laid down under
Section 50
of the NDPS
          Act. On this question, there were conflicts of views by
          different Benches of this Court and the matter was
          referred to a five-Judge Bench. This Court in Vijaysinh
          Chandubha Jadeja [(2011) 1 SCC 609 : (2011) 1 SCC
          (Cri) 497] answered the question, stating that it is
          imperative on the part of the officer to apprise the
          person intended to be searched of his right under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, to be searched before a
          gazetted officer or a Magistrate. This Court also held
          that it is mandatory on the part of the authorised officer
          to make the accused aware of the existence of his right
          to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate,
          if so required by him and this mandatory provision
          requires strict compliance. The suspect may or may not
          choose to exercise the right provided to him under the
          said provision, but so far as the officer is concerned, an
          obligation is cast on him under
Section 50
of the NDPS
          Act to apprise the person of his right to be searched
          before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate. The question,
          as to whether this procedure has been complied with or
          not, in this case the deposition of PW 1 assumes
          importance, which reads as follows:
"He was apprised while telling the reason of
                  being searched that he could be searched
                  before any Magistrate or any gazetted
                  officer if he wished. He gave his consent in
                  written and said that I have faith on you,
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 22 of 33
you can search me. Fard regarding
                  apprising and consent is Ext. P-3 on which
                  I put my signature from A to B and the
                  accused put his signature from C to D. E to
                  F is the endorsement of the consent of the
                  accused and G to H is signature, which has
                  been written by the accused."
The above statement of PW 1 would clearly indicate that
          he had only informed the accused that he could be
          searched before any Magistrate or a gazetted officer if he
          so wished. The fact that the accused person has a right
          under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act to be searched before
          a gazetted officer or a Magistrate was not made known
          to him. We are of the view that there is an obligation on
          the part of the empowered officer to inform the accused
          or the suspect of the existence of such a right to be
          searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, if so
          required by him. Only if the suspect does not choose to
          exercise the right in spite of apprising him of his right,
          the empowered officer could conduct the search on the
          body of the person.
8. We may, in this connection, also examine the general
          maxim ignorantia juris non excusat and whether in such
          a situation the accused could take a defence that he was
          unaware of the procedure
laid down in
Section 50
of the
          NDPS Act. Ignorance does not normally afford any
          defence under the criminal law, since a person is
          presumed to know the law. Undisputedly ignorance of
          law often in reality exists, though as a general
          proposition, it is true, that knowledge of law must be
          imputed to every person. But it must be too much to
          impute knowledge in certain situations, for example, we
          cannot expect a rustic villager, totally illiterate, a poor
          man on the street, to be aware of the various laws
laid
          down in
this country, leave aside the
NDPS Act
. We
          notice that this fact is also within the knowledge of the
          legislature, possibly for that reason the legislature in its
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 23 of 33
wisdom imposed an obligation on the authorised officer
          acting under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act to inform the
          suspect of his right under
Section 50
to be searched in the
          presence of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate warranting
          strict compliance with that procedure."
34.     The above decision also makes it clear that the mandate of
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act is to ensure that the authorized officer
informs the person proposed to be searched about his right to be
searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. The authorized
officer is also obliged to take the concerned person (the suspect) to the
nearest Gazetted Officer of any departments mentioned in
Section 42
of
the NDPS Act or to the nearest Magistrate, if such person so requires.
In
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
(supra), the Supreme Court had also
observed that though
Section 50
of the NDPS Act gives the option to
the empowered officer to take the person suspect either before the
nearest Gazetted Officer or to a Magistrate; in the first instance, an
endeavor should be made to produce the suspect before the nearest
Magistrate. This, obviously, would follow only 'if the person so
requires'.
35.     In view of the decisions as mentioned above, it is no longer res
integra that it is mandatory to comply with
Section 50
of the NDPS Act.
There is also no ambiguity as to manner in which Section 50 of the
NDPC Act is required to be complied. Plainly, there is no requirement
to conduct the search in the presence of a Magistrate or Gazetted
Officer, if the person proposed to be searched did not so desire, after
being informed of his right in this regard. The words "if such person so
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 24 of 33
requires" as used in
Section 50(1)
of the NDPS Act make it amply clear
that the person to be searched would be taken before a Magistrate or a
Gazetted Officer, only if he so requires.
36.     In terms of Sub-section (2) of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, the
Authorised Officer is empowered to detain the person proposed to be
searched until he can bring him before the Gazetted Officer/Magistrate,
as referred to in Sub-section (1) of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act. The
words "such requisition", as mentioned in the opening sentence of Sub-
section (2) of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, obviously refers to the
person proposed to be searched electing to exercise his right to be
searched before a Gazetted Officer / Magistrate.
37.     This also is in conformity with the scheme that makes it amply
clear that if the person proposed to be searched requires that search be
conducted before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate, the authorised
officer is required to take such person to the nearest Gazetted
Officer/Magistrate. In terms of Sub-section (3) of
Section 50
of the
NDPS Act, a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate may discharge any
person brought before him/her, if he/she finds no reasonable grounds
for conducting such search. Sub-section (5) and (6) were introduced in
Section 50
of the NDPS Act by virtue of the
Narcotics, Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 2001
enacted on
27.09.2001 and came into effect from 02.10.2001. The said Sub-
sections provided option to the authorised officer to search a person
notwithstanding the said persons (suspect) requiring to be searched
before a Magistrate/Gazetted Officer. However, the authorised person
Crl.A. 139/2017                                              Page 25 of 33
could do so only if the conditions as specified under Sub-section (5) of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act were met, that is, if it is not possible to take
the person to be searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer/Magistrate
without the possibility of the person being searched parting with the
possession of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substance or any
controlled substance or article or document. In terms of Sub-section (6)
of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, the authorised officer is also required
to record reasons for his belief that necessitated him to search the
suspect without taking him to the nearest Gazetted Officer or
Magistrate. Such reasons are required to be recorded within seventy-
two hours of the search being conducted and a copy of the same is
required to be sent by the authorised officer to his immediate official
superior. Given the scheme of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, it is difficult
to accept that notwithstanding that a suspect must be searched only
before a Magistrate/Gazetted Officer, even though he does not so
require, after he is apprised of his rights in this regard.
38.     It is contended on behalf of the appellant that the Supreme Court
in
Arif Khan @ Agha
(supra) has expanded and amplified the sweep of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act. In that case, the prosecution claimed that
the accused had admitted that he was in possession of Charas. The
accused was apprehended and he was informed by the police personnel
that he has a legal right to be searched in presence of a gazetted officer
or a Magistrate, to which the accused replied that "he had faith in the
raiding party" and consented to be searched by them. Thereafter, the
raiding party searched the accused, which yielded Charas weighing
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                Page 26 of 33
around 2.5 kilograms. The accused was charged, tried and found guilty
for the offence under
Section 20
of the NDPS Act. He was sentenced to
rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten years and a fine of ₹1,00,000/.
The accused, thereafter, filed an appeal before the Uttarakhand High
Court, which was dismissed. Aggrieved by
the said decision
of the High
Court of Uttarakhand, the accused appealed to the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court allowed the appeal and acquitted the appellant of
commission of an offence under
Section 20
of the NDPS Act. The
relevant extract of
the said decision
is set out below:-
"16. The short question which arises for consideration
           in the appeal is whether the search/recovery made by the
           police officials from the appellant-accused of the
           alleged contraband (charas) can be held to be in
           accordance with the procedure prescribed under
Section
           50
of the NDPS Act.
17. In other words, the question that arises for
           consideration in this appeal is whether the prosecution
           was able to prove that the procedure prescribed under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act was followed by the police
           officials in letter and spirit while making the search and
           recovery of the contraband "charas" from the appellant-
           accused.
18. What is the true scope and object of
Section 50
of
           the NDPS Act, what are the duties, obligation and the
           powers conferred on the authorities under
Section 50
and whether the compliance of requirements of
Section
           50
are mandatory or directory, remain no more res
           integra and are now settled by the two decisions of the
           Constitution Bench of this Court in
State of
           Punjab v. Baldev Singh [State of Punjab
v. Baldev
           Singh, (1999) 6 SCC 172 : 1999
SCC (Cri) 1080]
           and Vijaysinh       Chandubha        Jadeja [Vijaysinh
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 27 of 33
Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
, (2011) 1 SCC
           609 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 497].
19.
Indeed, the latter Constitution Bench decision
           rendered in
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja [Vijaysinh
           Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
, (2011) 1 SCC
           609 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 497] has settled the
           aforementioned      questions     after   taking     into
           considerations all previous case law on the subject.
20. Their Lordships have held in
Vijaysinh Chandubha
           Jadeja [Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
,
           (2011) 1 SCC 609 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 497] that the
           requirements of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act are
           mandatory and, therefore, the provisions of
Section 50
must be strictly complied with. It is held that it is
           imperative on the part of the police officer to apprise the
           person intended to be searched of his right under
Section 50
to be searched only before a gazetted officer
           or a Magistrate. It is held that it is equally mandatory on
           the part of the authorised officer to make the suspect
           aware of the existence of his right to be searched before
           a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, if so required by him
           and this requires a strict compliance. It is ruled that the
           suspect person may or may not choose to exercise the
           right provided to him under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act
           but so far as the officer is concerned, an obligation is
           cast upon him under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act to
           apprise the suspect of his right to be searched before a
           gazetted officer or a Magistrate.
(See also
Ashok Kumar
           Sharma v. State       of     Rajasthan [Ashok       Kumar
           Sharma
v. State of Rajasthan, (2013) 2 SCC 67 : (2013)
           1 SCC (Cri) 829] and Narcotics Control Bureau v. Sukh
           Dev Raj Sodhi [Narcotics Control Bureau v. Sukh Dev
           Raj Sodhi, (2011) 6 SCC 392 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 981]
           .)
21. Keeping in view the aforementioned principle of
           law laid down by this Court, we have to examine the
           question arising in this case as to whether the
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 28 of 33
prosecution followed the mandatory procedure
           prescribed under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act while
           making search and recovery of the contraband "charas"
from the appellant and, if so, whether it was done in the
           presence of a Magistrate or a gazetted officer so as to
           make the search and recovery of contraband "charas"
           from the appellant in conformity with the requirements
           of
Section 50
.
22. In our considered view, the evidence adduced by the
           prosecution neither suggested and nor proved that the
           search and the recovery was made from the appellant in
           the presence of either a Magistrate or a gazetted officer.
23. It is the case of the prosecution and which found
           acceptance by the two courts below that since the
           appellant-accused was apprised of his right to be
           searched in the presence of either a Magistrate or a
           gazetted officer but despite telling him about his legal
           right available to him under
Section 50
in relation to the
           search, the appellant-accused gave his consent in
           writing to be searched by the police officials (raiding
           party), the two courts below came to a conclusion that
           the requirements of
Section 50
stood fully complied
           with and hence the appellant was liable to be convicted
           for the offence punishable under the
NDPS Act
.
24. We do not agree to this finding of the two courts
           below as, in our opinion, a search and recovery made
           from the appellant of the alleged contraband "charas"
           does not satisfy the mandatory requirements of
Section
           50
as held by this Court in
Vijaysinh Chandubha
           Jadeja [Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
,
           (2011) 1 SCC 609 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 497] . This we
           say for the following reasons:
24.1. First, it is an admitted fact emerging from the
           record of the case that the appellant was not produced
           before any Magistrate or gazetted officer.
           24.2. Second, it is also an admitted fact that due to the
           aforementioned first reason, the search and recovery of
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 29 of 33
the contraband "charas" was not made from the
           appellant in the presence of any Magistrate or gazetted
           officer.
24.3. Third, it is also an admitted fact that none of the
           police officials of the raiding party, who recovered the
           contraband "charas" from him, was the gazetted officer
           and nor they could be and, therefore, they were not
           empowered to make search and recovery from the
           appellant of the contraband "charas" as provided under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act except in the presence of
           either a Magistrate or a gazetted officer.
           24.4. Fourth, in order to make the search and recovery
           of the contraband articles from the body of the suspect,
           the search and recovery has to be in conformity with the
           requirements of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act. It is,
           therefore, mandatory for the prosecution to prove that
           the search and recovery was made from the appellant in
           the presence of a Magistrate or a gazetted officer.
26. For the aforementioned reasons, we are of the
           considered opinion that the prosecution was not able to
           prove that the search and recovery of the contraband
           (charas) made from the appellant was in accordance
           with the procedure prescribed under
Section 50
of the
           NDPS Act. Since the non-compliance of the mandatory
           procedure prescribed under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act
           is fatal to the prosecution case and, in this case, we have
           found that the prosecution has failed to prove the
           compliance as required in law, the appellant is entitled
           to claim its benefit to seek his acquittal.
27. In the light of the foregoing discussion, the appeal
           succeeds and is allowed. The impugned judgment is set
           aside. As a consequence thereof, the appellant's
           conviction is set aside and he is acquitted of the charges
           in question."
39.     The petition filed by the prosecution seeking review of
the said
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 30 of 33
decision
was also dismissed by the Supreme Court.
40.     The question that needs to be considered is whether
Arif Khan @
Agha Khan
(supra) is an authority for the proposition that
notwithstanding that the person proposed to be searched has, after being
apprised of his right to be searched before a Gazetted Officer or a
magistrate, declined the offer of being searched before a Gazetted
Officer or a Magistrate; it is mandatory that he be searched before a
Gazetted Officer/Magistrate.
41.
In
Dharambir v. State
: (2018) 254 DLT 354, the Coordinate
Bench of the High Court of Delhi held as under:
"44. It is undisputed, in the present case, that the search
         of the appellant, and his car, were conducted by the
         raiding party, and not by the Magistrate or a Gazetted
         Officer. Neither were the appellant and his car produced
         before any Magistrate or Gazetted Officer. The plea, of
         the respondent, that, as the appellant had been apprised
         of his right to have himself, and his car, searched by the
         Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer, and he had himself
         agreed to be searched by the raiding party, the mandate
         of
Section 50
stood fulfilled, though attractive, cannot
         sustain, as an identical plea, raised in similar facts,
         stands negated in
Arif Khan
(supra).
42.
In
Sikodh Mahto v. State
: Crl.A. 660/2017 decided on
06.06.2019, the co-ordinate bench of this Court of Delhi held as
hereunder:
52.
Insofar as the facts, essential for determination of the
         controversy in issue are concerned, the present case
         cannot be distinguished, in any manner, from
Arif Khan
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 31 of 33
(supra).
The only difference, on facts - which makes no
         difference to the legal position - is that, in
Arif Khan
(supra), the appellant Arif Khan, on being queried,
         confessed to carrying charas, whereas the appellants, in
         the present case, did not do so. In the present case, too,
         the alleged contraband charas was recovered from the
         bags of the appellants. In the present case, too, the search
         of the bags, and the seizure of charas therefrom, was
         effected by the raiding team, in the absence of any
         Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. The witnesses, in the
         present case, have deposed that the I/O was not a
         Gazetted Officer, and that no Magistrate or Gazetted
         Officer was contacted.
The ratio decidendi of
Arif Khan
(supra), as contained in para 28 of
the said decision
applies, therefore, to the present case on all fours.
While
         it is true that
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
(supra) would
         seem to suggest that, once the accused was offered the
         option of having his search conducted in the presence of
         a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer, and he declined the
         offer,
Section 50
stood complied with,
Arif Khan
(supra), after noticing
Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
(supra), as well as the law laid down therein, holds,
         nevertheless, that, even where the accused - as
in that
         case
, and as in the present case - declined the offer under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, the raiding team was,
         nevertheless, required to have the search of the appellant
         conducted in the presence of a Gazetted Officer or
         Magistrate. The said enunciation of the law binds me, by
         virtue of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India."
43.     The aforesaid decisions in
Dharambir
(supra) and
Sikodh
Mahto
(supra) were delivered on 13.11.2018 and 06.06.2019,
respectively.
However, a decision rendered by this Court prior to the
said dates in
Ram Gopal v. State
: Crl. A. 676/2017, decided on
16.10.2018 was not considered in the aforesaid decisions. In that case,
the Court had noticed as under:-
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                  Page 32 of 33
"In
Arif Khan
(supra) on the facts of that case, the Court
         found that the mandatory procedure under
Section 50
of
         the Act had not been satisfied. The said case was peculiar
         on its own facts and therefore, is distinguishable from the
         facts of the present case. In the present case, the
         prosecution has been able to prove its case through the
         testimonies of its witnesses and the documents produced
         on record."
44.     It is relevant to note that in
Arif Khan
(supra), the Supreme Court
had referred to the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Vijaysinh
Chandubha Jadeja
(supra) and observed that the search and recovery
of the contraband made from the appellant
in that case
, did not satisfy
the mandatory requirements of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, as
enunciated by the Supreme Court in
Vijaysinh Chanduba Jadeja
(supra). It is, thus, apparent that the Court did not accept the
prosecution's case that the provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act
were complied with.
45.     In the facts of the present case, the prosecution has established
that the appellant was apprised of his right to be searched before a
Magistrate or a Gazetted officer but he did not require that his search be
conducted before the said persons.
46.     In view of the above, the appeal is dismissed. The pending
application is also disposed of.
VIBHU BAKHRU, J
JANUARY 14, 2020
pkv
Crl.A. 139/2017                                                 Page 33 of 33
