Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 2 of 1974
Citation: SCC Online SC 1724'
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/32224635/

[Cites
30
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi District Court
Cbi vs . Gopal Singh on 8 June, 2023
-1-

 IN THE COURT OF MS. NAMRITA AGGARWAL : SPECIAL JUDGE
       (PC ACT) CBI-21 : ROUSE AVENUE COURT : NEW DELHI.
                                                        CBI Vs. Gopal Singh
                                                            CBI No. 28/2019
                                                   RC No. DAI-2019-A-0001
                                               CNR No. DLCT11-000063-2019

IN THE MATTER OF :
CBI
                                       ............................... Prosecution

VERSUS

Gopal Singh,
S/o Late Sh. Ranbir Singh,
R/o H.No. 405, Jatav Mohalla, Tuglakabad,
Delhi-110044.

                                       ..................... Accused
CBI No.                                :      28/2019
CNR No.                                :      DLCT11-000063-2019
Date of institution                    :      02.04.2019
Date of conclusion of arguments        :      30.05.2023
Date of judgment                       :      08.06.2023


JUDGMENT
1.                "With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility" is an adage
which though popularized by Marvel Comics and Films, became an arduous
Code of Conduct specially for public servants. It means that power cannot be

CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-2-
enjoyed simply for its privileges alone but necessarily makes its holders
morally responsible both for what they choose to do with it and what they fail
to do with it. It is necessary that an person in authority should embrace it with
humility and skepticism that the authority is'nt deserved or that it is their
responsibility to honour the dignity of those under that authority.
2.                Policing authority is one of the most ubiquitous organization of
the society and the most visible representative of the government. Being
public servants with vast powers at their disposition, police officers are
expected to set a standard for the society by being accessible to public in case
of need. They play a vital role in the protection of Right to Life, Liberty,
Security etc enshrined in the Constitution of India. Thus, the need for police
accountability is made evident by the great powers that police forces yield.
3.                In the present case, aspersions have been levied against a police
officer that he failed to live upto the expectations of the society and fulfill the
onerous task bestowed upon him to uphold the values and the vision of the
framers of our Constitution.
4. BRIEF FACTS
4.1               The present case bearing no. RC-DAI-2019-A-0001 was
registered against SI Gopal Singh who was posted at P.S. Lodhi Colony, New
Delhi on the complaint of Ms. Anita, wife of Sh. Naresh Kumar alleging that
accused SI Gopal Singh had demanded bribe of Rs. 2 lakhs from her for


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-3-
removing her name as well as the name of her husband from the complaint
against them which was being investigated by him.
4.2               It is alleged that some people entered into the house of Ms. Anita
and a quarrel took place between them and the family members of Ms. Anita
on 25.12.2018 during evening hours due to which the husband of Ms. Anita
was taken away by the police. The complainant received a call from SI Gopal
Singh who asked her to meet him at P.S. Lodhi Colony next day at 11 a.m.
When the complainant reached P.S. Lodhi Colony she received a call and was
told by SI Gopal Singh that he was near Jor Bagh Metro Station. When the
complainant met accused Gopal Singh, he informed her that there was a
complaint against her, her husband as well as one Sh. Ashu Chauhan. The
accused further demanded bribe of Rs. 2 lakhs from the complainant and also
asked for sexual favours from her through video call on whatsapp to remove
her name and the name of her husband from the said complaint. On this,
complainant Ms. Anita filed a complaint against SI Gopal Singh on 28.12.2018
at CBI office upon which the complaint was registered and assigned to DSP
Sh. Ran Vijay and SI Dinesh for verification on 28.12.2018 itself.
5. VERIFICATION PROCEEDINGS
5.1               Verification proceedings were conducted by Deputy SP Sh. Ran
Vijay Singh and Inspector CMS Negi in the presence of Independent
Witnesses on 28.12.2018, 31.12.2018 and 02.01.2019.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-4-
5.2               On 28.12.2018, when Ms. Anita called SI Gopal Singh during
verification proceedings, he told her that he was out for work and also asked
her to meet him on 31.12.2018. On 31.12.2018, the complainant visited CBI
office and informed CBI officers that the accused visited the house of the
complainant on 30.12.2018 and demanded bribe money for dropping charges
against her and her husband. Subsequently, the complainant called accused on
his mobile wherein the accused asked her to meet him at P.S. Lodhi Colony.
The complainant met the accused at a tea stall near police station where
conversation took place between the two. When the complainant told SI
Gopal Singh that she could pay Rs. 80,000/- only as first installment as against
Rs. 2 lakhs, the accused told her not to talk about it. The complainant kept
talking about the money but the accused neither denied nor accepted it. In
fact, he did not even scold her for offering any bribe money to him. The entire
conversation was recorded in a SD card fixed in DVR which was carried by
the complainant with her. Further, on 31.12.2018 the accused asked the
complainant to meet him on 02.01.2019. Finding the inclination of accused to
demand money from complainant, the verification proceedings were kept open
so that the time and the place of handing over of the bribe money could be
decided at the behest of the accused.
6. TRAP PROCEEDINGS
6.1               On 02.01.2019, after the time and place of meeting with the
complainant was fixed by accused on phone, FIR was registered on the basis
of verification proceedings against the accused SI Gopal Singh and a trap team


CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-5-
was constituted comprising of Inspector N.C. Nawal TLO as well as
Independent Witnesses Sh. Amar Nath Prasad and Sh. Mukesh Kumar along-
with other CBI officers. The complainant produced a sum of Rs. 80,000/- in
the form of 40 GC notes of Rs. 2000/- each which were treated with
phenolphthalein powder by Inspector Raman Kumar Shukla. The reaction of
phenolphthalein powder with the solution of sodium carbonate was
demonstrated to the trap team and phenolphthalein powder was applied to the
GC notes produced by the complainant which was then put in the lady purse of
the complainant by independent witness Sh. Amar Nath Prasad.                            The
complainant was asked to hand over the same to accused only on his specific
demand and also give signal to the CBI team after completion of transaction
by rubbing her face or by giving a missed call on the mobile phone of TLO
Inspector N.C. Nawal. Independent witness Sh. Mukesh Kumar was directed
to act as a shadow witness in order to over hear and see the conversation as
well as the likely transaction of bribe money.
6.2               After completion of pre trap proceedings, the trap team left CBI
office in three vehicles and reached near P.S. Lodhi Colony. The DVR with
SD card inserted in it was handed over to the complainant in the recording
mode. The complainant went inside P.S. Lodhi Colony to meet SI Gopal
Singh. After sometime she returned back and informed the trap team that SI
Gopal Singh had gone outside the P.S and would return in some time. After
sometime when SI Gopal Singh returned back, complainant again went inside
with DVR which was kept in switched on mode in her inner garments, to meet


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-6-
SI Gopal Singh. Subsequently, a missed call was received at the mobile phone
of TLO from the complainant. On receiving the signal, the trap team rushed
inside the P.S where they met the accused near the reception and the
complainant standing in the corridor. TLO challenged the accused on which
the accused got panicked and kept mum. The DVR was taken back from the
complainant and switched off. Complainant informed the entire team that
when she went inside the office room of SI Gopal Singh, he demanded bribe
money by gestures and directed her to keep the bribe amount inside a file
cover which was kept on his table. The said bribe money was later recovered
by independent witness Sh. Amar Nath and on tallying the number of GC
notes recovered from the file cover they were found to be the same as recorded
in the Handing Over Memo. The file containing original complaint against the
husband of the complainant was also recovered from the office of the accused.
6.3               Call Detail Records as well as Consumer Application Forms of
the mobile phone of the complainant as well as the accused were collected by
the IO. The transcript of the recorded conversations were prepared and the
specimen voice of accused was taken. Sanction for prosecution of accused U/s
19 of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
was obtained from the competent
authority and the charge-sheet was prepared.
6.4               Pursuant to the filing of the charge-sheet, Ld. Predecessor of this
court took cognizance of the offence after perusing the same in light of the
supporting documents and summoned the accused accordingly. Compliance of


CBI No. 28/2019                                                   (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                       Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-7-
the provisions of
Section 207
Cr.P.C was done and the accused was supplied
with the copy of the charge-sheet and the documents relied upon by the
prosecution. Thereafter, charge under
Section 7
P.C. Act, 1988 (as amended in
2018) was framed against the accused Gopal Singh.
7. PROSECUTION EVIDENCE
7.1.              Prosecution was thereafter called upon to prove their case by
examining the witnesses listed in the list of witnesses filed along-with the
charge-sheet. Availing the said opportunity, the prosecution examined 17
witnesses.
7.2.              The witnesses examined by the prosecution to substantiate their
case can be broadly categorized into four categories.
7.3.              The first category of witnesses consists of Material Witnesses
relating to the incident i.e
a) PW-2 Ms. Poonam Rani.
b) PW-5 Ms. Anita, the complainant.
c) PW-6 Sh. Mukesh, Independent Witness.
d) PW-8 Sh. Amar Nath Prasad, Independent Witness.
7.4.              The second category of witnesses are those witnesses who were
involved in the investigation of the case at various stages and comprise of :
CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-8-
a) PW-9 Sh. Raman Kumar Shukla, Inspector CBI.
b) PW-11 Sh. Ran Vijay Singh, Deputy SP CBI ACB.
c) PW-14 Sh. C.M.S. Negi, Inspector CBI ACB.
d) PW-16 Sh. N.C. Nawal, Inspector CBI ACB.
e) PW-17 Sh. Pramod Kumar Tanwar, Inspector ACB CBI.
7.5.              The third category of witnesses consists of Official Witnesses
who played an important role for smooth investigation of the case. They
comprise of :
a) PW-4 Sh. Vikas Kumar, the then DCP, South Delhi (Sanctioning Authority).
b) PW-10 Sh. Ravi Shankar, SHO P.S. Lodhi Colony.
c) PW-12 Sh. V.B. Ramteke, Principal Scientific Officer (Chemistry) CFSL.
d) PW-13 Sh. S. Ingarsal, Principal Scientific Officer, CFSL, CBI.
e) PW-15 Sh. Mahesh Kumar Jain, Senior Scientific Officer II (Physics).
7.6.              The fourth category of witnesses are the Miscellaneous
Witnesses which comprise of :
a) PW-1 Sh. Saurabh Kumar.
b) PW-3 Sh. Surender Kumar.
c) PW-7 Ms. Deepti Vasishth.
7.7.              Before proceeding further, it is pertinent to make a brief mention
of the role and deposition of these prosecution witnesses category wise as
referred herein above. The detail deposition of the witnesses is not being


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-9-
adverted to, as the same shall be referred to while dealing with the necessary
ingredients of the offences with which the accused has been charged viz-a-viz
the rival contentions advanced by Ld. Special PP for CBI as well as Ld.
Defence Counsel for the accused. Even the detailed cross examination of
these witnesses is not being mentioned for the sake of brevity, but the same
shall be referred to during the course of appreciating the legal as well as
factual issues advanced by the parties.
7.8. MATERIAL WITNESSES
a)                PW-2 Ms. Poonam Rani, sister-in-law of complainant Ms. Anita
stated that she had made a complaint Ex.PW-2/C at P.S. Lodhi Colony
regarding the quarrel which took place on 25.12.2018 and stated that she was
informed by the complainant Ms. Anita that the accused Gopal Singh had
demanded a bribe from the complainant. She also deposed that accused had
asked her to make a video call to him after going to a washroom and also
instructed her that if she would follow his instructions, the names of Ms. Anita
and her husband would be removed from the case lodged at P.S. Lodhi Colony.
b)                PW-5 Ms. Anita i.e the complainant in the present case identified
the complaint filed by her sister-in-law Ms. Poonam Rani and stated that on
25.12.2018 she had received a call from Ms. Poonam Rani at about 7:30 p.m
that a quarrel had taken place at her house and that some unknown persons
were beating husband of the complainant and threatening to kill Ms. Anita as
well. She further deposed that in the intervening night of 25/26.12.2018 she


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-10-
had received a call from SI Gopal Singh from P.S. Lodhi Colony who asked
her to meet him at P.S the next day. The next day SI Gopal Singh informed the
complainant that a complaint has been lodged against her and her husband
with respect to some money dispute by one person called Bunty at P.S. Lodhi
Colony and that money has to be returned to Bunty. Further, this witness
turned hostile to the extent that she deposed that 'I cannot state if SI Gopal was
demanding this amount of Rs. 2 lakhs for himself or not'. She also identified
her signatures on the complaint Ex.PW-2/B lodged by her before CBI against
SI Gopal Singh wherein she stated that SI Gopal Singh was demanding illegal
gratification from her for deleting her name from the complaint. This witness
also proved the transcript of the conversation recorded during verification
proceedings as Ex.PW-5/D, Ex.PW-5/I, Ex.PW-5/K, Ex.PW-5/P and Ex.PW-
5/W.     She identified her signatures on the verification proceedings dated
31.12.2018 Ex.PW-5/L and verification proceedings dated 02.01.2019 Ex.PW-
5/R. She further proved the trap proceedings and stated that she kept the bribe
amount in the file cover kept at the table of SI Gopal Singh on his asking
which was recovered at her instance by the trap team. She identified her
signatures on the trap proceedings Ex.PW-5/X and the site plan Ex.PW-5/Y.
She also identified forty currency notes of the denomination of Rs. 2,000/- said
to be recovered from the constructive possession of the accused as Ex.PW-5/Z
(colly) and stated that the number of the said notes tallied with that recorded in
the Handing Over Memo. She identified the file cover along-with the paper in
which she had kept the alleged bribe amount as Ex.PW-5/Z2 (colly). This
witness turned hostile during her testimony and thus was cross examined by


CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-11-
Ld. PP for CBI. During her cross examination she stated that at the time of
giving her complaint Ex.PW-2/B to the CBI, she had stated that accused Gopal
Singh was asking for bribe from her. She further admitted in her cross
examination that the accused had demanded the bribe money from her through
gestures.
c)                PW-6 Sh. Mukesh, who was working as Assistant Section
Officer in Ministry of Human Resource Development in 2019 acted as an
independent witness in this case and stated that on 01.01.2019 he was
instructed by his office to attend CBI duty. Consequently, on 02.01.2019 he
became the part of the trap team wherein the complaint filed by Ms. Anita was
shown and explained to him stating that the said trap was being laid over SI
Gopal Singh as he had allegedly demanded Rs. 2 lakhs as bribe from the
complainant. This witness proved the Handing Over Memo Ex.PW-6/A and
stated that Ms. Anita had produced Rs. 80,000/- as the alleged bribe amount
which was treated with phenolphthalein powder by Inspector Raman Kumar
Shukla and the trap team was demonstrated with the use of phenolphthalein
powder and its reaction with the solution of sodium carbonate and water. This
witness further proved the trap proceedings stating that the entire trap team left
the CBI office at around 3 p.m and after reaching P.S. Lodhi Colony the
complainant was asked to hand over the bribe amount to Gopal Singh only on
his asking and give signal to the team after completion of transaction either by
rubbing her face with both her hands or by giving a missed call. He further
stated that the TLO received the missed call from the complainant at 4:20 p.m


CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-12-
that day and immediately challenged the accused who got perplexed. Further,
the tainted bribe amount was recovered from the file cover kept at the table of
accused. Accused Gopal Singh was arrested. This witness also proved the
seizure memo dated 02.01.2019 through which additional amount of Rs.
20,000/- was recovered from the table of accused as Ex.PW-6/E and also the
search-cum-seizure memo dated 02.01.2019 of the articles recovered from the
car search of the accused as Ex.PW-6/F. He also proved the arrest memo of
accused Gopal Singh as Ex.PW-6/N.
d)                PW-8 Sh. Amar Nath Prasad who was working as Inspector in
Delhi Customs at the relevant point of time also acted as an independent
witness and deposed in sync with PW-6 Sh. Mukesh. This witness also
identified his introductory voice as well as the voice of complainant Ms. Anita
and accused Gopal Singh in Q-1, Q-2, Q-3 and Q-4.
7.9. WITNESSES INVOLVED IN THE INVESTIGATION
a)                PW-9 Sh. Raman Kumar Shukla, who was posted as Inspector
in CBI ACB Delhi, deposed that he was the member of the trap team which
was constituted to conduct trap proceedings on accused Gopal Singh for
demanding bribe of Rs. 2 lakhs from the complainant. He also proved the
entire trap proceedings conducted by CBI on 02.01.2019.
b)                PW-11 Sh. Ran Vijay Singh stated that on 28.12.2018 while
posted as SP CBI ACB Delhi the present complaint was marked to him for


CBI No. 28/2019                                             (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                 Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-13-
verification purposes. He further stated that he along-with SI Dinesh Kumar
arranged for an independent witness Sh. Amar Nath Prasad and also one new
DVR along-with micro SD card for the purpose of verification. Thereafter, the
conversation between complainant and accused was recorded in the SD card
and verification memo dated 28.12.2018 Ex.PW-2/A was prepared.                     This
witness also identified the transcript Ex.PW-5/D relating to conversation
between complainant and accused on 28.12.2018.
c)                PW-14 Sh. CMS Negi while posted as Inspector, CBI ACB was
directed to carry out further investigation in the complaint of Ms. Anita on
31.12.2018 after the verification was kept open on 28.12.2018 by Sh. Ran
Vijay Singh. He called the complainant as well as independent witness to CBI
office on 31.12.2018 and also arranged for the DVR and a fresh memory card.
As per this witness, the complainant informed him that on 30.12.2018 accused
Gopal Singh had called her and made a demand of bribe money from her to
clear her name and the name of her husband from the complaint. PW-14
thereafter conducted verification proceedings dated 31.12.2018 by visiting P.S.
Lodhi Colony and asking the complainant to meet SI Gopal Singh along-with
independent witness. The conversation held between the complainant and
accused near the tea stall outside P.S. Lodhi Colony was recorded in the
memory card with the help of DVR. After verification proceedings dated
31.12.2018, the verification memo Ex.PW-5/L was prepared which was proved
by PW-14. PW-14 also participated in the trap proceedings dated 02.01.2019
and identified the pre-trap memo Ex.PW-5/R, Handing Over Memo Ex.PW-
CBI No. 28/2019                                             (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                 Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-14-
6/A and the rough site plan Ex.PW-5/Y. This witness also identified the voice
in recording dated 31.12.2018 and 02.01.2019 and the transcription of the
same.
d)                PW-16 Sh. N.C. Nawal while posted as Inspector CBI ACB was
marked the FIR RC-1(A)/2019 CBI ACB Delhi Ex.PW-16/A (colly) registered
on the complaint of Ms. Anita, for further investigation on 02.01.2019. On
receipt of said FIR a trap team was prepared. This witness stated that the
complainant produced Rs. 80,000/- comprising of 40 GC notes of Rs. 2,000/-
each and the demonstration of the reaction of phenolphthalein powder with the
solution of sodium carbonate and water was explained to the entire trap team
by Sh. Raman Kuma Shukla. Thereafter, Handing Over Memo was prepared.
As per this witness, the trap team left CBI office on 02.01.2019 at about 3 p.m
in two government vehicles and one private vehicle of complainant for P.S.
Lodhi Colony. The complainant was asked to hand over the treated currency
notes to the accused only on his asking and give a signal to CBI team after
completion of the transaction by rubbing her face or by giving a missed call.
After the completion of the trap proceedings, this witness apprehended the
accused Gopal Singh and challenged him. The tainted bribe amount was
recovered from the file cover kept at the table of the accused at the instance of
the complainant and all the exhibits recovered were sealed by CBI before
sending them to CFSL for examination.         This witness also identified his
signatures on the recovery memo, search and seizure memo as well as various
exhibits produced in this case.
CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-15-
e)                PW-17 Sh. Prabodh Kumar Tanwar, Inspector ACB CBI was
also assigned the investigation of this case. After receiving the complaint,
verification memos etc from PW-16, this witness recorded the statement of
various witnesses U/s 161
Cr.P.C
and also collected the CAF, CDR of the
mobile phones of the complainant and accused. Voice identification of the
recorded conversation was also got done by this witness. He also obtained the
sanction order for prosecution of the accused and thereafter filed the charge-
sheet in this case Ex.PW-17/A. PW-17 further stated that he got prepared the
transcription of the recorded conversation and obtained the CFSL report in this
case.
7.10. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
a)                PW-4 Sh. Vijay Kumar, who was posted as DCP South Delhi
from September 2018 to August 2019, granted sanction for prosecution of
accused vide sanction order Ex.PW-4/A. This witness also got exhibited the
copy of the draft sanction order Ex.PW-4/DA and the SP report along-with the
forwarding letter as Ex.PW-4/DB.
b)                PW-10 Sh. Ravi Shankar, who was the SHO in P.S. Lodhi
Colony at the relevant period of time deposed that on 02.01.2019 trap
proceedings were conducted against SI Gopal Singh by CBI. As per this
witness, the investigation of the case relating to quarrel in which complainant
Ms. Anita was also involved was handed over to SI Gopal Singh. The said file


CBI No. 28/2019                                             (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                 Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-16-
containing documents pertaining to the quarrel case were proved by this
witness as Ex.PW-10/A (colly). PW-10 also identified the hard disc Ex.PW-
6/S which was handed over to CBI relating to CCTV footage of 02.01.2019
recorded at P.S. Lodhi Colony along-with the memorandum of extraction of
CCTV footage Ex.PW-6/M.             He also proved voice identification memo
pertaining to Gopal Singh as Ex.PW-10/B and Ex.PW-10/C.
c)                PW-12    Sh.   V.B.   Ramteke,   Principal      Scientific       Officer
(Chemistry)-cum-Ex-Officio Assistant Chemical Examiner to the Government
of India examined the contents of the sealed glass bottle Ex.PW-6/D and filed
his report Ex.PW-12/A.
d)                PW-13 Sh. S. Ingarsal, Principal Scientific Officer, CFSL Delhi
prepared three copies of Ex.Q-1, Q-2, Q-3, Q-4 and S-1 and handed over the
same to CBI vide letter Ex.PW-13/A.
e)                PW-15 Sh. Mahesh Kumar Jain, Senior Scientific Officer
(Physics) CFSL received the exhibits of the present case for CFSL
examination vide letter Ex.PW-15/A (colly) dated 08.02.2019 and prepared his
report Ex.PW-15/B (colly) dated 02.09.2019. The said report was sent to ACB
CBI through letter Ex.PW-15/C dated 06.09.2019.
7.11. MISCELLANEOUS WITNESSES
a)                PW-1 Sh. Saurabh Aggarwal, Alternate Nodal Officer, Vodafone


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-17-
Idea Ltd. provided Customer Application Form (CAF) Ex.PW-1/B, Call Data
Record (CDR) Ex.PW-1/C, Location Chart of Delhi Circle Ex.PW-1/D and
Certificate U/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act Ex.PW-1/E qua mobile no.
9990071189 in the name of accused Gopal Singh to CBI vide letter Ex.PW-
1/A.
b)                PW-3 Sh. Surender Kumar, Nodal Officer, Bharti Airtel Ltd.,
provided Customer Application Form (CAF) Ex.PW-3/B, Call Data Record
(CDR) Ex.PW-3/C and Certificate U/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act Ex.PW-3/D
qua mobile no. 9717049409 in the name of complainant Ms. Anita Devi to
CBI vide letter Ex.PW-3/A.
c)                PW-7 Ms. Deepti Vasisthth, Programmer in the System Division
of CBI stated that she was asked by CBI to extract the recording of two CCTV
cameras installed at P.S. Lodhi Colony. She identified her signatures in the
memo Ex.PW-6/M as well as the certificate U/s 65 B of Indian Evidence Act
Ex.PW-7/A.
8. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED
                  Statement of accused U/s 313
Cr.P.C
was recorded wherein
accused Gopal Singh denied all the incriminating evidence against him. He
further submitted in his statement U/s 313
Cr.P.C
that he has been falsely
implicated by CBI in the present case and the FIR in this case was registered
illegally without there being any specific recommendation in writing by any of


CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-18-
the Verifying Officers. He further stated that the alleged bribe amount was
falsely planted upon him as nothing was recovered from his possession or at
his instance. As per the accused, all the documents including the verification
memos, pre trap and post trap proceedings and the FSL report have been
falsely prepared and procured by the IO. Even the sanction order was received
without application of mind by the sanctioning authority.
9. DEFENCE EVIDENCE
9.1               Ld. Defence Counsel appearing on behalf of accused Gopal Singh
sought permission to examine three witnesses in his defence namely :
a) Sh. Himanshu Randhawa, JJA / Ahlmad in the court of Ld. MM NI Act-II,
South East District.
b) Sh. Aman Kumar, Inspector (CBIC), CGST Division, Kamla Nagar.
c) Ms. Hema Ramchandani.
On being granted permission, all these witnesses were called in
the witness box.
9.2               DW-1 Sh. Himanshu Randhawa, Ahlmad in the court of Sh.
Nishat Bangarh, Ld. MM, NI Act, South East District brought with him the
summoned record i.e file of complaint no. 10067/2019 titled as 'Hema
Ramchandani Vs Rajan Kumar @ Aashu Chauhan' Ex.DW-1/A (colly). He
also produced copy of cheque no. 000005 dated 01.01.2019 drawn on HDFC
Bank, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi as Ex.DW-1/B.



CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-19-
9.3               DW-2 Sh. Aman Kumar, Inspector (CBIC), CGST Division,
Kamla Nagar brought with him the summoned record i.e RTI file pertaining to
C.No. CGST/KND/Tech/RTI/109/2017/369 dated 15.06.2021 out of which
copy of the application was taken on record as Ex.DW-2/A. The reply to the
said application along-with the annexures was taken on record as Ex.DW-2/B
(colly).
9.4               DW-3 Ms. Hema Ramchandani, sister of Sh. Manish
Ramchandani @ Bunty stated in her deposition that she knew Sh. Ranjan
Kumar @ Aashu Chauhan as he used to visit the restaurant run by brother
Bunty and husband of DW-3 Sh. Lalit Kumar. As per this witness, Sh. Aashu
Chauhan allured DW-3 and her family members to give money to him in
return of allottment of flats and shops at Kidwai Nagar area in the name of the
brother and husband of DW-3. Subsequently, DW-3 along-with her husband
and brother handed over Rs. 70 lakhs to Aashu Chauhan who did not arrange
for such flat or shop as promised by him and also failed to return the money
handed over to him by DW-3. DW-3 further stated that on 25.12.2018 she
along-with her brother and husband visited house of Ms. Anita along-with
certain market persons. During the said meeting a quarrel took place between
husband of Ms. Anita and husband of DW-3 on which a PCR call was made
and two complaints dated 25.12.2018 were filed. This witness further deposed
that on 27.12.2018 she again visited the police station along-with her brother
and bhabhi when Ms. Anita was also present and the SHO told both the parties
that they should settle the matter and arrive at an agreement. Subsequently, an


CBI No. 28/2019                                             (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                 Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-20-
oral agreement was arrived at pursuant to which Ms. Anita handed over a
cheque of Rs. 2 lakhs signed by Aashu Chauhan Ex.DW-1/B to DW-3. Ms.
Anita further promised that she would hand over the balance amount in few
days. As per DW-3, she again visited P.S. Lodhi Colony on 02.01.2019 where
she met SI Gopal Singh. After sometime she was asked to leave the P.S due to
some raid proceedings. DW-3 further deposed that she had presented the
cheque Ex.DW-1/B in the bank which got dishonoured and for which
complaint Ex.DW-1/A was filed. She also identified the photographs Mark D1
which were subsequently exhibited as Ex.DW-3/A (colly).
9.5               During cross examination this witness stated that she had handed
over Rs. 70 lakhs to Ms. Anita and her husband as well as Aashu Chauhan in
installments but no receipts were taken or issued in lieu of such payment. She
further stated that the said amount was paid in cash out of her savings as well
as the contributions made by her family members against which as well no
receipts were issued. This witness further failed to produce in the court any
record of payment received or made by her. DW-3 also admitted that she had
not filed any separate case for recovery of Rs. 70 lakhs against the
complainant, her husband or Aashu Chauhan except the cheque bouncing case
under
N.I Act
for recovery of Rs. 2 lakhs.
9.6               Accused Gopal Singh did not examine any other witness in his
defence and at the request of Ld. Defence Counsel appearing on behalf of
accused Gopal Singh, the defence evidence was closed.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-21-
9.7               I have heard the arguments advanced by Sh. Amjad Ali, Ld.
Special PP for CBI as well as Sh. Sanjay Gupta, Ld. Counsel appearing on
behalf of accused Gopal Singh.
10. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF CBI
                  Ld. PP for CBI Sh. Amjad Ali briefed this court about the facts of
this case and argued that accused Gopal Singh while posted as SI at P.S. Lodhi
Colony demanded bribe of Rs. 2 lakhs from the complainant Ms. Anita for
clearing her name and the name of her husband from a quarrel case being
investigated by the accused SI Gopal Singh. Ld. PP further stated that the
demand of bribe by the accused is proved through complaint Ex.PW-2/B as
well as through verification proceedings dated 28.12.2018, 31.12.2018 and
02.01.2019. Acceptance of bribe money is proved through trap proceedings
dated 02.01.2019.         He also relied upon Handing Over Memo, recorded
conversation as well as there transcripts, CFSL report and deposition of
various witnesses to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Ld. PP vehemently argued that though the complainant Ms. Anita (PW-5) and
her sister-in-law Ms. Poonam Rani (PW-2) turned partly hostile in their
examination-in-chief but the case against the accused Gopal Singh still got
proved on the basis of their admitted examination-in-chief and the supporting
circumstantial evidence. He heavily relied upon the judgment titled as 'Neeraj
Dutta Vs State (Government of GCT of Delhi) 2022 SCC Online SC 1724'
along-with other judgments in support of his contentions.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-22-
11. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE ACCUSED
                  Ld. Defence Counsel Sh. Sanjay Gupta has filed detailed written
arguments on behalf of the accused challenging the contentions of Ld. PP for
CBI. It is submitted that the accused is liable to be acquitted since the
essential ingredients for conviction U/s 7 of the
P.C. Act, 1988
(as amended in
2018) have not been established by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.
Ld. Counsel has challenged the validity of the sanction order Ex.PW-4/A
stating that the same was passed without application of mind and without
consideration of all the relevant documents.         He has also challenged the
admissibility of the CFSL report Ex.PW-15/B, admissibility of the report
submitted by the Chemical Examiner, CFSL Ex.PW-12/A as well as the
authenticity of the tape recorded conversation relied upon by the prosecution.
It is also contended by him that the FIR in the present case remained unproved
as the same was filed without any recommendation from any of the Verifying
Officers and the then SP who had given the endorsement on the complaint and
had signed the FIR has not been examined by CBI. That even the independent
witnesses PW-6 Sh. Mukesh and PW-8 Sh. Amarnath Prasad did not hear the
conversation between the complainant and the accused and thus could not
depose as eye witnesses to the incident. Ld. Counsel has also highlighted
various contradictions in the testimony of witnesses regarding search
proceedings, availability of laptop and printer, place of recording of sample
voice, site plan, issuance of phenolphthalein powder etc. Ld. Defence Counsel
has also laid emphasis on the fact that the complainant had turned hostile and


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-23-
had also stated that accused Gopal Singh had demanded money only for the
purpose of settlement of her matter with Bunty @ Manish Ramchandani. Ld.
Defence Counsel has relied upon several judgments in support of his
contentions.
12.               I have heard the contentions of both the parties and have perused
the record.
13.               Foremost assault of the defence is upon the Sanction Order
Ex.PW-4/A. The contention of Ld. Defence Counsel is that the sanction order
was passed without application of mind as complete set documents were not
supplied to the sanctioning authority by the prosecuting agency. It is also
averred that a draft sanction Ex.PW-4/DA was sent by CBI to the sanctioning
authority and the sanction order which has been passed is the verbatim
reproduction of the said draft sanction order.
14.               Before proceeding to advert upon the submissions advanced, it is
pertinent to make mention of
Section 19
of Prevention of Corruption Act.
Section 19
of Prevention of Corruption Act reads as under :
19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.--
(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
         under
sections 7
,
10
,
11
,
13
and
15
alleged to have been
         committed by a public servant, except with the previous
         sanction,--
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in connection

CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-24-
with the affairs of the Union and is not removable from his
         office save by or with the sanction of the Central
         Government, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed in connection
         with the affairs of a State and is not removable from his
         office save by or with the sanction of the State Government,
         of that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority
         competent to remove him from his office.
(2) Where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises as to
         whether the previous sanction as required under sub-section
         (1) should be given by the Central Government or the State
         Government or any other authority, such sanction shall be
         given by that Government or authority which would have
         been competent to remove the public servant from his office
         at the time when the offence was alleged to have been
         committed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of
         Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974),--
(a) no finding, sentence or order passed by a special Judge
         shall be reversed or altered by a court in appeal,
         confirmation or revision on the ground of the absence of, or
         any error, omission or irregularity in, the sanction required
         under sub-section (1), unless in the opinion of that court, a
         failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby;
(b) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on the
         ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the sanction
         granted by the authority, unless it is satisfied that such error,
         omission or irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice;
(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any
         other ground and no court shall exercise the powers of
         revision in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any
         inquiry, trial, appeal or other proceedings.
(4) In determining under sub-section (3) whether the
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-25-
absence of, or any error, omission or irregularity in, such
         sanction has occasioned or resulted in a failure of justice the
         court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection
         could and should have been raised at any earlier stage in
         the proceedings. Explanation.--For the purposes of this
         section,--
(a) error includes competency of the authority to grant
         sanction;
(b) a sanction required for prosecution includes reference to
         any requirement that the prosecution shall be at the instance
         of a specified authority or with the sanction of a specified
         person or any requirement of a similar nature.
15.               The importance of this provision and the obligation of the
sanctioning authority was stated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in
'R.S. Nayak
Vs A.R Antulay
AIR 1984 SC 684' wherein it has been held that :
"In catina of decisions it has been held that the authority
            entitled to grant sanction must apply its mind to the facts of
            the case, evidence collected and other incidental facts before
            according sanction. A grant of sanction is not an idle
            formality, but a solemn and sacrosanct act which removes
            the umbrella of protection of government servants against
            frivolous prosecution and the aforesaid requirement must,
            therefore, be strictly complied with before any prosecution
            could be launched against a public servant."
16.               The legal position regarding the importance of sanction U/s 19 of
Prevention of Corruption Act
is much too clear to admit equivocation. The
object and character of this provision is evidently emanating from the non-
obstante clause used in this section by the legislature which says 'No court
shall take cognizance of such offence, except with the previous sanction'. The


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-26-
use of words 'No' and 'shall' make it abundantly clear that the bar on the
exercise of power of the court to take cognizance of an offence is absolute. As
per Black's Law Dictionary, the word 'cognizance' means jurisdiction or the
exercise of jurisdiction. In common parlance, it means 'taking notice of'. In
view thereof, in absence of a valid sanction, the court is precluded from even
taking notice of the offence or exercising its justification, with respect to a
public servant.
17.               In the present case, no aspersions have been cast about the
competency of the sanctioning authority to grant sanction for prosecution of
accused Gopal Singh. The only grievance is that the draft sanction order
Ex.PW-4/DA was sent by CBI to the sanctioning authority and the sanction
order Ex.PW-4/A is verbatim reproduction of the said draft sanction order. Ld.
Defence Counsel has relied upon the judgment titled as 'Sri Anand
Murlidhar Salvi Vs State of Maharashtra' Crl.
Appeal no. 1107 of 2004
and
'Om Prakash Vs State
' 2009 (3) RCR (Cr.) 293 Delhi in support of his
contention. In both these judgments it has been held by the Hon'ble Court that
the pre-requisite of sanction for prosecution of government servants is to
provide a safeguard to them against frivolous and vexatious litigants.
However, the order of sanction should not be construed in a pedantic manner
and there should not be hyper technical approach to test its validity.
In
'Anand Murlidhar Salvi' case (supra) the witness testified that he could not
remember whether the draft sanction order sent to him was accompanied with
the investigation papers or not.      The Hon'ble Court clearly held that the


CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-27-
witness was vague regarding application of his mind before signing the
sanction order.
Similarly, in
'Om Prakash
' case (supra) the sanctioning
authority was not able to state as to what material was perused by it before
granting sanction for the prosecution of the public servant.
18.               The crux of these judgments is that the passing of sanction order
is not an acrimonious job but is a solemn and a sacrosanct act which should be
done only after due application of mind and after pepsing the material placed
before it by the sanctioning authority. In the present case, PW-4 Sh. Vijay
Kumar IPS, who was posted as DCP South at the time of grant of sanction has
clearly stated in his testimony that he had perused the entire record sent by
CBI i.e copy of FIR, recovery memo, seizure memo etc before according
sanction for the prosecution of the accused and has also denied the suggestion
that he had accorded sanction without application of mind or in a mechanical
manner. Thus, from the testimony of PW-4 itself it is clear that the sanction
order Ex.PW-4/A was passed after perusing all the documents sent by CBI to
the sanctioning authority and the mere fact that the draft sanction order was
sent along-with these documents does not mean that PW-4 had not considered
the documents sent to him before passing the sanction order or that the
sanction order was passed without application of mind.
19.               Further, the contention of Ld. Defence Counsel that a SP report
was sent along-with the sanction order and therefore the sanction order is
invalid is also without any ground because the SP report was in fact an


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-28-
essential piece of document containing the details of the case made out by CBI
and thus the sending of SP report Ex.PW-4/DB cannot be said to be harmful
for the validity of the sanction order.
20.               The defence has also argued that the complete documents were
not sent to the sanctioning authority i.e the copy of the recordings Q-1, Q-2, Q-
3, Q-4 and S-1 as well as the CCTV footage and the CFSL report of physics
division and thus the sanction order Ex.PW-4/A is bad in law. Judgments titled
'CBI Vs Ashok Kumar Aggarwal' JT
2013 (15) SC 215 and 'State Vs
Aamir Jaan' AIR 2008 SC 108 have been cited in support of the contention
of the defence.
In
'CBI Vs Ashok Kumar
' (supra) CBI admitted before the
Hon'ble Court that since the documents of the case were voluminous, they
were not enclosed with the SPs report and that only list of documents and list
of witnesses were sent to the sanctioning authority.
Similarly, In 'Aamir Jaan
case' (supra) the sanction was given only the basis of the report made by IG of
police and nowhere has it been mentioned whether any document was annexed
with the IG report or not.
21.               This case is distinguishable on factual grounds itself from the
cases relied upon by the defence as in the present case it has been clearly
stated by PW-4 that all the documents were perused by him before granting
sanction for prosecution of Gopal Singh. It is not the case of the prosecution
that complete documents were not sent to the sanctioning authority for grant of
sanction. The IO PW-17 admitted in his evidence that the voice examination


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-29-
report (CFSL report Ex.PW-17/A) was not sent as the same was not received
from CFSL till that date when all the documents were sent to the sanctioning
authority. It is an admitted case that the transcript of the conversation was sent
to the sanctioning authority along-with the letter requesting for grant of
sanction in addition to several other documents relating to the case. The mere
fact that the CFSL report was not sent would not make the sanction order bad
specially in light of the fact that no suggestion was put to the witness as to
whether his opinion would have changed regarding the grant of sanction had
the said report been sent to him along-with the request. Moreover, the entire
file of the sanctioning authority was summoned by the Ld. Defence Counsel
for cross examination of PW-4 and it was duly produced in the court
containing all relevant material, meaning thereby that the sanction order was
passed after due application of mind and consideration of all the documents by
the sanctioning authority. Thus, this court refrains itself from adopting a hyper
technical approach and holds that the sanction order Ex.PW-4/A is valid and
admissible.
22.               Before delving into the next limb of the arguments of Ld. Defence
Counsel regarding non fulfillment of the essential ingredients of
Section 7
of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, it is essential to recapitulate
Section 7
in
verbatim of
P.C Act
which has been reproduced below :
Section 7
in
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(as amended in 2018) reads as under :
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed.--Any
            public servant who,--
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-30-
(a) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain from any
            person, an undue advantage, with the intention to perform
            or cause performance of public duty improperly or
            dishonestly or to forbear or cause forbearance to perform
            such duty either by himself or by another public servant;
or
(b) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain, an undue
            advantage from any person as a reward for the improper
            or dishonest performance of a public duty or for
            forbearing to perform such duty either by himself or
            another public servant; or
(c) performs or induces another public servant to perform
            improperly or dishonestly a public duty or to forbear
            performance of such duty in anticipation of or in
            consequence of accepting an undue advantage from any
            person,
            shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
            shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
            seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.--For the purpose of this section, the
            obtaining, accepting, or the attempting to obtain an undue
            advantage shall itself constitute an offence even if the
            performance of a public duty by public servant, is not or
            has not been improper.
Illustration.--A public servant, 'S' asks a person, 'P' to
            give him an amount of five thousand rupees to process his
            routine ration card application on time. 'S' is guilty of an
            offence under this section.
Explanation 2.--For the purpose of this section,--
(i) the expressions "obtains" or "accepts" or "attempts to
            obtain" shall cover cases where a person being a public
            servant, obtains or "accepts" or attempts to obtain, any
            undue advantage for himself or for another person, by

CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-31-
abusing his position as a public servant or by using his
            personal influence over another public servant; or by any
            other corrupt or illegal means;
(ii) it shall be immaterial whether such person being a
            public servant obtains or accepts, or attempts to obtain the
            undue advantage directly or through a third party.
23.               The essential ingredients of
Section 7
of P.C. Act 1988 are :
1) the accused must be a public servant or expecting to be a public servant ;
2) he should accept or obtain or agree to accept or attempt to obtain from any
person ;
3) for himself or for any other person ;
4) any gratification other than legal remuneration ;
5) as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act or to
show any favour or disfavour ;
24.               In the present case it has nowhere been denied that accused Gopal
Singh is a public servant being posted as Sub Inspector in Delhi Police. No
arguments qua this aspect was ever raised in the court and thus the first
ingredient stands proved.
25.
In
'B. Jayaraj Vs State of A.P
(2014) 13 SCC 55' it has been
held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that mere possession and recovery of currency
notes from the accused without proof of demand would not bring home the
offence U/s 7 of
P.C. Act
(as amended in 2018). It was further observed that
presumption U/s 20 of the Act could not be drawn in respect of an offence U/s
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-32-
7 of the Act. Such a presumption could have been drawn only if there was a
proof of acceptance of illegal gratification for which proof of demand was a
sine qua non.
26.               Subsequently, in
'P. Satyanarayana Murthy Vs The District
Inspector of Police, State of A.P
(2015) 10 SCC 152', the Hon'ble Apex
Court by placing reliance on
B. Jayaraj
(supra) observed that mere possession
and recovery of currency notes from the accused without proof of demand
would not establish an offence
u/s 7
of the P.C. Act. This is because proof of
demand is a sine qua non or an indispensable essentiality and a mandate for
an offence U/s 7 of the act. The proof of acceptance of illegal gratification
could follow only if there was a proof of demand. The proof of demand of
illegal gratification is therefore the gravemen of the offence under
Sections 7
of the Act and in the absence thereof, the charge would thereby fail.
27.               Thus, mere acceptance of any amount by way of illegal
gratification or recovery thereof dehors the proof of demand, ipso-facto would
not be sufficient to bring home the charges U/s 7 of
P.C. Act
(as amended in
2018).
28.               Recently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India clarifying the
relevant provisions of law U/s 7 of
P.C. Act
in 'Neeraj Dutta Vs State
(Government of GCT of Delhi) 2022 SCC Online SC 1724' held that :
"74. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is
            summarised as under:
CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-33-
(a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal
            gratification by a public servant as a fact in issue
            by the prosecution is a sine qua non in order to
            establish the guilt of the accused public servant
            under
Sections 7
and
13(1) (d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(b) In order to bring home the guilt of accused, the
            prosecution has to first prove the demand of illegal
            gratification and the subsequent acceptance as a
            matter of fact. This fact in issue can be proved
            either by direct evidence which can be in the nature
            of oral evidence or documentary evidence.
(c) Further, the fact in issue, namely, the proof of
            demand and acceptance of illegal gratification can
            also be proved by circumstantial evidence in the
            absence of direct oral and documentary evidence.
(d) In order to prove the fact in issue namely, the
            demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by
            the public servant, the following aspects have to be
            borne in mind:
(I) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe giver
            without there being any demand from the public
            servant and the latter simply accepts the offer and
            receives the illegal gratification, it is a case of
            acceptance as per
Section 7
of the Act. In such a
            case, there need not be a prior demand by the
            public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant makes
            a demand and the bribe giver accepts the demand
            and tenders the demanded gratification which in
            turn is received by the public servant, it is a case

CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-34-
of obtainment. In the case of obtainment, the
            prior demand for illegal gratification emanates
            from the public servant. This is an offence under
Section 13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (I) and (ii) above, the offer
            by the bribe giver and the demand by the public
            servant respectively have to be proved by the
            prosecution as a fact in issue. In other words,
            mere acceptance or receipt of an illegal
            gratification without anything more would not
            make it an offence under
Section 7
or
Section
            13(1)(d)
, (i) and (ii) respectively of the Act.
Therefore, under
Section 7
of the Act, in order to
            bring home the offence, there must be an offer
            which emanates from the bribe giver which is
            accepted by the public servant which would make
            it an offence. Similarly, a prior demand by the
            public servant when accepted by the bribe giver
            and in turn there is a payment made which is
            received by the public servant, would be an
            offence of obtainment under
Section 13(1)(d)
and
            (I) and (ii) of the Act.
(e) The presumption of fact with regard to the
            demand and acceptance or obtainment of an
            illegal gratification may be made by a court of
            law by way of an inference only when the
            foundational facts have been proved by relevant
            oral and documentary evidence and not in the
            absence thereof. On the basis of the material on
            record, the Court has the discretion to raise a
            presumption of fact while considering whether the
            fact of demand has been proved by the prosecution
            or not. Of course, a presumption of fact is subject
            to rebuttal by the accused and in the absence of

CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-35-
rebuttal presumption stands.
(f) In the event the complainant turns 'hostile', or
            has died or is unavailable to let in his evidence
            during trial, demand of illegal gratification can be
            proved by letting in the evidence of any other
            witness who can again let in evidence, either orally
            or by documentary evidence or the prosecution can
            prove the case by circumstantial evidence. The trial
            does not abate nor does it result in an order of
            acquittal of the accused public servant.
(g) In so far as
Section 7
of the Act is concerned,
            on the proof of the facts in issue,
Section 20
mandates the court to raise a presumption that the
            illegal gratification was the purpose of a motive or
            reward as mentioned in the said Section. The said
            presumption has to be raised by the court as a legal
            presumption or a presumption in law. Of course,
            the said presumption is also subject to rebuttal.
Section 20
does not apply to
Section 13(1)(d) (i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(h) We clarify that the presumption in law under
Section 20
of the Act is distinct from presumption of
            fact referred to above in point (e) as the former is a
            mandatory presumption while the latter is a
            discretionary in nature."
(emphasis supplied)

Further, paragraph 76 of the aforesaid judgment provided
that :
"76. Accordingly, the question referred
            for consideration of this Constitution

CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-36-
Bench is answered as under:
In the absence of evidence of the
                  complainant        (direct/primary,
                  oral/documentary evidence), it is
                  permissible to draw an inferential
                  deduction of culpability/guilt of a
                  deduction of culpability/guilt of a
                  public servant under
Section 7
and
                  Section (13)(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2)
of the Act based on
                  other evidence adduced by the
                  prosecution."
(emphasis supplied)
29.               In this case, it is vehemently argued by Ld. Defence Counsel that
no demand on the part of the public servant was established in any of the
verification proceedings dated 28.12.2018 Ex.PW-2/A, 31.12.2018 Ex.PW-5/L
and 02.01.2019 Ex.PW-5/R and thus no case is made out against the accused.
On the other hand, the prosecution has relied upon the verification proceedings
dated 31.12.2018 and stated that the inclination of demand on part of the
accused from the complainant Ms. Anita is clear from the conversation dated
31.12.2018 held between them. This fact is also stated by the Verification
Officer in the verification memo Ex.PW-5/L. As per conversation held
between the complainant and the accused near the tea stall on 31.12.2018, the
transcript of which is Ex.PW-5/P, the accused nowhere denied the complainant
to accept any illegal gratification from her nor did he snub her when she was
repeatedly talking about illegal gratification with him. In fact, from the

CBI No. 28/2019                                                   (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                       Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-37-
conversation it was pellucid that the accused was taking abundant caution
while he was referring to the bribe amount with the complainant.
30.               Transcript Ex.PW-5/K which is duly proved by the complainant
as the true version of actual conversation which took place between the
complainant Ms. Anita and accused on 31.12.2018 reflects that when
complainant asked accused 'uske paise dena hain ki nahi dena hain yeh bataa
doh', the accused answered her by saying 'na, yeh toh koi baat hi na phone pe
yeh sab baat mut kar'. Had accused been innocent or would have asked money
only for settlement, then he would not have stopped the complainant from
talking about settlement amount on phone or he would have scolded her for
even offering any amount to him, which he didn't. Further, following extract
of conversation dated 31.12.2018 between the complainant and accused
clearly brings out that there was a specific demand by accused from the
complainant for removing her name from the complaint made by Hema
Ramchandani or her family members against the complainant, her husband
and Ashu Chauhan :
"Anita :         Phir paise aaj dene hain kal dene
                                   hain nu bataa de bus seedhe.

                  Anita :          Phir toh main free hoke jau aaj parso
                                   milu.

                  Gopal Singh :    Kuchh aaj kar le kuchh kal kar le
                                   dono din kar le.

                  Anita :          Chup Chap rakh ke chali jau.


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-38-
Gopal Singh :    Na na maem bataa dunga aaj hi ho
                                   jayega phone kar ke.

                  Anita :          Achha toh jab aap kahoge tab aau
                                   lekar.

                  Gopal Singh :    Aur apne paas rakho.

                  Anita :          Paise main apne paas rakhu theek
                                   hain."
In this conversation, there is a clear cut demand by Gopal Singh when he says
'kuchh aaj kar le kuchh kal kar le, dono din kar le'. An officer who is
roguish enough to ask the complainant to make a video call to her will
obviously not make any demand directly in unambiguous words as a matter of
abundant caution. Moreover, in the entire conversation accused Gopal Singh
kept asking the complainant not to tell all this to her husband Naresh and even
not talk about it on phone. This clearly proves the malice on part of accused
Gopal Singh while demanding money from the complainant.
31.               Further, in their conversation dated 02.01.2019 which has also
been admitted by the complainant to be true, again there is a clear inclination
of demand by accused which is as below :
"Anita :        Fir woh kaam karna hai ya nahi?

             Gopal Singh : Haan, theek hai.

             Anita :         Kar du?

             Gopal Singh : Haa
CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-39-
Anita :          Theek hai toh, wahi miloge aap? Thaane
                              mein hi .
Gopal Singh : Inke bayan ke liye, bayan ke liye hi aaya
                           tha maen.
Anita :          Achha achha, fir who intezam toh ho
                              gaya hain, maen le aau saath mein ya
                              nahi.

             Gopal Singh : Ek minute hold....... Hello.

             Anita :          Haa, maen yeh keh rahi thi ki who
                              intezam toh ho gaya, saath lana hain yaa
                              nahi.
Gopal Singh : Arey maen yeh keh raha hu ki ...... haa
                           theek hain aa jao tum."
Here also it can be safely deduced that the reference was about arrangement of
money that was agreed to by accused Gopal Singh in conversation dated
31.12.2018.
32.               Accused in his defence has, on the one hand, denied to had made
any demand but on the other hand stated that he had asked money from the
complainant only to settle the money dispute between complainant and her
family members and Hema Ramchandani and her family members.                              Ld.
Defence Counsel has relied upon the judgment titled as 'Neeraj Dutta Vs
State (Government of GCT of Delhi) (supra) wherein it has been held that
every demand made for money is not a demand for gratification.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-40-
33.               In order to establish his claim, prosecution examined DW-3 Ms.
Hema Ramchandani, who testified before the court that Ms. Anita and her
husband used to visit restaurant run by brother of DW-3 namely Sh. Manish
Ramchandani @ Bunty along-with her husband.               With the help of Ashu
Chauhan, Ms. Anita and her husband deceived DW-3 along-with her family
members and other people of the market by assuring them that he would get
allotted shops and flats to them at Kidwai Nagar in return of Rs. 70 lakhs
which was paid by DW-3 and her husband to Ms. Anita and her family
members. Further, as per DW-3 when the fraud was revealed Ms. Anita, her
husband as well as Ashu Chauhan refused to return back the amount.
However, subsequently an oral agreement was arrived at between family
members of DW-3 and Ms. Anita wherein Ms. Anita promised to return back
the money. This witness also proved on record cheque Ex.-DW-1/B which
was allegedly given by Ms. Anita to DW-3 saying that the remaining amount
would be paid afterwards.
34.               On being cross examined, this witness stated that Rs. 70 lakhs
were paid by her to Ms. Anita by way of cash in installments but no receipt of
the same was taken at any point of time. On being inquired about the source
of said amount, DW-3 deposed that she had given that amount from her
savings as well as from the contributions made by friends and family, for
which no receipt was obtained. She further failed to file or prove the record
of the payments received or made by her to Ms. Anita. A startling fact that


CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-41-
DW-3 testified was that despite all this she did not file any recovery suit
against Ms. Anita or her family at any point of time. Only a
Negotiable
Instruments Act
case was filed by her against one Ranjan Kumar when cheque
of Rs. 2 lakhs Ex.DW-1/B which was issued by Ranjan Kumar on 01.01.2019
to DW-3 got dishonoured. In the said
N.I. Act
complaint Ex.DW-1/A, the
name of issuer of cheque / accused is stated to be Ranjan Kumar @ Ashu
Chauhan.
This case was filed on 20.05.2019 i.e after the registration of
present
CBI
case against Gopal Singh. No proof has been filed on record to
show that Ashu Chauhan was also known or called as Ranjan Kumar.
Thus,
the possibility that the name of the issuer of the cheque i.e Ranjan Kumar has
been deliberately wrongly mentioned in the
N.I. Act
case as @ Ashu Chauhan
to create false evidence in this case, cannot be ruled out.
35.               Even otherwise, it seems unbelievable that a person would pay
back money without any written settlement and that also when she kept on
denying to have any due from DW-3 or her family even on 02.01.2019 in front
of accused when she had gone to meet him at P.S. Had the claim of defence
been true then DW-3 would have atleast obtained a written receipt for giving
such a hefty amount of Rs. 70 lakhs to Ms. Anita or would have proved the
source of such amount. Thus, the story of defence seems to be a concocted
one after the present
CBI
case was registered against accused Gopal Singh.
Hence, the defence of accused regarding the purpose of demand from the
complainant to be that for settlement could not be proved by them. Even PW-
10 denied in his testimony to have even asked Gopal Singh to get money


CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-42-
matter between these parties settled.
36.               It is also argued by Ld. Defence Counsel that the complainant
herself did not support the prosecution version due to which she was declared
hostile by Ld. PP for CBI and was even cross examined by him. Ld. Counsel
strenuously argued that when a specific question was put to the complainant
that 'Is it correct that SI Gopal Singh had demanded a bribe of Rs. 2 lakhs from
you on that day that he had come to your house', she replied that the accused
Gopal Singh stated that she would have to pay back Rs. 2 lakhs to Bunty -
'paise toh tum ko dene hi padenge'.
37.               Even another star witness of the prosecution i.e the sister-in-law
of the complainant PW-2 Ms. Poonam Rani turned hostile and stated that no
demand was ever made by accused in her presence from Ms. Anita.
38.               However, perusal of the entire evidence of the complainant
reveals that the complainant has completely supported the version of the
prosecution except the fact that accused was demanding money only for
getting her matter settled with Bunty. When the audio recording of the
conversation between her and accused dated 28.12.2018, 31.12.2018 and
02.01.2019 was played in the court, she unambiguously identified her own
voice and voice of accused in the said conversation and even testified the same
to be the true recording of the conversation actually held between them. She
also got the SD cards as well as the transcripts of conversation exhibited in the


CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-43-
court by admitting them to be correct.        From the said conversation duly
recorded in SD cards Ex.PW-5/J, Ex.PW-5/Q and Ex.PW-5/W, it is clear that
in fact accused had made a demand from the complainant as illegal
gratification.
In
'Bhagwan Singh Vs State of Haryana
', AIR 1976 SC 202,
the Honb'le Supreme Court held that merely because the Court give
permission to the Public Prosecutor to cross examine his own witness
describing him as hostile does not completely efface his evidence.
The
evidence remains admissible in trial and there is no legal bar to base
conviction upon the testimony of such a witness (Also relied is AIR 1977 SC
170 'Rabindra Kumar Dey Vs State of Orissa'). Moreover, complainant
herself stated in her original complaint Ex.PW-2/B filed on 26.12.2018 before
CBI that 'Vishay : Gopal Singh Upnirikshak SI Thana Lodhi Road Delhi
Police ke dwara rishwat maangne hetu shikayat patra'. This complaint is in
the handwriting of complainant and she proved her handwriting and signatures
in the court on the said complaint Ex.PW-2/B. With respect to the use of word
'rishwat', complainant failed to give any plausible explanation as to why this
word was used by her in the complaint. Complainant Ms. Anita is a literate
female who is well aware about the word and it cannot be said that she must
have used this word in ignorance or lightly while making complaint against
Gopal Singh to CBI. Even otherwise, if the complaint was only with respect
to the alleged pressure exerted by Gopal Singh on complainant to settle the
matter with Bunty, then there would have been no occasion to make any
complaint to CBI by the complainant.
CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-44-
39.               Hence, just because the complainant became hostile only with
respect to the purpose of demand made by accused does not mean that the
same could not be proved through other evidence by way of relevant
incriminating portion of voice recording of verification proceedings and trap
proceedings duly exhibited and admitted by complainant before the court.
Mere fact that the Verifying Officer did not recommend registration of FIR on
31.12.2018 does not mean that there was no demand on behalf of accused that
day. It has been clearly mentioned in verification proceedings dated
31.12.2018 that there was an inclination of demand on behalf of accused on
31.12.2018. However, since the date and place of handing over of bribe
money was not settled between the parties that day therefore verification
proceedings were kept open for 02.01.2019. As soon as the time and place
was decided on mobile phone between the complainant and accused, FIR was
got registered and trap proceedings were initiated.
40. ACCEPTANCE
40.1              Ld. Defence Counsel has also challenged acceptance of any
illegal gratification by accused by bringing forth alleged contradiction in the
testimony of various witnesses regarding portion DA to DA of Recovery
Memo Ex.PW-5/X which is as under :
"The TLO made call on the mobile phone of the
            complainant and enquired about the transaction of bribe
            amount, on which she informed that she has handed over
            money to accused, but he has not counted the same."
He further stated that the alleged asking of accused to keep money on 'note
CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-45-
pad' and the second averment that the complainant kept the money inside the
file cover on asking of the accused is enough to show that both these
averments are contradictory to each other interse.
40.2              Perusal of Recovery Memo Ex.PW-5/X (colly) reveals that when
TLO made a call to the complainant after receiving the pre-decided signal
from her, she informed that she had handed over the bribe money to accused
Gopal Singh which he has not counted. In continuation thereof, it has been
stated in Ex.PW-5/X (colly) itself that after accused was apprehended,
complainant informed the TLO that she had kept the amount in the file cover
on the table of the accused. Even the recorded conversation between the
accused and the complainant shows that instead of directly handing over the
bribe money by complainant to accused, the same was handed over to him
constructively by the complainant by placing it inside the file cover kept on his
table.
40.3              Ld. Defence Counsel has also tried to bring out contradiction with
respect to keeping the bribe amount on the table or inside the file cover.
However, it cannot be lost sight of the fact that the complainant deposed in her
testimony that the file cover was kept on the table of the accused meaning
thereby that she had kept it on the table of the accused only.
40.4              When the complainant asked accused Gopal Singh where she
should keep Rs. 80,000/- he did not stop her and in fact stated that :
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-46-
"Gopal Singh : Note par
             Anita :       File ke neeche theek hain.
             Gopal Singh : Nikal aana do teen minute mein.
             Anita :       Aap ke saath aa jau.
Gopal Singh : Thodi der mein ....... maen yeh keh raha
                           tha thodi der mein aa jaiyo.
Anita :       Paise rakh kar aa jau..........
             .
             .
             .

             Anita :       Par kaha par aana hain rakh kar.
             Gopal Singh : Security par aao bilkul......
             .
             .
             .
             Anita :       Rakh kar aa jau theek hain."
This conversation reveals that Gopal Singh did not respond directly to the
complainant when she asked him where she should keep Rs. 80,000/- but kept
talking about something else. He did not even ask her about what money she
was talking about. Complainant specifically asked Gopal Singh whether she
could go out of the room with him but he told her to wait for some minutes
and thereafter go out to the security.        All these dialogues between the
complainant and accused go on to prove that the demand by accused was not
for some legal purpose like settlement as he was continuously trying to hide
that part of conversation and was acting fishy the whole time, which
reasonably a prudent man would not do under normal circumstances.
Contradiction regarding keeping the bribe amount on 'note par' or between the
file can be explained by the fact that the complainant herself told CBI that SI

CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-47-
Gopal Singh demanded bribe money through gestures only asked her through
gestures to keep it inside the file cover lying on the table of the accused.
40.5              In fact, Gopal Singh during this conversation also told Ms. Anita
that Investigating Officer has immense powers and can remove the name of
any person from the charge-sheet before filing it in the court. This bragging
by the accused together with the fact that there were repeated conversation
between the two regarding which names to delete on payment of money,
proves beyond reasonable doubt that the demand as well as acceptance of
money was done as illegal gratification for doing an unlawful act by the
accused.
40.6              Even otherwise,
Section 20
of P.C. Act, 1988 provides as under :
"20. Presumption where public servant accepts any undue
         advantage -
Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under
section 7
or
         under
section 11
it is proved that a public servant accused of an
         offence has accepted or obtained or attempted to obtain for
         himself, or for any other person, any undue advantage from
         any person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved,
         that he accepted or obtained or attempted to obtain that undue
         advantage, as a motive or reward under
Section 7
for
         performing or to cause performance of a public duty
         improperly or dishonestly either by himself or by another
         public servant or, as the case may be, any undue advantage
         without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to
         be inadequate under
Section 11
."
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-48-
40.7              Thus,
Section 20
of the Act deals with presumption where public
servant accepts gratification other than legal remuneration.                 It uses the
expression 'shall be presumed' in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) unless the
contrary is proved. The said provision deals with a legal presumption which is
in the nature of a command that it has to be presumed that the accused
accepted gratification as a motive or reward for doing or for bearing to do any
official act, if the condition envisaged in the former part of the section is
satisfied. The only condition for drawing a legal presumption U/s 20 of the
Act is that during trial, it should be proved that the accused had accepted or
agreed to accept any gratification.
40.8              In
'State of Madras Vs A. Vaidyanatha Iyer
AIR 1958 SC 61'
it was observed that presumption U/s 20 of the Act would arise where illegal
gratification has been accepted. The legislature has used the words 'shall
presume' and not 'may presume' which means the presumption has to be raised
as it is a presumption of law and therefore it is obligatory on the court to raise
it. In the present case as well having proved that the accused had demanded as
well as accepted illegal gratification from complainant which was
subsequently recovered from the file cover kept on his table, a presumption
U/s 20 of
P.C. Act, 1988
(as amended in 2018) can be raised that the said
illegal gratification was received by Gopal Singh for dishonestly performing
his public duty in favour of complainant Ms. Anita.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-49-
41. RECOVERY
41.1              Ld. Defence Counsel has raised doubts as to whether the table
from where the file cover containing bribe amount was recovered was kept in
a room belonging to accused Gopal Singh exclusively or to 'Inspector
Investigation". For this, Mr. Counsel referred to the deposition of PW-10 Sh.
Ravi Shankar, the then SHO P.S. Lodhi Colony while deposing regarding trap
proceedings conducted by CBI on 02.01.2019. PW-10 stated during his cross-
examination that 'it is correct that the said room was allotted to Inspector
Investigation. It is correct that all the IOs in the P.S used to use 2-3 common
rooms on the first floor'. The defence tried to establish through this testimony
that recovery was not effected from the room exclusively belonging to accused
Gopal Singh, thus raising doubt regarding the same. However, as per the
recovery memo Ex.PW-5/X (colly) not only the file cover and paper
containing tainted bribe amount was recovered from that room of Inspector
Investigation but also documents relevant to this case were recovered from
there which were seized vide a separate search-cum-seizure memo Ex.PW-6/E.
In Ex.PW-6/E, it is stated that original file related to complaint made by the
complainant at P.S. Lodhi Colony was found from the said room which was
later seized from the SHO by CBI and proved in the court as Ex.PW-10/A
(colly). Had that room been used by some other IO, then the file in which
accused himself was the IO would not have been on the table in that room.
41.2              Further, extraction of CCTV footage of P.S. Lodhi Colony of
02.01.2019 was also procured which was duly proved through PW-7. The said


CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-50-
CCTV footage was got played by the defence itself in the court wherein it was
clearly visible that it was the accused Gopal Singh only who had entered into
the said room of Inspector Investigation along-with complainant and later
came out of that room only during the relevant time on 02.01.2019, proving
thereby that the said room from where recovery was effected was in fact used
by the accused only at the relevant time.          Thus, recovery can be safely
attributed from the constructive possession of accused Gopal Singh only.
41.3              The Independent Witness Sh. Amar Nath got recovered the tainted
bribe amount from the file cover kept on the table of the room used by accused
Gopal Singh on 02.01.2019 at the relevant time and the number of GC notes so
recovered tallied with the number as recorded in Handing Over Memo Ex.PW-
6/A duly proved by the independent witnesses and the other trap team
members in the court. The file cover and paper from which the bribe amount
was recovered were rubbed with the help of piece of wet cloth and thereafter
dipped in the solution of sodium carbonate. The said solution turned pink in
colour and when sent to CFSL for chemical examination through letter
Ex.PW-12/B, gave positive result for the presence of phenolphthalein powder
on it through report Ex.PW-12/A. Rubbing cloth 'on' or 'over' the file cover
does not mean that it was rubbed on the covering page of the file cover as
alleged by defence. Cloth could have been rubbed 'on' or 'over' the inside
side of the file cover as well.
41.4              Mere fact that the recovery was effected at the instance of


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-51-
complainant and not that of accused is of no consequence in light of the above
discussion wherein presence of accused Gopal Singh in the room of Inspector
Investigation at the relevant time on 02.01.2019 is duly proved.
CBI No. 28/2019                                              (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                  Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-52-
41.5              Moreover, defence raised objection with respect to the fact that
none of the independent witnesses were eye witness to the said demand or
recovery and thus the same cannot be relied upon. However, in every case
independent witness since cannot possibly be insisted upon to accompany the
complainant at every single spot due to fear of suspicion and the mere fact that
the independent witnesses completely supported the case of prosecution
regarding verification and trap proceedings goes on to prove the admissibility
and genuinety of these proceedings. No major discrepancy came out between
the testimony of all the independent witnesses and other official witnesses.
The defence on the other hand tried to bring about several discrepancies in the
testimony of these witnesses, one of them being that PW-6 Sh. Mukesh
introduced the theory of keeping tainted bribe money in a white envelope for
the first time in the court which was never the case of the prosecution. No
other witness supported this theory at the first instance. Defence also tried to
bring forth several other minor discrepancies in the testimony of various
witnesses relating to verification proceedings or trap proceedings. However,
minor discrepancies in evidence which do not go to the root of the matter,
specially when evidence is adduced by the witnesses after a long time from the
date of incident, cannot be considered as material discrepancies.
In this
regard, it has been held in
'Harijana Thirupala Vs Public Prosecutor, High
Court of A.P Hyderabad, AIR 2002 SC 2821' that :
"The case of the prosecution must be judged as a
                  whole having regard to the totality of the evidence.
                  In appreciating the evidence, the approach of the
                  court must be integrated not truncated or isolated. In
                  other words, the impact of evidence in totality on the
CBI No. 28/2019                                                   (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                       Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-53-
prosecution case or innocence of accused has to be
                  kept in mind in coming to the conclusion as to the
                  guilt or otherwise of the accused. In reaching to a
                  conclusion about the guilt of the accused, the court
                  has to appreciate, analyze and access the evidence
                  placed before it by the yardstick of probabilities, its
                  intrinsic value and the animus of the witnesses.'

41.6              The Hon'ble Court has further emphasized that if the
discrepancies in the depositions are minor what is important is the nature of
contradiction. Similarly, in
'Rammi @ Rameshwar Vs State of Madhya
Pradesh
' it was held that :
"The courts should bear in mind that it is only when
                  the discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses are
                  so incompatible with the credibility of his version that
                  the court is justified in jettisoning his evidence. But
                  too serious of view to be adopted on mere variations
                  falling in the narration of an incident is an unrealistic
                  approach for judicial scrutiny".
Similarly, the contradictory version of complainant regarding place of meeting
accused on 26.12.2018 does not go to the root of the matter as due to lapse of
time and some amount of nervousness, the witness in all probability tends to
get confused in the court regarding minor details of the series of incidents
which took place in the past due to which these discrepancies are reflected.
Thus, all the essential ingredients of
Section 7
of P.C. Act, 1988 (as amended
in 2018) stand duly proved.
42.               Another limb of argument of Ld. Defence Counsel was regarding


CBI No. 28/2019                                                     (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                         Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-54-
the reliability and admissibility of CFSL Report (Chemistry Division) Ex.PW-
12/A and CFSL Report (Physics Division) Ex.PW-15/B.
43.               For CFSL report Ex.PW-12/A, the defence of accused is that the
expert did not mention as to how TLC and other tests were conducted nor
mentioned the value of Retention Factor in the report. Even the silicon plate
which was used for the purpose of tests was not produced in the court and thus
the report Ex.PW-12/A is not admissible in evidence in the court. He also
stated that since the worksheets Ex.PW-12/DB were filled in by the Assistant
of the expert who was not examined in the court therefore the report remains
unproved. In this regard, one cannot expect an expert who is conducting
chemical tests in the lab using sensitive chemicals and devices to record the
findings simultaneously by himself. Thus, the record being made by the
assistant of the expert in his presence would not make the report of an expert
unproved on unreliable in the court specially when it was duly signed by the
expert himself. Moreover, Hon'ble High Court has time and again directed
that a Hyper Technical approach should not be adopted while interpreting the
report of an expert which otherwise has corroborative value and is admissible
U/s 293
Cr.P.C
which reads as under :
CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-55-
"Section 293 in The Code Of Criminal Procedure,
                  1973 :
293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts.
                  (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the
                  hand of a Government scientific expert to whom this
                  section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted
                  to him for examination or analysis and report in the
                  course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used
                  as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
                  under this Code.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine
                  any such expert as to the subject- matter of his report.
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court and
                  he is unable to attend personally, he may, unless the
                  Court has expressly directed him to appear personally,
                  depute any responsible officer working with him to
                  attend the Court, if such officer is conversant with the
                  facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court
                  on his behalf.
(4) This section applies to the following Government
                  scientific experts, namely:-
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical
                  Examiner to Government;
(b) the Chief Inspector of- Explosives;
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau;
(d) the Director, Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;
(e) the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director
                  of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State
                  Forensic Science Laboratory;
(f) the Serologist to the Government.
44.               Similarly, CFSL report Ex.PW-15/B was also challenged by Ld.

CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-56-
Defence Counsel to be inadmissible in the court on the following grounds :
a) CFSL was not notified U/s 79-
A I.T. Act
by the Central Government to act
as an expert of electronic evidence.
b) PW-15 i.e the expert was not qualified to act as such as he is only B.Sc
(PCM) & B.Ed. Linguistic and Phonetic were never his subjects even in the
certificate course in Forensic pursued by him from DU.
c) The recordings are not substantive piece of evidence.
d) The Expert was never designated as Assistant Chemical Examiner to the
Government of India.
e) There is discrepancy regarding the seal impression on the exhibits which
were initially sent to CFSL, Photo Division for preparation of copies and later
were sent to CFSL Physics Division.
f) No sample seal was sent to CFSL Physics Division by the CFSL, Photo
Division though the said fact has been wrongly stated in the report Ex.PW-
15/B.
g) The DVR was not sent to CFSL.
h) Proper sample voice was not prepared by TLO as per rules.
i) The computerized markings on the voice gram / spectrograph were not taken
from SSL.
45.               Section 79A in
The Information Technology Act, 2000
provides
as under :
"[79A Central Government to notify Examiner of
                  Electronic Evidence. -The Central Government may,
                  for the purposes of providing expert opinion on

CBI No. 28/2019                                               (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                   Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-57-
electronic form evidence before any court or other
                  authority specify, by notification in the Official
                  Gazette, any Department, body or agency of the
                  Central Government or a State Government as an
                  Examiner of Electronic Evidence. Explanation. -For
                  the purposes of this section, "electronic form
                  evidence" means any information of probative value
                  that is either stored or transmitted in electronic form
                  and includes computer evidence, digital audio, digital
                  video, cell phones, digital fax machines.]"
The use of word 'may' reflects that it is not a mandatory provision and thus it
is not necessary that every CFSL lab should be certified U/s 79-
A I.T. Act
.
Moreover, the report of an expert is admissible U/s 293
Cr.P.C
as has already
been explained above.          The defence has also challenged the educational
qualification of expert by saying that he did not have linguistic and phonetic as
his subjects at any point of time. However, PW-15 himself stated that he had
joined CFSL Physics Division in 1991 meaning thereby he has experience of
more than 30 years. Even in the report Ex.PW-15/B it is mentioned that
accused was promoted as Senior Scientific Assistant (Assistant) (which is duly
recognized U/s 293
Cr.P.C
) 2008 and has assisted in examination of about 600
cases related to Forensic Physical & Speech Identification Examination
consisting of nearly 05,10,527 exhibits. He stated that he has 15 years of
experience in the field of Voice Identification and Speaker Identification.
Hence, this argument of the defence regarding pre-requisite qualification of the
expert also does not hold much waters since experience speaks greater than
academic knowledge. Acquiring experience of around 15 years in Voice
Identification & Speaker Identification means the expert has vast knowledge
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-58-
about that subject and has obtained mastery in it.
46.               Coming to another aspect of alleged inadmissibility of report, the
grievance of the defence is that when Exhibits Q-1, Q-2, Q-3, Q-4 and S-1
were sent to CFSL Photo Division for preparation of copies, they were
received back with the seal impression of 'S INGRASAL PSO PHOTO
DIVISION CFSL CBI NEW DELHI'. However, seal impression mentioned in
the remarks column of forwarding letter Ex.PW-15/A is mentioned as 'CFSL
NEW DELHI'. Perusal of the record shows that in the report Ex.PW-15/B, in
the column 'Details of parcels & seals', the specimen seal impression on
exhibits is described to be 'Photo Division CFSL / CBI/ New Delhi & S.
INGARSAL PSO'. It is only the letter Ex.PW-15/A in which the abridged
version of the said seal impression is mentioned as 'Seal of CFSL'. However,
this was done only for the sake of brevity and this cannot be the ground of
challenging the authenticity of the report. Defence has tried to pick and
choose even the minutest of the discrepancies to support its case forgetting that
the case was handled by human beings who are bound to act like this in natural
course of events.         This kind of perfection as expected would have been
possible only when investigation was carried out by machines having a set
software which even otherwise are liable to get corrupted sometimes. Thus, a
Hyper Technical approach should not be adopted while relying upon the report
of an expert and such a report definitely has a corroborative value more so in
the light of the fact that the conversation has been duly admitted by the
complainant herself who has got it exhibited in the form of transcripts.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-59-
Moreover, the entire process by which the exhibits were sealed at the spot with
the CBI seal and later sent to CFSL who after examining the exhibits, resealed
them with the CFSL seal has been duly explained and noted down in the letters
by which the case property / exhibits were sent for examination to CFSL and
thereafter collected by the CBI officials.          Since, the seal at all these
interceptions have been found to be intact during deposition of the witnesses in
the court, there was no separate requirement of examination of the witnesses
who took the exhibits to CFSL or collected those exhibits from there.
47.               It is also argued that PW-15 has wrongly mentioned in his report
Ex.PW-15/B that the seal impressions on exhibits were compared with sample
seal whereas he admitted in his testimony that no sample seal was provided to
him of CFSL (Photo Division) as these are internal departments of CFSL and
as a matter of practice the officials of these departments do not insists on the
sample seal of the other department being completely aware of the seal
impression of that department. Be it as it may, as PW-15 himself stated that he
could identify the seal and even otherwise the seal being proved as above, just
because this statement regarding supply of sample seal has been inadvertently
mentioned in the report which the expert witness has clarified will not affect
the authenticity of the report.
48.               With regard to DVR, it is an admitted fact that the DVR was
produced in the court in the sealed envelope and identified by the witnesses.
In
'Anvar PV Vs P.K. Basheer & Ors.
, (2014) 10 SCC 473', Hon'ble Apex


CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-60-
Court has drawn clear distinction between the situation when the device used
for recording is directly produced in the court as primary evidence and a
situation when the incriminating material is recorded using other instruments
which are fed in computer from which CDs are prepared and produced in
evidence before the court. The relevant paragraph is :
"24. The situation would have been different had the
              appellant adduced primary evidence, by making available
              in evidence, the CDs used for announcement and songs.
              Had those CDs used for objectionable songs or
              announcement been duly got seized through the police or
              election commission and had the same been used as
              primary evidence, the High Court would have played the
              same in court to see whether the allegations were true.
              That is not the situation in this case. The speeches, songs
              and announcements were recorded using other
              instruments and by feeding them into a computer, CDs
              were made therefrom which were produced in court,
              without due certification. Those CDs cannot be admitted
              in evidence since the mandatory requirement of
Section
              65 B
of Indian Evidence Act are not satisfied. It is
              clarified that not withstanding what we have stated herein
              in preceding paragraphs on the secondary evidence of
              electronic record with reference to
Sections 59
,
65A
and
65B
of the Evidence Act, if an electronic record as such
              is used as primary evidence U/s 62 of the
Evidence Act
,
              the same is admissible in evidence without compliance
              with the conditions in
Section 65B
of the Evidence Act."
Thus, even the CFSL report stands duly proved in the court.
CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-61-
49.               Ld. Defence Counsel has also challenged non compliance of pro-
visions of CBI Crime Manual. He argued that as per "Rule 14.16" of CBI
Crime Manual, a direction is mandated for the TLOs to take steps to get the
pre & post trap proceedings photographed & videographed. However, none of
the witnesses in the present case deposed regarding any photography or
videography of the pre and post trap proceedings nor any record of the same
was produced in the court. It was submitted that In
'Vineet Narayan Vs.
State
', AIR 1998 SC it has been held that:-
"12. The CBI Manual based on statutory provisions of
                  the
Cr.P.C
. provides essential guidelines for the CBI's
                  functioning. It is imperative that the CBI adheres
                  scrupulously to the provisions in the Manual in relation
                  to its investigative functions, like raids, seizure and ar-
                  rests. Any deviation from the established procedure
                  should be viewed seriously and severe disciplinary ac-
                  tion taken against the concerned officials."
Ld counsel has also relied upon the judgment in 'SCN. Sukana Vs. State of
AP', Crl. A.1355/2015 dated 14.10.2015 wherein it was observed that:-
"As far as possible, the crime scene, steps during the
                  course of investigation such as pre- trap and post-trap
                  proceedings,     search      proceedings  should     be
                  photographed as well as videographed. The rule also
                  provides the provision for preservation of such
                  recording depending upon it being still or digital
                  photography/videography. The rule also specifies the
                  purpose of such recording in clear terms ; it being
                  preventing the public witnesses from turning hostile
                  during the course of trial."
CBI No. 28/2019                                                    (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                        Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-62-
He also argued that other provisions of the CBI Manual as well as CVC Man-
ual were not followed in letter and spirit during arrest documentation and re-
lated evidence. Even the guidelines laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court in
'D.K.
Basu Vs State
', AIR 1977 SC 610 were not followed regarding filling up of
the arrest memo and recovery memo and information of the arrest to be given
to the family members of the accused person. It was further alleged that no
search was offered to the accused in the present case before searching him and
as such possibility of plantation cannot be ruled out.
50.               The police manuals are prepared to generalize the rules and pro-
cedures of the investigation with an idea of bringing in uniformity and reliabil-
ity in the proceedings of the investigation. It is expected of the police officers
to follow such instructions/ directions contained in the manuals. However,
these manuals are not statutory documents; they are merely directory in na-
ture. Non-compliance of the directions/ guidelines though should be avoided,
it does not invalidate the proceedings completely. Such defaults in the prose-
cution case at best can be termed as irregularities and not illegalities going to
the root of the case.
In so far as judgment in
'Vineet Narayan
' (supra) is con-
cerned, the judgment says that the consequence of not following the manual is
disciplinary inquiry. The judgment does not say that such default would per se
invalidate the investigation.
Even in Sukana's case (supra), the court has not
made the videography or recording mandatory. The words used are "as far as
possible". The accused, therefore were to show how the non-recording of the
proceedings has affected them adversely and have also to justify as to how
would they have not been able to challenge the investigation if it was

CBI No. 28/2019                                                 (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                     Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-63-
recorded, when they are not admitting the existing recording of the conversa-
tions. Moreover, the police officials are liable only for disciplinary action in
case of non compliance of these provisions. The irregularities on the part of
the CBI officials do not disprove the case of the prosecution, if otherwise
proved beyond reasonable doubt.
51.               Further, in the column of 'names and particulars of the person no-
tified about arrest in the arrest memo Ex.PW-6/N the name of wife of accused
Smt. Kavita has been specifically mentioned. Moreover, the accused was ar-
rested in a police station and all the police officials present in the police station
at that time were aware about his arrest.
52.               It is also argued that as per CBI Crime Manual Rule 10.15 FIR
should contain the time and date of commission of offence which in the
present case has not been recorded. Further, there is no evidence on record
that the copy of the FIR was received in the court of Ld. Special Judge within
24 hours of its registration. He also alleged that the FIR remained unproved in
the present case as the Recording Officer was not got examined in the court by
the prosecuting agency. Perusal of the record shows that IO PW-17 clearly de-
posed regarding registration of FIR along-with other witnesses. In fact, PW-
14 Inspector CMS Negi stated during his examination that the verification
conducted on 31.12.2018 had confirmed the inclination of SI Gopal with re-
spect to the demand of bribe amount from the complainant. However, since
the time and the place of meeting was not disclosed by the accused in the said
verification proceeding, FIR was not recommended to be registered at that


CBI No. 28/2019                                                   (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                       Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-64-
time only and was kept open for 02.01.2019. It was only after the accused
agreed to call the complainant to P.S on 02.01.2019 during telephonic conver-
sation, the verification proceedings got completed. PW-14 deposed that he
submitted his verification report to SP CBI ASB that day itself for necessary
action on the basis of which FIR was registered. Just because there was no
specific recommendation for registration of FIR does not mean that the FIR
could be challenged in the court. The witness is clearly proving the registra-
tion of FIR along-with the IO. Further, non proving of the fact that FIR was
sent to Special Judge, P.C. Act or not is a mere irregularity. As far as the men-
tioning of date and time of the commission of the offence in the FIR is con-
cerned, this is not an error which would make the court disbelieve the FIR
even if the Officer who has recorded the FIR has been examined as such.
53.               Ld. Counsel for the accused averred that the CBI miserably failed
to prove source of Rs. 80,000/- allegedly arranged by the complainant. How-
ever, all the witnesses have stated that the complainant herself had produced
Rs. 80,000/- on 02.01.2019 after this figure was agreed to by the accused dur-
ing conversation dated 31.12.2018. Asking the complainant about the source
of the said money or telling her to produce her bank statement in order to
prove the source would have in fact put the complainant in the array of ac-
cused and thus it was not correct for the CBI to ask such questions to the com-
plainant at that point of time when the investigation in the complaint filed by
the complainant herself was pending. The presence of the complainant during
the entire post trap proceedings have also been challenged on the ground that
as per CCTV footage Ex.PW-16/D2 the complainant remained inside the room

CBI No. 28/2019                                                  (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                      Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-65-
from 16:30:07 to 16:32:18 and thus all the post trap documents must have
been signed by the complainant later. The possibility that the complainant
came out of the room at 16:32:18 for some urgent work and could have re-
turned back to the said room afterwards cannot be ruled out and this alone is
no ground to challenge the authenticity of the post trap proceedings specially
when all the trap team members have signed on the post trap memos prepared
at the spot and have deposed qua their authenticity. The grievance of the de-
fence goes to the extent that the local police present at P.S. Lodhi Colony were
not joined in the trap proceedings. However, it cannot be lost sight of that
there were around 10-12 trap team members who were already present in P.S.
Lodhi Colony during trap proceedings and therefore a mere fact that some lo-
cal police from the police station was not joined during the trap proceedings
does not destroy the case of the prosecution.
54. CONCLUSION


In Neeraj Dutta case (supra) it has been held that :
"55. It is trite law that in cases dependent on circumstan-
            tial evidence, inference of guilt can be made if all the in-
            criminating facts and circumstances are incompatible with
            the innocence of the accused or any other reasonable hy-
            potheses than that of his guilt, and provide a cogent and
            complete chain of events which leave no reasonable doubt
            in the judicial mind. When an incriminating circumstance
            is put to the accused and the said accused either offers no
            explanation or offers an explanation which is found to be
            untrue, then the same becomes an additional link in the
            chain of circumstances to make it complete. If the com-
CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
-66-
bined effect of all the proven facts taken together in con-
            clusive in establishing the guilt of the accused, a convic-
            tion would be justified even though any one or more of
            those facts by itself is not decisive. (
Sharad Birdhichand
            Sarda Vs State of Maharashtra
(1984) 4 SCC 116
            ("Sharad Birdhichand Sarda") as reiterated in
Prakash Vs
            State of Rajasthan
(2013) 4 SCC 668 ("Prakash")).
In view of the above discussion, it can be safely inferred that the complete

chain of circumstances was established beyond reasonable doubt and without

a snap, thus proving the guilt of the accused. Thus, accused Gopal Singh is

convicted for offence U/s 7 of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(as

amended in 2018).
Dictated & Announced in the open court
today dated 08.06.2023
                                                        (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                 Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI-21
                                    Rouse Avenue Courts Complex/New Delhi




CBI No. 28/2019                                                (Namrita Aggarwal)
                                                    Spl. Judge (PC Act) CBI­21/08.06.2023
