Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 54 of
2004
Citation: citations: AIR 2005 MADRAS 218, 2005 (2) ARBI LR 468, (2005) 2 ARBILR 468, (2005) 2 MAD LJ 137, (2006) 1 MAD LW 758, (2005) 2 CTC 487 (MAD)
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/366616/

[Cites
37
, Cited by
4
]
Madras High Court
M/S. Ford Credit Kotak Mahindra vs M. Swaminathan on 11 February, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 MADRAS 218, 2005 (2) ARBI LR 468, (2005) 2 ARBILR 468, (2005) 2 MAD LJ 137, (2006) 1 MAD LW 758, (2005) 2 CTC 487 (MAD)
Author:
A. Kulasekaran
Bench:
A. Kulasekaran
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS           

DATED: 11/02/2005  

CORAM   

THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A. KULASEKARAN             

C.R.P. No. 1177 of 2004 
and 
C.M.P. No. 11527 of 2004 

M/s. Ford Credit Kotak Mahindra 
Limited
rep. by its Authorised Signatory
Ceebros Centre, 1st Floor
No.44, Montieth Road 
Egmore, Chennai  600 008                                ... Petitioner

-Vs-

M. Swaminathan                                         ... Respondent


        Revision under
Article 227
of the Constitution of  India  against  the
order dated 25-03-2004 passed in I.A.  No.  3762 of 2004 in O.S.  No.  8 54 of
2004 on the file of VIII Assistant Judge, City Civil Court, Chennai.


!For Petitioner :       Mr.  Abdul Hameed for M/s.  Anand, Abdul &
                                Vinodh Associates
^For Respondent :       Mr.  T.T.  Ravichandran


:ORDER
This  revision  is  filed  against  the  order  of  dismissal  of  the
application under Section 8  read  with
Section  5
of  the  Arbitration  and
Conciliation Act, 1996, filed by the petitioner herein.
2.      The   petitioner  and  the  respondent  entered  into  a  loan
agreement No.   21602081  dated  30-09-2001  thereby  the  respondent  availed
financial  assistance  from  the petitioner to the extent of Rs.4,93,000/- for
purchase of Ford icon car.  The respondent herein agreed to pay the  said  sum
in 36  monthly  instalments commencing from 03-11-2001 to 03-10-2 004.  Clause 
29 of the said agreement contemplates  arbitration  clause.    The  petitioner
herein  has  issued loan recall notice on 12-01-2004 invoking clause 14 of the
agreement  as  the  respondent  committed  default  in  repaying  the  monthly
instalments  and  as  on 29-02-2004, the respondent was liable to pay a sum of
Rs.2,68,062/-.  The petitioner has also issued a telegram on 14-01-2004 to the
respondent terminating the said loan agreement.  The respondent has filed  the
suit O.S.   No.    85 4 of 2004 before VIII Assistant City Civil Court, Madras
for permanent  injunction  restraining  the  petitioner  from  in  any  manner
repossessing the  vehicle.    In  the said suit, the petitioner has filed I.A.
No.  3259 of 2004 for injunction, and  order  of  status-quo  was  granted  on
26-02-2004.
3.      The petitioner herein has filed I.A.  No.  3762 of 2004 in the
said  suit  under  Section  8A  read  with
Section  5
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.  The said application was dismissed on the ground that
clause 29 of the agreement contemplates that disputes and  differences  to  be
settled  by the Arbitrators nominated by the petitioner and the proceedings to
be held at Mumbai; whereas clause 30 of the agreement confers jurisdiction  of
the  Courts  at  Chennai;  that  the  loan agreement was terminated, hence the


arbitration clause contain in the arbitration no longer exists and  the  Civil
Court  is  vested  with  the  jurisdiction  to entertain the suit and that the
respondent has paid 2 6 instalments, only 10 instalments remains to be paid.
4.      The learned counsel for the revision petitioner  submits  that
when agreement contains arbitration clause, it is mandatory on the part of the
civil  court to refer the matter to arbitrator; that the findings of the court
below that clause 29 is contradictory to clause 30 is unsustainable; clause 29
stipulates the venue of arbitration  at  Mumbai,  whereas  clause  30  confers
jurisdiction on the Courts at chennai to decide the dispute arising out of the
agreement,  hence  they  are  not contradictory; that the court below erred in
holding that once agreement is  rescinded,  the  arbitration  clause  also  no
longer  exists; that the arbitration clause in an agreement is an agreement by
itself and the same shall not be deemed to have been terminated by  reason  of
termination  of  agreement, when an agreement containing arbitration clause is
terminated, the parties to the agreement have to work out their remedy only by
way of arbitration under the terms of the  agreement  and  not  otherwise  and
prayed for setting aside the order passed by the court below.
5.      In  support  of  his  contentions, the learned counsel for the
petitioner relied on the below mentioned decisions:-
i)      (Chairman and Managing Director,  N.T.P.C.    Ltd  vs.    M/s.
Reshmi Constructions, Builders & Contractors) 2004 (1) C.T.C.  445 wherein the
Honourable Supreme Court held in Paragraph No.  27, 28, 29 and 36 as follows:-
"27.    Even when rights and obligations of the parties are worked out
the  contract  does  not  come  to  an  end  inter  alia  for  the  purpose of
determination of the disputes arising thereunder, and, thus,  the  arbitration
agreement can  be  invoked.    Although it may not be strictly in place but we
cannot shut our eyes  to  the  ground  reality  that  in  the  cases  where  a
contractor  has  made  huge  investment, he cannot afford not to take from the
employment the amount under the bills, for various reasons which  may  include
discharge of his liability towards the banks, financial institutions and other
persons.   In  such  a situation, the public sector undertakings would have an
upper hand.  They would not ordinarily release the money unless a  'No  demand
Certificate' is signed.  Each case, therefore, is required to be considered on
its own facts.
28.     Further,  necessitas non habet legam is an old age maxim which
means necessity knows no law.  A person may sometimes have to succumb  to  the    
pressure of other party to the bargain who is on a stronger position.
29.     We may, however, hasten to add that such a case has to be made
out and proved before the Arbitrator for obtaining an award.
36.     The  appellant has in its letter dated 20th December, 1990 has
used the term 'without prejudice'.  It has explained the situation under which
the amount under the 'No Demand Certificate' had to be signed.   The  question
may have  to  be  considered from that angle.  Furthermore, the question as to
whether the respondent has waived its contractual right to receive the  amount
or  is  otherwise estopped from pleading otherwise will itself be a fact which
has to be determined by the arbitral tribunal.
In this case, final bill was submitted by the contractor and the  same
was returned by the principal disputing the amount.  The contractor issued 'No
demand Certificate' for releasing of security deposit.  The Honourable Supreme
Court  held  that  notwithstanding  the issue of No Objection Certificate, the
contractor can raise dispute regarding  non  payment.    The  question  as  to
whether  the respondent has waived its contractual right to receive the amount
or is otherwise estopped from pleading otherwise will itself be a  fact  which
has to be determined by the arbitral tribunal.
ii)     (
NIIT Limited  vs.    ASHISH  DEB and another
) 2004 (2) R.A.J.
505 ( Madras) wherein a Division Bench of this Court, in para-15 held thus:-
'15.    Though  the  respondents/  plaintiffs  have   challenged   the
validity  of  the agreement on the ground that a fraud was played on them, the
same also can be gone into by the Arbitrator in view  of  powers  given  under
Section 16
of  the  Act.  This aspect was not considered by the learned Judge
while rejecting the application filed under
Section  8
of  the  Act  by  the
appellant/defendant.   Hence,  we  are  inclined  to  interfere with the order
passed by the learned Judge.'

        In that case, the respondent filed  a  suit  to  declare  the  licence
agreement  as  invalid  and  to  direct  the  respondent to pay certain amount
towards loss sustained by the them.  The defendant filed an application  under
Section  8
of  the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to stay all further
proceedings of the suit and to refer the dispute for  arbitration,  which  was
dismissed  by  the  civil court holding that the prayer sought for in the suit
cannot be decided by the arbitrator.  The division bench of  this  Court  held
that
Section  16
of  the Arbitration and Conciliation Act gives power to the
Arbitrator to decide even the validity of the agreement.  Once it  is  brought
to  the  notice of the civil court that there was an arbitration agreement, it
is obligatory for the court to refer the matter for arbitration  in  terms  of
the  arbitration clause and ultimately set aside the order of dismissal passed
by the civil court in the application filed under
Section 8
of  the  Act  and
held  that  even validity of the agreement on the ground that fraud was played
on them can be gone into by the Arbitrator by virtue of the powers given under
Section 16
of the Act.
iii)    (Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd v.  M/s.  Pinkcity Midway
Petroleums) 2003 (3) CTC 438 wherein the Honourable Supreme Court, in  para-15 
held thus:-
15.     The  question  would arise what would be the role of the civil
court when an agreement is raised that such an  arbitration  clause  does  not
apply to  the  facts  of  the case in hand?  Learned counsel for the appellant
contends that it is a matter which should be raised before the arbitrator  who
is competent to adjudicate upon the same and the civil court should not embark
upon  an  inquiry  in regard to the applicability of the arbitration clause to
the facts of the case.  While learned counsel  appearing  for  the  respondent
contends  that  since the applicability of the arbitration clause to the facts
of the case goes to the very root of the  jurisdiction  of  the  reference  to
arbitration,  this  question will have to be decided by the Civil Court before
referring the matter to arbitration even in cases where there is admittedly an
arbitration clause.  The answer to this argument, in our opinion is  found  in
Section 16
of the Act itself.  It has empowered the Arbitral Tribunal to rule
on its own jurisdiction including rule on any objection with  respect  to  the
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement...."
In  dealership  agreement  between the parties, clause 40 contemplates
reference of all disputes to sole arbitrator.  The corporation,  in  terms  of
contractual  powers  suspended  supply  of  sales  to respondent on account of
breach of conditions.  The respondent filed suit challenging the  decision  of
the corporation.    The  corporation  filed application under
Section 8
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act.  The Honourable Supreme Court, while setting
aside the order of the trial court  as  well  as  the  high  court  held  that
judicial  authorities  are  mandated to refer the parties to arbitration, once
existence of clause is pointed out and such  reference  is  obligatory.    Any
objection  as  to applicability of arbitration clause to the facts of the case
has to be raised before the arbitral tribunal and the tribunal has to consider
the same under
Section 16
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 .
6.      The learned counsel for the respondent submits that  once  the
agreement  is  terminated,  the  clauses  contained in the agreement also gets
terminated automatically; that the petitioner has obtained signatures in blank
papers and that the respondent cannot get any relief from the arbitrator,  who
has been appointed by the petitioner hence there is every likelihood of bias.
7.      In  support  of  this  contention, the learned counsel for the
respondent relied on the below mentioned decisions.
i)      (
Sukanya Holdings Pvt Ltd V.  Jayesh H.  Pandya
)  2003(2)  CTC
431 wherein  the  Honourable  Supreme  Court, in para Nos.  12, 13 and 14 held
thus:-
"12.  For interpretation of
Section 8
,
Section 5
would have no bearing
because it only contemplates that in the matters governed by
Part  I  of  the
Act
,  Judicial  authority  shall not intervene except where so provided in the
Act.  Except
Section 8
, there is no other provision  in  the  Act  that  in  a
pending  suit,  the  dispute  is  required  to  be referred to the arbitrator.
Further, the matter is not required to be referred to the  arbitral  Tribunal,
if    (1)  the  parties  to the arbitration agreement have not filed any such
application for referring the dispute to the  arbitrator;  (2)  in  a  pending
suit,  such  application is not filed before submitting first statement on the
substance of the dispute; or (3) such application is not  accompanied  by  the
original arbitration  agreement  or  duly certified copy thereof.  This would,
therefore, mean that
Arbitration Act
does not oust  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Civil  Court  to decide the dispute in a case where parties to the Arbitration
Agreement do not take appropriate steps as contemplated under Sub-sections (1) 
& (2) of
Section 8
of the Act.
13.  Secondly, there is no provision in the Act that when the  subject  matter
of  the  suit  includes subject matter of the arbitration agreement as well as
other disputes, the matter is required to be referred to arbitration.    There
is  also  no  provision  for  splitting  the cause or parties and referred the
subject matter of the suit to the arbitrators.
14.  Thirdly, there is no provision  as to what is required to be done  in  a
case  where  some  parties  to  the  suit  are  not parties to the arbitration
agreement.  As against this, under
Section 24
of the  Arbitration  Act,  1940,
some  of  the  parties  to  a  suit could apply that the matters in difference
between them be referred to arbitration and the Court may refer  the  same  to
arbitration  provided  that  the  same  can  be separated from the rest of the
subject matter of the suit.    Section  also  provided  that  the  suit  would
continue  so  far  as  it  related  to  parties  who  have  not joined in such
application."
In this case, it was held by the Honourable  Supreme  Court  that  the
Arbitration  Act
does  not oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to decide
the dispute in a case where parties to the Arbitration agreement do  not  take
appropriate  steps  as contemplated under sub-
sections 1
and
2
of
Section 8
of
the  Act;  that  when  parties  to  arbitral  agreement  have  not  filed  any
application  for referring the dispute to arbitration and in pending suit such
application was not filed before submitting first statement  on  substance  of
dispute  or  such  application  is  not  accompanied  by  original arbitration
agreement or certified copy thereof, then the matter is  not  required  to  be
referred to arbitration.
ii)     (
S.  Viswanathan  vs.  Ashok Leyland Finance Limited
) 2004 (2)
CTC 266, wherein a single judge of this Court held thus:-
"4.  I have already found that defendants 2 and 3 are neither  parties
to the house loan agreement dated 1.9.1995, which is between the plaintiffs on
the  one  hand and the first defendant on the other hand, nor they are parties
to the letter dated 10.1.2000, which  admittedly  is  written  by  the  second
defendant to  the  first  defendant.  The reliefs prayed for in the suit is to
set aside the sale of the property forming the  subject  matter  of  the  suit
executed by the first defendant, in favour of defendants 2 and 3; for recovery
of possession from them and for other reliefs."
In  this  case, the lender, under housing loan agreement executed sale
deed in favour of two third parties on  the  strength  of  power  of  attorney
executed by borrower.  Housing loan agreement contains clause for arbitration.
The  borrower  and  guarantor  challenges the execution of sale deed by way of
suit.  Purchasers of property are  not  parties  to  housing  loan  agreement.
Subsequent  correspondence  between  borrower  and  lender  did not constitute


concluded contract.  Dispute raised did not fall within the arbitration clause
and lender could not successfully maintain application  under
Section  8
for
referring the disputes to arbitrator.
iii)    (Dharma Prathishthanam Vs.   M/s.  Madhok Construction Private
Limited) 2004 (5) CTC 442 wherein the Honourable Supreme Court held in para-12
thus:-
12.  On a plain reading of the several provisions referred  to  herein
above,  we  are  clearly  of  the  opinion that the procedure followed and the
methodology adopted by the  respondent  is  wholly  unknown  to  law  and  the
appointment of the sole arbitrator Shri Swamy Dayal, the reference of disputes
to  such  arbitrator  and  the  ex  parte  proceedings  and award given by the
arbitrator are all void ab initio and hence nullity, liable to be ignored.  In
case of arbitration without the intervention of the Court,  the  parties  must
rigorously stick  to  the  agreement  entered  into  between  the two.  If the
arbitration clause names an arbitrator as the one  already  agreed  upon,  the
appointment of  an  arbitrator poses no difficulty.  If the arbitration clause
does not name  an  arbitrator  but  provides  for  the  manner  in  which  the
arbitrator  is  to  be chosen and appointed, then the parties are bound to act
accordingly.  If the parties do not agree then arises the  complication  which
has to  be  resolved  by  reference  to  the provisions of the Act.  One party
cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the Court and proceed to act unilaterally.  A
unilateral appointment and a unilateral reference  both will be illegal.   It
may  make a difference if in respect of a unilateral appointment and reference
the other party submits to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and  waives  its
rights  which it has under the agreement, then the arbitrator may proceed with
the reference and the party submitting to his jurisdiction  and  participating
in  the  proceedings  before  him  may later on be precluded and estopped from
raising any objection in that regard...
In this case, the Apex Court held that if the arbitration clause  does
not  name an arbitrator but provides for the manner in which the arbitrator is
to be chosen and appointed, then the parties are bound to act accordingly.  If
the arbitration clause does not name an arbitrator but provides for the manner
in which the arbitrator is to be chosen and appointed, then  the  parties  are
bound to  act  accordingly.    If  the  parties do not agree then it has to be
resolved by reference to the provisions of the Act.    Unilateral  appointment
and unilateral  reference    both  will  be illegal.  Exparte proceedings and
award given by such arbitrator are void ab initio.  It may make  a  difference
if  in respect of unilateral appointment and reference the other party submits
to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and waives its rights which it has under
the agreement, then the arbitrator may proceed  with  the  reference  and  the
party  submitting  to  his  jurisdiction  and participating in the proceedings
before him may later on be
precluded and estopped from raising any objection in that regard.
8.      In the light of the arguments of the counsel  on  either  side
and  also  the  decisions relied on by them, I proceed to consider the dispute
involved in this case.
9.
Section 2-b
,
5
,
7
and
8
of the  Arbitration  and  Conciliation
Act, 1996 are relevant for this case, which runs as follows:-
"
Sec.  2
.  Definitions:- ...
(b) 'arbitration agreement' means an agreement referred to in
Section 7
.
Sec.  5
.        Extent   of  judicial  intervention:-  Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force,  in  matters
governed  by  this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so
provided in this part.
Sec.  7
.        Arbitration agreement:- (1) In this part, 'arbitration
agreement' means an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration  all  or
certain  disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them in respect
of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
(2)     An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an  arbitration
clause in a contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
(3)     An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
        (4)     An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in -
        (a)     a document signed by the parties:
        (b)     an  exchange  of  letters,  telex, telegrams or other means of
telecommunication which provide a record of the agreement; or
(c)     an exchange of statements of claim and defence  in  which  the
existence  of  the  agreement  is  alleged  by one party and not denied by the
other.
(5)     The reference in  a  contract  to  a  document  containing  an
arbitration  clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in
writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration clause  part  of
the contract.
Sec.  8
.        Power  to  refer parties to arbitration where there is
an arbitration agreement:- (1) A judicial authority before which an action  is
brought  in  a  matter which is the subject matter of an arbitration agreement
shall, if a party  so  applies  not  later  than  when  submitting  his  first
statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration.
(2)     The  application  referred  to in sub-section (1) shall not be
entertained unless it is accompanied by the original arbitration agreement  or
a duly certified copy thereof.
(3)     Notwithstanding  that  an  application  has  been  made  under
subsection (1) and that the issue is pending before the judicial authority, an
arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral award made."
10.     The definition of
Section 2-b
of  the  Act  defines  that  an
arbitration agreement  means an agreement referred to in
Section 7
.
Section 7
is  quite  comprehensive  compared  to  the  definition  of   the   expression
'arbitration  agreement'  as contained in
Section 2 (a)
of the Arbitration Act,
1940.  The provisions of
Section 7 (1)
,
7 (2)
,
7(3)
and
7(4)
and
Section 7 (5)
of the Act materially correspond to
Section 6(1)
,
6 (2)
,
5 (2)
,
5
and  Section
5 (6)  of  the  English Arbitration Act, 199 6 respectively.
Section 7
of the
Act is modelled after
Article 7
of the Model Law.  The reference in a contract
to a document containing an  arbitration  clause  constitutes  an  arbitration
agreement  if  the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make
that arbitration clause part of the  contract.    The  arbitration  clause  is
distinct from  the  other  clauses  in  the  contract.
Total  breach of the
substantive stipulations, even when it is accepted by  other  party  does  not
abrogate  the arbitration clause and even the party in default may invoke that
clause.  The arbitration clause stands apart from the rest  of  the  contract.
For  deciding  whether  an agreement is an arbitration agreement under the Act
1996, the test is whether the  proposed  arbitrator/Tribunal  is  expected  to
decide a  dispute,  contention of the parties and to decide per Law.  Followed
(
K.K.  Modi Vs.  K.N.  Modi and others
) AIR 1998 Supreme  Court  1297  wherein
the Honourable Supreme Court in para-17 and 18 held thus:-
"17.    Among the attributes which must be present for an agreement to
be considered as an arbitration agreement are:
(1)  The  arbitration  agreement must contemplate that the decision of
the tribunal will be binding on the parties to the agreement,
        (2) That the jurisdiction of the tribunal  to  decide  the  rights  of
parties must derive either from the consent of the parties or from an order of
the court or from a statute, the terms of which make it clear that the process
is to be an arbitration,
        (3)  The agreement must contemplate that substantive rights of parties
will be determined by the agreed tribunal,
        (4) That the tribunal will determine the rights of the parties  in  an
impartial  and  judicial manner with the tribunal owing an equal obligation of
fairness towards both sides,
        (5) That the agreement of the parties to refer their disputes  to  the
decision of the tribunal must be intended to be enforceable in law and lastly,
        (6)  The  agreement  must  contemplate  that  the tribunal will make a
decision upon a dispute which  is  already  formulated  at  the  time  when  a
reference is made to the tribunal.
18.   The  other  factors  which  are  relevant  include,  whether the
agreement contemplates that the tribunal will receive evidence from both sides
and hear their contentions or at least give the parties an opportunity to  put
them   forward;  Whether  the  wording  of  the  agreement  is  consistent  or
inconsistent with the view that the process was intended to be an arbitration,
and whether  the  agreement  requires  the  tribunal  to  decide  the  dispute
according to law."
11.
Section   5
of   Arbitration   and  Conciliation  Act,  1996
corresponds to
Section 32
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1940.
Section
5
of  the  new Act, 1996 also corresponds to
Article 5
of the UNICITRAL Model
Law.  Part 4 (v) of the Statement of object and reason to the Act states  that
the  main objective of the bill is 'to minimise the supervisory role of Courts
in arbitral process.  Coupled with this, the Act, as per  provisions  of  this
Section  makes  it abundantly clear that no judicial authority shall intervene
except where so provided in this part".  The scheme of the Act is  to  prevent
the  parties to an arbitration agitating questions relating to the arbitration
in any manner other than that provided by the Act.    So,  a  suit  where  any
question may be raised with regard to the existence or validity of an award is
expressly barred  by  the section.
Section 30
of the Specific Relief Act does
not override the provisions of this section, which applies notwithstanding any
Law for the time being in force.   The  stipulations  in  the  Act  vest  more
authority  in  the  arbitral  tribunal  to  determine  the scope and extent of
arbitral process rather in the Court,  as  under  the  old  Act.
Under  the
Arbitration  Act,  1940
,  a  party can approach the Court under
Section 33
for
determination of the  effect  of  the  agreement  or  its  validity  and  seek
injunction for forestalling the arbitral proceedings under
Section 41 (b)
read
with Schedule  II  Rule  4.   If the party succeeded in getting injunction, it
would continue with this for couple of years or more before the  matter  would
finally come  before  the Court for final disposal.  The said tactics resulted
in  frustrating  the  efforts  of  the  aggrieved  party  to  have  the  claim
adjudicated upon.    The  present Act has changed the situation altogether and
instead of rushing to the Courts on every little excuse as under the old  Act,
the  parties  can  challenge  the validity of the arbitral Tribunal before the
Arbitral Tribunal itself  and,  the  Arbitral  Tribunal,  after  affording  an
opportunity  of  being  heard  to  both  the  parties, it shall act on its own
jurisdiction where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting  the  plea
to continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.
12.     Under  the  new  Act,  1996,  there  are  three sections which
basically confers power on Court to intervene in the matter.  The main section
is
Section 34
, which recourse to a Court against the arbitral award by  making
an application  to  set  aside.   The next section, which confers power on the
Court for judicial intervention is
Section 37 (2)
under which  appeal  can  be
filed  against  the order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 16 (2)
or (3) or against granting or refusing to grant interim measures under Section
17.  The Court can intervene also on application under
Section  14  (2)
.    A
conjoint reading of
Sections 5
,
17 (2)
,
34
and
37
will show that the Court can
intervene only in cases covered under
Section 14 (2)
,
34
and
37
.
13.
Section  8  (1)
corresponds to
Section 34
of the old Act with
some difference.
Section 8
also corresponds to
Article 8
of UNICITERAL  model
law.
Section  8
contemplates that a party should invoke the attention of the
judicial authority to the arbitration agreement and pray for stay so that  the
arbitration agreement may be carried out.  Where disputes and differences have
arisen between the parties to an agreement, the same have to be settled by the
Arbitrator.  The Court, under
Section 8
, has no other option but to direct the
parties to  the  arbitration.    The  provisions of
Section 8
are mandatory in
nature and the appropriate  remedies  for  the  parties  would  be  to  go  to
arbitration.   Under the provisions of 1996 Act, an arbitrator has been vested
with the power to adjudicate even the validity of an action of termination  of
contract.   Thus,  the  parties  have  no  other  forum  to agitate the matter
relating  to  termination  of  contract  except  by  the  Arbitrator,  in  the
Arbitration forum.
14.
Section  8
is intended to make arbitration agreement effective
and to prevent a party from going to Court  contrary  to  its  own  agreement.
Followed (
Union of India Vs.  Surjit Singh Atwal
) AIR 1970 SC 189.
15.     Where  the  parties  by  contract  have  agreed to refer their
disputes to arbitrator, the Court should, as far as possible proceed  to  give
opportunity  for  resolution  of  disputes  through arbitration rather than by
judicial adjudication.  Followed (State of Punjab Vs.  M/s.   Geeta  Iron  and
Brass Works) AIR 1978 SC 1608.
16.     In  the  case  on  hand,  the  respondent herein has committed
default, with the result, the petitioner terminated the contract and  recalled
the entire  amount.    Aggrieved  by  the  said  action of the petitioner, the
respondent has filed the suit.  It is argued by the respondent that  once  the
main contract is terminated, the arbitration clause cannot operate.  On behalf
of  the  petitioner,  arguments  were  placed  that  despite  termination, the
arbitration clause is still in  existence.    It  is  relevant  to  refer  the
judgment of the Apex Court reported in
(
The Union  of  India  vs.    Kishorilal  Gupta & Brothers
) Volume XXIII  The
Supreme Court Journal Page No.1102)  =  AIR  1959  SC  1632  wherein  in  Page 
No.1111, it was held thus:-
"The  following  principles  relevant  to  the  present  case  emerge from the
aforesaid discussion:  (1) An arbitration clause is a  collateral  term  of  a
contract as distinguished from its substantive terms; but nonetheless it is an
integral  part  of  it;  (2) however comprehensive the terms of an arbitration
clause may be, the existence of the contract is a necessary condition for  its
operation;  it  perishes with the contract; (3) the contract may be non est in
the sense that it never came legally into existence or it was void ab  initio;
(4) though the contract was validly executed, the parties may put an end to it
as  if  it  had  never  existed  and  substitute  a new contract for it solely
governing their rights and liabilities thereunder; (5) in the former case,  if
the  original  contract  has  no  legal existence, the arbitration clause also
cannot operate, for along with the original contract, it is also void; in  the
latter  case, as the original contract is extinguished by the substituted one,
the arbitration clause of the original contract  perishes  with  it;  and  (6)
between  the  two  falls  many  categories  of  disputes  in connection with a
contract, such as the question of repudiation, frustration, breach  etc.    In
those cases it is the performance of the contract that has come to an end, but
the contract is still in existence for certain purposes in respect of disputes
arising under  it  or  in  connection  with  it.  As the contract subsists for
certain  purposes,  the  arbitration  clause  operates  in  respect  of  these
purposes.
We  have  held  that  the  three  contracts were settled and the third
settlement contract was in substitution of the three contracts; and, after its
execution, all the earlier contracts were  extinguished  and  the  arbitration
clause contained  therein  also  perished  along with them.  We have also held
that the new contract was not a conditional one and after  its  execution  the
parties should  work out their rights only under its terms.  In this view, the
judgment of the High Court is correct.  This appeal  fails  and  is  dismissed
with costs.
In
the  above  decision
,  the Honourable Supreme Court held that many
categories of disputes in connection with a contract, such as the question  of
repudiation,  frustration,  breach etc., In those cases, it is the performance
of the contract that has come  to  an  end,  but  the  contract  is  still  in
existence  for  certain purposes in respect of disputes arising under it or in
connection with it.   As  the  contract  subsists  for  certain  purposes  the
arbitration clause operates in respect of these purposes.
17.     Considering  the facts involved in this case, I hold that even
after termination of the agreement, the arbitration clause subsists.
18.     The above mentioned  decisions  and  also  the  provisions  of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
make it clear that if a suit is brought
by a party to the arbitration agreement namely suit to challenge the agreement
or  award,  suit  to  affirm  agreement  or award, suit inspite of arbitration
agreement are clearly barred by the provisions of
Section 8
of  the  Act  and
relief, if any, has to be by way of provisions of the
Arbitration Act
itself.
19.     It  is not in dispute that the petitioner herein has satisfied
the requirements of
Section 8
before the trial court.  The trial court  passed
the  impugned  order  in  contravention  of
Section  8
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, hence the same is liable to be set aside and accordingly  it
is set aside.   The  dispute  in  O.S.    No.   854 of 2004 is referred to the
arbitrator as mentioned in clause 29 of the agreement.  The respondent  is  at
liberty  to  canvas all the points and disputes, which are raised in the suit,
before the Arbitrator.
20.     The Civil  Revision  Petition   is   allowed.      No   costs.
Consequently, connected CMP is closed.
11-02-2005 
rsh
Index :  Yes
Web site :  Yes
To

The VIII Assistant Judge
City Civil Court



