Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: 2018 ACD 349 (DEL), (2017) 180 ALLINDCAS 763 (DEL), 2018 ALLMR(CRI) 277, (2017) 3 DLT(CRL) 873, (2018) 1 NIJ 25, (2017) 242 DLT 363
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/43654058/

[Cites
15
, Cited by
4
]
Delhi High Court
Smt Rani Kapoor vs M/S Silvermount on 7 July, 2017
Equivalent citations: 2018 ACD 349 (DEL), (2017) 180 ALLINDCAS 763 (DEL), 2018 ALLMR(CRI) 277, (2017) 3 DLT(CRL) 873, (2018) 1 NIJ 25, (2017) 242 DLT 363
Author:
Mukta Gupta
Bench:
Mukta Gupta
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                          Reserved on: 27th April, 2017
                                           Decided on: 7th July, 2017

+      CRL.M.C. 3474/2016 & Crl.M.A. 14666/2016 (stay)

       SMT RANI KAPOOR                                  ..... Petitioner
                    Represented by:          Mr. Sermon Rawat, Mr.
                                             Shivang Rawat, Mr. Jagmeet
                                             Randhawa, Advs.
                          versus

       M/S SILVERMOUNT                                     ..... Respondent
Represented by:
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
1.     By the present petition the petitioner seeks quashing of complaint case
No. 2009/1 titled as "M/s. Silvermount Vs. Mrs. Rani Kapoor" wherein the
petitioner has been summoned as an accused for offence punishable under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1981 (in short the
NI Act
) by
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate (West), Tis Hazari, Delhi.
2.     Allegations in the complaint filed by the respondent are that it is a
partnership firm carrying on business of building construction and had
entered into a collaboration agreement with the petitioner for reconstruction
of property No. 4/16, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi admeasuring 200 sq.
yds. approximately. As per the collaboration agreement, the respondent paid
a sum of ₹25 lakhs as earnest money to the petitioner and the balance
amount of ₹1.5 crores in two installments. On reconstruction, respondent
was entitled to keep the first and second floor with proportionate right in the
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                               Page 1 of 10
land underneath whereas the rest of the portion was to continue in the
ownership of the petitioner. After execution of the agreement, the petitioner
approached the respondent and requested for payment of ₹20 lakhs which in
any case the respondent was to make later on, hence the same was paid.
However, the petitioner with malafide intention avoided handing-over the
vacant peaceful possession of the property which was required to be
demolished for reconstruction. Finally the dispute was settled, petitioner
agreed to repay the amount and a dissolution deed was entered into between
the parties. A cheque bearing No.183141 dated 28th May, 2015 for a sum of
₹5 lakhs issued in favour of the respondents was returned as dishonoured
vide memo dated 29th May, 2015 on account of 'payment stopped by
drawer'. Hence on non-receipt of the payment, respondent issued a notice
and filed the complaint under
Section 138
NI Act as noted above.
3.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits before this Court that
Section 138
NI Act envisages that when a cheque issued in lieu of a legally
recoverable debt is dishonoured and on service of notice the money is not
paid within 15 days, a complaint is maintainable. The only issue raised by
learned counsel for the petitioner challenging issue of summons in the
complaint to the petitioner is that admittedly the respondent is an
unregistered partnership firm and an unregistered partnership firm is not
entitled to enforce its rights through contract as per
Section 69
of the Indian
Partnership Act.     Hence the complaint against the petitioner is not
maintainable and is liable to be set aside.
4.     On the issue whether an unregistered partnership firm is entitled to
maintain a complaint under
Section 138
NI Act different views have been
expressed by various High Courts. The view expressed by the Division
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                               Page 2 of 10
Bench of Kerala High Court & Single Benches of Karnataka High Court and
Punjab & Haryana High Court is that irrespective of
Section 69(2)
of the
Indian Partnership Act, a complaint under
Section 138
NI Act is
maintainable whereas the view taken by the Division Bench of Andhra
Pradesh High Court is that the bar under
Section 69(2)
of the Indian
Partnership Act is also applicable to a complaint under
Section 138
of the NI
Act.
5.
In the decision reported as
AIR 1975 Ker 144 Kerala Arecanut Stores
v. Ramkishore and Sons
it was held:
"10. Reference has been made to these provisions to indicate
       that the obligation of the drawer of a cheque as well as the
       indorser to the indorsee who is the holder in due course arises
       by virtue of statutory provisions. It is not as if there is any
       privity of contract between the maker of a cheque and the
       holder in due course. Any right of action available to such
       holder is not under any contract, for he would be a third party
       to the contract and would not come within one of the exceptions
       enabling a third party to a contract to sue. But he is entitled to
       sue on his cheque by reason of the right conferred upon him by
       the statute. In fact, in the case of an indorsement of a pronote or
       of a cheque it is not an assignment of the debt as such but only
       of the property in the note or the cheque and it is by virtue of
       obtaining such property in the note or the cheque that the
       indorsee sues thereon. It is not necessary to advert to the
       several decisions which indicate that a person suing on a
       negotiable instrument is not suing by virtue of the assignment of
       the debt. That, we think, is well settled and therefore we are not
       referring to the decisions cited by counsel on this point. It is
       sufficient to state here, for the purpose of this case, that the
       right of action available to an indorsee of a cheque who comes
       to hold the cheque in due course is based upon conferment on
       him by the statutory provisions the right to sue the maker of the
       cheque and also the indorser. If that be the case the right that is
       sought to be enforced does not arise from a contract. It is not a
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                 Page 3 of 10
suit by the indorsee to enforce a right arising out of a contract
       and therefore the bar under
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership
       Act will not operate in such a case."
6.     Following the decision of the Supreme Court in
BSI Ltd. Vs. Gift
Holdings Pvt. Ltd.
in the decision reported as ILR 2003 KAR 4325 Beacon
Industries v. Anupam Ghosh it was held:
"5. A careful reading of
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership Act
       clearly shows that an unregistered partnership firm is barred
       from filing a civil suit and there is no bar as such to file a
       private complaint and it is purely criminal liability on the part
       of the person who has issued the cheque. Even if the cheque
       issued by a partner of an unregistered firm for legally
       recoverably debt or otherwise and if such cheque dishonoured
       when it was presented for encashment, it amounts to a criminal
       liability. Therefore the dismissal of a complaint by the Trial
       Court by relying on the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High
       Court referred to above is incorrect. Whenever a complaint is
       presented under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act
       it is the duty of the learned Magistrate to take note of the
       cognizance and record the sworn statement of the complainant
       and his witnesses and after hearing if there is any prima facie
       case then it is the duty of the Court to issue summons to the
       accused.
6.
In the case of
Abdul Gafoor v. Abdur Rehman
[ 1999 (4)
       Crimes 1998.] the Kerala High Court held that an unregistered
       firm can prosecute a complaint under
Section 138
of the
       Negotiable Instruments Act and the effect of non-registration of
       a firm under
Section 69
of the Partnership Act is applicable
       only to a case involving civil rights.
Further, the Supreme Court in the case
BSI Ltd. v. Gift
       Holdings Pvt. Ltd
[2000 SCC (Cri) 538.] has held that:
".... A criminal prosecution is neither for recovery of money
       nor for enforcement of any security etc.
Section 138
of the
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                               Page 4 of 10
Negotiable Instruments Act
is a penal provision the commission
       of which offence entails a conviction and sentence on proof of
       the guilt in duly conducted criminal proceedings. Once the
       offence under
Section 138
is completed the prosecution
       proceedings can be initiated not for recovery of the amount
       covered by the cheque but for bringing the offender to penal
       liability."
Again in the case of
Gurcharan Singh v. State of U.P.
[ 2002 (4)
       Crimes 165.] the Allahabad High Court has followed the above
       said judgment of the Supreme Court.
Therefore, in view of the above decisions of the Supreme Court
       as well as of the other High Courts, the contention of the
       respondent that filing of a criminal complaint by a partner of an
       unregistered firm is hit by
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership Act
       cannot be accepted. The said section has no application to the
       criminal cases. Under these circumstances it could be said that
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership Act is applicable only where
       the civil rights are invoked and not in criminal cases. Non-
       registration of the firm has no legal bearing on the criminal
       case. Hence the finding recorded by the Trial Court is totally
       incorrect and illegal and the same is liable to be set aside."
7.     Learned Single Judge of Punjab and Haryana High Court following
the Division Bench of Kerala High Court in the decision reported as (2005) 4
RCR (Cri) 330 Capital Leasing and Finance Co v. Navrattan jain held-
"25. A bare reading of the above shows that
Section 69(2)
prohibits the enforcement of rights in respect of an unregistered
       firm by way of a suit. The same does not relate to a criminal
       complaint.
In
Kerala Arecanut Stores v. Ramkishore and Sons
       and another
, AIR 1975 Kerala 144, a Division Bench of the
       Kerala High Court held that provisions of
Section 69(2)
of the
       Partnership Act, provide that the suit by a partner for recovery
       of money of a dishonoured cheque, interest in favour of the firm
       is not barred. The following observations in the said case are
       apposite :
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                               Page 5 of 10
"It is sufficient to state here for the purpose of this case that the
       right of action available to an indorsee of a cheque who comes
       to hold the cheque in due course is based upon conferment on
       him by the statutory provisions the right to sue the maker of the
       cheque and also the endorser. If that be the case the right that is
       sought to be enforced does not arise from a contract. It is not a
       suit by the indorsee to enforce a right arising out a contract and
       therefore, the bar under
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership Act
       will not operate in such a case."
26. Besides, the Supreme Court in
Haldiram Bhujiawala and
       another v. Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar and another
, 2000 (1)
       Unreported Judgments 603, held that a suit is not barred by
Section 69(2)
if a statutory right or a common law right is being
       enforced.
27. In the case in hand the complainant has a statutory claim
       in terms of
Section 138
N.I. Act. Even otherwise
Section 69
of
       the Partnership Act is confined to enforcement of a right arising
       out a contract by instituting a suit or other proceedings by an
       unregistered firm. The criminal complaint that has been filed
       cannot be treated as a suit or other proceedings to enforce any
       rights arising under a contract. Therefore, there is no bar to the
       criminal complaint that has been filed and the non-
       registration of the firm would not bar the prosecution of an
       accused on the ground that the firm was not registered."
8.
In
Gowri Containers v. S.C. Shetty
2007 SCC OnLine Kar 624 : 2008
Cri LJ 498 Division Bench of Karnataka High Court held:
"9. Now coming to the contention of the respondents that in
       view of the provisions of
Section 69(2)
of the Indian Partnership
       Act. The amount under the transaction was not legally
       enforceable debt, reliance has been placed by the respondents
       learned advocate on a Division Bench decision of Andhra
       Pradesh High Court in
Amit Desai v. Shine Enterprises
(2000
       Cr LJ 2386) wherein in respect of an unregistered partnership
       firm, on the ground that the suit cannot be instituted by an
       unregistered firm, it was held that the debt against the accused
       was not a legally enforceable debt. That was the case in which,
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                   Page 6 of 10
the second consignment received by the complainant could not
       be sold and it had been returned to the accused by dispatching
       through a lawyer and the accused had sent a credit note to the
       amount and promised to return the value of the stock returned
       to them. In those circumstances, the accused had issued a
       cheque and the complaint arose out of the dishonour of that
       cheque. The amount under the cheque arose out of that promise
       of the accused to return the value of the stock. That was a case
       of enforcement of a right arising out of such contract. That
       principle is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
10. The Supreme Court in the case of
Kamal Pushpa
       Enterprises v. D.R. Construction Company
((2000) 6 SCC 659 :
AIR 2000 SC 2676) has observed that the bar to enforce rights
       arising from contract under
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership
       Act applies only in respect of suits and not applicable to the
       proceedings before the Arbitrator. In a direct decision of this
       Court in Beacon Industries, Rep. by its Partners, Bangalore v.
       Anupam Ghosh (ILR 2003 KAR 4325) the observation of this
       Court is that an unregistered firm is barred from filing a civil
       suit, but that there is no bar to initiate a private complaint for
       the offence punishable under
Section 138
of the Negotiable
       Instruments Act.
11. The words, legally enforceable debt or other liability'
       used in the explanation to
Section 138
of the Negotiable
       Instruments Act refer to the enforceability in law of the debt or
       the liability in question and have no reference to the right of the
       person enforcing ft. If there is no legal impediment for
       enforceability of a debt or other liability in general, disability of
       a particular individual or entity to enforce such right to recover
       such debt or liability does not render such debt or liability not
       legally enforceable debt or liability. The intention of the
       legislature is to make non-payment of amounts of cheques
       despite service of notice as per the provisions of the Act an
       offence only when the cheque has been issued for payment of a
       legitimate debt or liability. Amount required to be paid as price
       of articles or goods is a legitimate debt or liability and
       therefore it is a legally enforceable debt or liability. The
       disability of an unregistered firm under
Section 69(2)
of the
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                   Page 7 of 10
Indian Partnership Act
to file a suit to enforce a right arising
       out of a contract does not make such debt or liability a not
       legally enforceable debt or liability."
9.     However, in
Amit Desai v. Shine Enterprises
2000 SCC OnLine AP
748 : 2000 Cri LJ 2386 Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court
taking a contrary view held:
"14. The learned counsel Mr. C. Padmanabha Reddy further
       relied upon a ruling reported in
Kerala Arecanut Stores v.
       Ramkishore and Sons
, AIR 1975 Kerala 144. Their Lordships of
       Kerala High Court were pleased to hold that a suit by a partner
       for recovery of money on dishonour of cheque endorsed in
       favour of the firm is not barred.
The learned counsel further
       relied upon a ruling reported in
Abdul Gafoor v. Abdurathiman
,
       (1999) 2 Andh LT (Cri) 196. The learned single Judge of Kerala
       High Court was pleased to hold that
Section 69(2)
of the
       Partnership Act is applicable only where the civil rights are
       invoked and not in criminal cases. Non-registration of the firm
       has no legal bearing on the criminal case. With due respect to
       the learned single Judge of Kerala High Court, we prefer to
       differ with the views expressed by him. Explanation to
Section
       138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act specifically laid down
       that the debt or other liability means a legally enforceable debt
       or other liability. Enforcement of legal liability has to be in the
       nature of civil suit because the debt or other liability cannot be
       recovered by filing a criminal case and when there is a bar of
       filing a suit by unregistered firm, the bar equally applies to
       criminal case as
laid down in
explanation (2) of
Section 138
of
       the Negotiable Instruments Act. Considering the above legal
       aspect, we hold that it is a fit case wherein this court can
       exercise the powers under Section 482, Cr. P.C. for quashing
       the criminal case. Accordingly we quash C.C. No. 88/97 which
       was filed against the petitioners herein and pending in the
       Court of the Judicial Magistrate of First Class Madanapalle.
Thus, the Criminal Petition is allowed."
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                 Page 8 of 10
10.    It is thus apparent that except the Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh
High Court the view expressed by the three other High Courts is that the bar
applicable under
Section 69(2)
of the Partnership Act would not operate in
proceedings under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
11.    Supreme Court in
BSI Ltd.
(supra) clarifying the distinction between
criminal and civil proceedings noted that a criminal prosecution is neither for
recovery of money nor for enforcement of any security,
Section 138
of the
NI Act is a penal provision convicting and sentencing an offender for
commission of the offence on proof of the guilt established after a criminal
trial.
Section 138
of the NI Act notes as under:
"138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in
       the account. --Where any cheque drawn by a person on an
       account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any
       amount of money to another person from out of that account for
       the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability,
       is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of
       money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to
       honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be
       paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank,
       such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and
       shall, without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act, be
       punished with imprisonment for [a term which may be extended
       to two years], or with fine which may extend to twice the
       amount of the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
       apply unless--
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period
       of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the
       period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the
       case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said
       amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                 Page 9 of 10
the cheque, [within thirty days] of the receipt of information by
       him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid;
       and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of
       the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to
       the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the
       receipt of the said notice."
12.    It is thus apparent that on finding of the guilt arrived at by the criminal
Court the accused is liable to a sentence of imprisonment which may extend
to two years, or fine or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of
cheque, or with both. Thus discretion is granted to the criminal Court to
either award imprisonment or fine or both. Thus proceedings under
Section
138
of the NI Act are not recovery proceedings and in a given case the
criminal Court may only award sentence of imprisonment. Irrespective of a
complaint proceeding under
Section 138
of the NI Act, a creditor has the
right to institute civil suit for recovery of his debt in which case the same
would be recoverable only if it is a legally enforceable debt or other liability.
13.    Following the decision of the Supreme Court in
BSI Ltd.
(supra) this
Court is of the considered view that the decisions of the Kerala High Court,
Karnataka High Court and Punjab & Haryana High Court as noted above lay
down the correct law. Thus the issue raised by learned counsel for the
petitioner that since the complainant respondent is not a registered firm it
cannot maintain a complaint under
Section 138
of the NI Act is rejected.
Petition and application are dismissed.
(MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                               JUDGE
JULY 07, 2017/'ga'
CRL.M.C. 3474/2016                                                  Page 10 of 10
