Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 3
March 1990
Citation: SCC 308] appears to
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/54084720/

[Cites
28
, Cited by
15
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Zarina Begum vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 May, 2021
Author:
Atul Sreedharan
Bench:
Atul Sreedharan
1



     HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH, JABALPUR

                       M.Cr.C. No.30933/2020

                   (Through Video Conferencing)


IN THE MATTER OF:-

Applicant ...                   Zarina Begum

                                Versus
Respondent ...                  State of Madhya Pradesh through
                              P.S. E.O.W

Mr. Sankalp Kochar and Aman Dawra, learned counsel for the
applicant.
Mr. A. Rajeshwar Rao learned Government Advocate for the
respondent/State.

Present : Atul Sreedharan J.

                               ORDER
(13/05/2021)

            This application has been preferred by the applicant under
section 438
Cr.P.C, in Crime No.95/2020 registered at P.S E.O.W

      Bhopal,   District   Bhopal,       for   offences   under
sections

      420
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
472
,
474
read with
section 120B
of IPC.
2.    The investigating agency is the Economic Offences Wing, Bhopal

      (hereinafter referred to as the "EOW"). The applicant is around

      58 years of age and is stated to be suffering from various medical

      ailments including sleep apnoea.
3.    Briefly, the facts of this case are that one Rabiya Bi, the

      complainant along with others, registered the FIR against the

      applicant and other co-accused persons. The property in question

      is a piece of land admeasuring 93.37 acres situated in Village

      Singarcholi, Bhopal. The owner was one Faiz Mohammad who

      died leaving behind seven legal heirs. They are Mohammad Ayub,
2
Mohammad Yakub, Hanifa Sultan, Asma Sultan, Sikandar Khan,

     Qamar Khan and Anwar Khan. Out of the total area of 93.37

     acres, 54 acres was demarcated for residential purpose while the

     remaining, approximately 39 acres was kept aside for agricultural

     purpose.
4.   With the exception of Mohammad Yakub, the remaining six legal

     heirs of Faiz Mohammad jointly executed a power of attorney

     dated 17/01/1989 and transferred all their rights in the aforesaid

     property to the power of attorney holder Mohammad Sharif (the

     then President of Tilak Grah Nirman Society).           Similarly,

     Mohammad Yakub also executed a power of attorney on

     05/08/1989 transferring all his rights in the aforesaid property

     in favour of power of attorney holder Mohammad Sharif. Thus,

     Mohammad Sharif became the power of attorney holder for six of

     the legal heirs by way of power of attorney dated 17/01/1989 and

     also the power of attorney holder for Mohammad Yakub vide

     power of attorney dated 05/08/1989. On the basis of the

     combined power of attorney given by the six legal heirs,

     Mohammad Sharif sold 34 acres of agricultural land through 12

     registered sale deeds, executed in favour of various individuals

     between 04/02/1989 and 26/06/1989. On the basis of the power

     of attorney executed by Mohammad Yakub, Mohammad Sharif

     sold the remaining agricultural land of five acres and 64 decimals

     to Tilak Grah Nirman Samity vide 11 registered sale deeds and

     the same was executed between 15/11/1994 and 23/11/1994.

     Besides the power of attorney mentioned hereinabove, all the 7

     legal heirs of Faiz Mohammad executed 7 different power of

     attorneys in favour Mohammad Sharif between February and
3
March 1990 vesting the rights of remaining the 54 acres of land

     in favour of Mohammad Sharif, the power of attorney holder.
5.   On the strength of the 7 power of attorneys executed between

     February and March 1990, the remaining land of 54 acres was

     also sold to Tilak Grah Nirman Samiti by 14 registered sale deeds

     executed in the year 1997 and Tilak Grah Nirman Samiti further

     sold the land to 1500 persons.
6.   In the FIR dated 07/02/2020, it has been alleged by the

     complainants that Mohammad Sharif had executed the power of

     attorney dated 17/01/1989 without the knowledge of the 6 legal

     heirs or the ancestor of the complainants and altered the

     remaining paragraphs of the power of attorney and thereby

     committed forgery.
7.   In the FIR, it was also alleged that Mohammad Sharif, in

     connivance with other accused persons, executed various sale

     deeds in favour of his family members and friends between

     04/02/1989 to 26/06/1989. The applicant Zarina Begum was

     one of the beneficiaries. It is for this alleged offence that was

     committed thirty-one years ago, that the applicant is sought to

     be arrested today.
8.
In a connected case arising from the same FIR, being M.Cr.C No.

     26706/2020 (
Colonel Bhupendra Singh Kharayat Vs. State of

     Madhya Pradesh
), this court had granted the benefit of bail to the

     78 year old retired Colonel who was picked up from his home by

     the investigating agency for the same offence for which the

     applicant herein is sought to be apprehended. In that case the
4
Colonel did not even get an opportunity to move either this Court

      of Sessions Court for an anticipatory bail.
While passing that

      order, this court had elaborately discussed the judgement of the

      Supreme Court in
Joginder Kumar versus State of Uttar Pradesh
,

      a landmark judgement of the Supreme Court striking a balance

      between the personal liberty of an accused and the safety of the

      society.
However, the order passed by this court in
Col

      Bhupendra Singh Kharayat
's case, though being available to the

      Ld. Court below it has unfortunately dismissed the application

      for anticipatory bail moved by the applicant only on the basis that

      the investigation was still in progress. Not even fleetingly has the

      learned court below even considered the necessity for a custodial

      interrogation of the applicant for an offence that was committed

      more than three decades ago.
9.    Case after case this court has observed that the District Judiciary

      is extremely tight-fisted when it comes to granting bail.

      Applications are routinely dismissed on cyclostyled grounds that

      the offence alleged is serious or that the investigation is still in

      progress or that the accused may influence the witnesses. Hardly

      ever does the court below examine the requirement for continued

      incarceration of the accused as an under trial, but for the routine

      reasons given above. Resultantly, the High Court suffers a deluge

      of bail cases and its precious time is lost in deciding bail

      applications instead of deciding civil and criminal appeals.
10.   The figures given hereinbelow with regard to the pendency of bail

      applications before the three benches of the High Court and the

      number of Criminal Appeals that have been withdrawn by the
5
appellants (still undergoing their sentence and who have not got

the benefit of suspension of sentence) is anything but desirable.
PENDENCY OF BAIL MATTERS AS ON 19/01/2021

 HEADING        JABALPUR         INDORE     GWALIOR      TOTAL
 U/s. 438          533             177        518         1228
Cr.P.C
U/s. 439           3457          1327        2172        6956
Cr.P.C
U/s. 14(A)         489           103          180         772
 of SC/ST
    Act
   Total            4479          1607        2807        8956
In less than two months, the situation goes from bad to worse.

The figures for pending bail applications in March 2021 is as

herein below.
PENDENCY OF BAIL MATTERS AS ON 12/03/2021

 HEADING        JABALPUR         INDORE     GWALIOR      TOTAL
 U/s. 438          555             251        492         1298
Cr.P.C
U/s. 439           3422          2119        2322        7863
Cr.P.C
U/s. 14(A)         506           142          169         817
 of SC/ST
    Act
   Total            4483          2512        2983        9978
The pressure of the pending bail applications is a major factor

preventing this Court to spare time for deciding criminal appeals

on account of which, several criminal appeals are withdrawn by

the appellants on account of the same being rendered

infructuous with the appellant having served the entire sentence

during the pendency of the appeal          or, in case of life

imprisonment, the State offers remission to the appellants who

have completed fourteen years or more of their sentence, subject

to the withdrawal of the criminal appeal. The chart below shows

the number of criminal appeals withdrawn from the High Court

in the year 2020.
6
CRIMINAL APPEALS WITHDRAWN FROM THE HIGH COURT
      IN THE YEAR 2020

                      BENCH                            NO. OF CASES
Principal Bench at Jabalpur                           44
Bench at Indore                                       32
Bench at Gwalior                                      13
Total                                                 89
The above figures have been received from the Registry of the

      High Court. The huge burden of bail matters that has been

      shifted to the High Court, is on account of the extremely negative

      view that is being adopted by the District Judiciary in bail matters

      for which they can hardly be held responsible on account of

      perception by the judges of the District Judiciary of professional

      hardships they may have to face, if they indeed start deciding bail

      applications applying the principle of "Bail and not Jail". For a

      majority of the Judges of the District Judiciary, it is a catchy

      phrase to be observed in breach rather than in compliance.
11.   The attention of the District Judiciary must also be drawn to the

      overcrowding of jails in the State which is also directly associated

      with the reluctance of the lower courts to grant bail. The inmates

      occupying these jails are far in excess of the optimum capacity of

      these jails. A majority of them are undertrials. Even convicts and

      undertrials are entitled to basic human rights and overcrowded

      prisons with waning resources, result in the violation of that

      right. Convicts serving sentence or undertrials awaiting judgment

      cannot be held in inhuman conditions. The charts below give the

      figures, which paint a very dismal picture. It is almost as if, basic

      human rights are not available to undertrials while judgement

      after judgement laudably mentions that during trial, the

      presumption is of innocence and not of guilt.
7
PRISON INMATES AS ON 30/11/2020

S.No    Type    of    Number    Undergoing     Undertrials     Others    Total
        Jail                    Sentence
1       Central       11        11,182         10,107          96        21,385
        Jails


2       District      41        2290           13,164          47        15,501
        Jails


3       Open          06        2              0               0         2
        Jails


4       Sub-Jails     73        271            7596            3         7870
5       Total         131       13,745         30,867          146
(30.71%)       (68.96%)        (0.33%)
The figures disclose that 68.96% of the prison inmates in the

State are undertrial while convicts constitute 30.71%.
OVER CROWDING OF PRISONS AS ON 30/11/2020

S.No    Type of      Number    Prison      Number       Excess      Percentage of
        Jail                   Capacity    of                       Overcrowding
                                           Prisoners
1       Central      11        14,060      21,385       7325        52.10%
        Jails


2       District     41        9485        15,501       6016        63.43%
        Jails


3       Open         06        94          2            -92
        Jails


4       Sub-         73        5020        7870         2850        56.77%
        Jails


5       Total        131       28,659      44,758       16,099      56.17%
The chart above reveals that the total overcrowding in the four

categories of jails in the State is 56.17%. Even convicts and under

trails are entitled to basic human rights and if the figures are

anything to go by, their condition as on date is no better than
8
livestock, herded together for lack of infrastructure and a "not so

      sensitive" judicial system
12.   The "grundnorm" of bail jurisprudence i.e., "bail and not jail"
[
State of Rajasthan Vs. Balchand
- (1977) 4 SCC 308] appears to

      have been forgotten. Bail should not be denied by the District

      Judiciary only for the purpose of ingratiating the raucous blood

      lust of a society existing on social media, or to pander to public

      perception.
The courts must remember that the presumption is

      always of innocence and that the denial of bail must be for

      exceptional reasons, justifiable on the facts and circumstances of

      the case before it.
13.   This Court feels it essential to refer to the judgement of the

      Supreme Court in
Joginder Kumar
's case where the Supreme

      Court has extensively discussed the power of the police to affect

      an arrest. The Supreme Court refers to the third National Police

      Commission report and extracts therefrom "In India, Third

      Report of the National Police Commission at p. 32 also

      suggested: "An arrest during the investigation of a cognizable

      case may be considered justified in one or other of the

      following circumstances: (i) The case involves a grave offence

      like murder, dacoity, robbery, rape etc., and it is necessary

      to arrest the accused and bring his movements under

      restraint to infuse confidence among the terror-stricken

      victims. (ii) The accused is likely to abscond and evade the

      processes of law. (iii) The accused is given to violent

      behaviour and is likely to commit further offences unless his

      movements are brought under restraint. (iv) The accused is a
9
habitual offender and unless kept in custody he is likely to

         commit similar offences again. It would be desirable to insist

         through departmental instructions that a police officer

         making an arrest should also record in the case diary the

         reasons for making the arrest, thereby clarifying his

         conformity to the specified guidelines ...."1. After reproducing

         the above from the NPC report, the Supreme Court holds "The

         above guidelines are merely the incidents of personal liberty

         guaranteed under the Constitution of India. No arrest can be

         made because it is lawful for the police officer to do so. The

         existence of the power to arrest is one thing. The

         justification for the exercise of it is quite another. The police

         officer must be able to justify the arrest apart from his power

         to do so. Arrest and detention in police lock-up of a person

         can cause incalculable harm to the reputation and self-

         esteem of a person. No arrest can be made in a routine

         manner on a mere allegation of commission of an offence

         made against a person. It would be prudent for a police officer

         in the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of a

         citizen and perhaps in his own interest that no arrest should

         be made without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some

         investigation as to the genuineness and bona fides of a

         complaint and a reasonable belief both as to the person's

         complicity and even so as to the need to effect arrest.

         Denying a person of his liberty is a serious matter.
The

         recommendations of the Police Commission merely reflect

         the constitutional concomitants of the fundamental right to


1
Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P.
, (1994) 4 SCC 260, Paragraph 20.
10
personal liberty and freedom. A person is not liable to arrest

         merely on the suspicion of complicity in an offence. There

         must be some reasonable justification in the opinion of the

         officer effecting the arrest that such arrest is necessary and

         justified. Except in heinous offences, an arrest must be

         avoided if a police officer issues notice to person to attend

         the Station House and not to leave the Station without

         permission would do"2.
14.
In recent times, if there has been a judgement of the Supreme

         Court    which    passionately     desired    the   protection   of   the

         individual's liberty from arbitrary arrest, it is
Arnesh Kumar Vs.

         State of Bihar3
, the Supreme Court scathingly indicted the police

         for still bearing a colonial mindset and disdain for the liberty of

         the citizen. The Supreme Court referred to the power of arrest as

         a "tool of harassment". In paragraph 5 the Supreme Court

         observed "Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and

         casts scars forever. Lawmakers know it so also the police.

         There is a battle between the lawmakers and the police and

         it seems that the police has not learnt its lesson: the lesson

         implicit and embodied in
CrPC
. It has not come out of its

         colonial image despite six decades of Independence, it is

         largely considered as a tool of harassment, oppression and

         surely not considered a friend of public. The need for caution

         in exercising the drastic power of arrest has been emphasised

         time and again by the courts but has not yielded desired

         result.
Power to arrest greatly contributes to its arrogance so


2
Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P.
, (1994) 4 SCC 260, Paragraph 20.
3   (2014) 8 SCC 273.
11
also the failure of the Magistracy to check it. Not only this,

the power of arrest is one of the lucrative sources of police

corruption. The attitude to arrest first and then proceed with

the rest is despicable. It has become a handy tool to the

police officers who lack sensitivity or act with oblique

motive". The Supreme Court went on to hold that a person

accused of an offence punishable with imprisonment up to seven

years, cannot be arrested by the police on          mere prima facie

satisfaction of the person having committed such an offence and

thereafter, adverting to
s. 41 (1) (b) (ii)
clause a to e, laid down the

requirement under the law in the following words.
"7.1. From a plain reading of the aforesaid
      provision, it is evident that a person accused of
      an offence punishable with imprisonment for a
      term which may be less than seven years or which
      may extend to seven years with or without fine,
      cannot be arrested by the police officer only on
      his satisfaction that such person had committed
      the offence punishable as aforesaid. A police
      officer before arrest, in such cases has to be
      further satisfied that such arrest is necessary to
      prevent such person from committing any further
      offence; or for proper investigation of the case; or
      to prevent the accused from causing the evidence
      of the offence to disappear; or tampering with
      such evidence in any manner; or to prevent such
      person from making any inducement, threat or
      promise to a witness so as to dissuade him from
      disclosing such facts to the court or the police
      officer; or unless such accused person is arrested,
      his presence in the court whenever required
      cannot be ensured. These are the conclusions,
      which one may reach based on facts.
12
7.2. The law mandates the police officer to state
             the facts and record the reasons in writing which
             led him to come to a conclusion covered by any of
             the provisions aforesaid, while making such
             arrest. The law further requires the police officers
             to record the reasons in writing for not making
             the arrest

             7.3. In pith and core, the police officer before
             arrest must put a question to himself, why arrest?
             Is it really required? What purpose it will serve?
             What object it will achieve?
It is only after these
             questions are addressed and one or the other
             conditions as enumerated above is satisfied, the
             power of arrest needs to be exercised. In fine,
             before arrest first the police officers should have
             reason to believe on the basis of information and
             material that the accused has committed the
             offence. Apart from this, the police officer has to
             be satisfied further that the arrest is necessary for
             one or the more purposes envisaged by sub-
             clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of
Section 41
CrPC."4

      The Supreme Court, in paragraph 7.3 has reiterated the spirit of
Joginder Kumar Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
, when it says that the

      police officer before effecting an arrest must question himself with

      regard to the necessity of arrest and the objective such an arrest

      seeks to fulfil. In Joginder Kumar, the Supreme Court opined that

      "The existence of the power to arrest is one thing. The justification

      for the exercise of it is quite another. The police officer must be able

      to justify the arrest apart from his power to do so".
Having thus

      illumined the legal position on the power of the police to arrest

      without a warrant in cases punishable with imprisonment up to
4Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar
- (2014) 8 SCC 273, Paragraphs 7.1 to 7.3 at
page 278 to 279.
13
seven years, the Supreme Court went on to lay down the duty of

the Magistrate, to ascertain the necessity for further incarceration

of the accused as an undertrial, in the following words.
"8.1. During the course of investigation of a case,
      an accused can be kept in detention beyond a
      period of 24 hours only when it is authorised by
      the Magistrate in exercise of power under
Section
      167
CrPC. The power to authorise detention is a
      very solemn function. It affects the liberty and
      freedom of citizens and needs to be exercised with
      great care and caution. Our experience tells us
      that it is not exercised with the seriousness it
      deserves. In many of the cases, detention is
      authorised in a routine, casual and cavalier
      manner.
8.2. Before a Magistrate authorises detention
      under
Section 167
CrPC, he has to be first
      satisfied that the arrest made is legal and in
      accordance with law and all the constitutional
      rights of the person arrested are satisfied. If the
      arrest effected by the police officer does not
      satisfy the requirements of
Section 41
of the
      Code, Magistrate is duty-bound not to authorise
      his further detention and release the accused. In
      other words, when an accused is produced before
      the Magistrate, the police officer effecting the
      arrest is required to furnish to the Magistrate, the
      facts, reasons and its conclusions for arrest and
      the Magistrate in turn is to be satisfied that the
      condition precedent for arrest under
Section 41
CrPC has been satisfied and it is only thereafter
      that he will authorise the detention of an accused.
8.3. The Magistrate before authorising detention
      will record his own satisfaction, may be in brief
      but the said satisfaction must reflect from his
      order. It shall never be based upon the ipse dixit
14
of the police officer, for example, in case the
             police officer considers the arrest necessary to
             prevent such person from committing any further
             offence or for proper investigation of the case or
             for preventing an accused from tampering with
             evidence or making inducement, etc. the police
             officer shall furnish to the Magistrate the facts,
             the reasons and materials on the basis of which
             the police officer had reached its conclusion.
             Those shall be perused by the Magistrate while
             authorising the detention and only after recording
             his satisfaction in writing that the Magistrate will
             authorise the detention of the accused.
8.4. In fine, when a suspect is arrested and produced
             before a Magistrate for authorising detention, the
             Magistrate has to address the question whether
             specific reasons have been recorded for arrest and if
             so, prima facie those reasons are relevant, and
             secondly, a reasonable conclusion could at all be
             reached by the police officer that one or the other
             conditions stated above are attracted. To this
             limited extent the Magistrate will make judicial
             scrutiny"5.
15.   After imposing the checks on the power of the police to arrest, the

      Supreme Court, in paragraphs 8.1 to 8.4, diverts its attention to

      the duty of the Magistrate
u/s. 167
Cr.P.C. It emphasises that

      further detention of the accused should not be resorted to in the

      exercise of remand powers, unless warranted. The Supreme

      Court has also given serious consideration to the power of

      remand referring to it as a "solemn function" which must be

      exercised with concern for liberty of the individual and has also
5Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar
- (2014) 8 SCC 273, Paragraphs 8.1 to 8.4 at
page 279 to 280
15
observed that it is presently exercised in a "routine, casual and

         cavalier manner" in some cases.
16.      The Supreme Court, in paragraph 9 of the judgement examines s.
41A
Cr.P.C
in and observes "Another provision i.e.
Section 41-

         A
CrPC aimed to avoid unnecessary arrest or threat of arrest

         looming large on the accused requires to be vitalized ........
The aforesaid provision makes it clear that in all cases where

         the arrest of a person is not required under
Section 41(1)
CrPC, the police officer is required to issue notice directing

         the accused to appear before him at a specified place and

         time. Law obliges such an accused to appear before the police

         officer and it further mandates that if such an accused

         complies with the terms of notice he shall not be arrested,

         unless for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the

         opinion that the arrest is necessary. At this stage also, the

         condition precedent for arrest as envisaged under
Section 41
CrPC has to be complied and shall be subject to the same

         scrutiny by the Magistrate as aforesaid"6. This observation

         reveals the unequivocal premium that the Supreme Court

         attaches to an individual's liberty. It has held that
section 41
of

         the CRPC, prohibits the police from effecting an arrest for an

         offence where the punishment is not more than seven years

         imprisonment except for exceptional reasons to be recorded. It

         has interpreted section 41A CRPC and held that the police shall

         refrain from making an arrest where the accused, in response to

         a notice under section 41A appears before the police and joins



6
Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar
- (2014) 8 SCC 273, Paragraph 9 at page 280
16
the investigation, except in exceptional circumstances to be

      recorded by police.
17.   Thereafter, in paragraph 11 of the judgement, the Supreme Court

      issue directions which is law under
article 141
of the

      Constitution. The same are reproduced hereinbelow.
"11. Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure
           that police officers do not arrest the accused
           unnecessarily and Magistrate do not authorise
           detention casually and mechanically. In order to
           ensure what we have observed above, we give the
           following directions:
11.1. All the State Governments to instruct its
           police officers not to automatically arrest when a
           case under
Section 498-A
IPC is registered but to
           satisfy themselves about the necessity for arrest
           under the parameters laid down above flowing
           from
Section 41
CrPC;
11.2. All police officers be provided with a check
           list   containing   specified   sub-clauses     under
Section 41(1)(b)(ii)
;
11.3. The police officer shall forward the check
           list duly filled and furnish the reasons and
           materials which necessitated the arrest, while
           forwarding/producing the accused before the
           Magistrate for further detention;
           11.4. The Magistrate while authorising detention
           of the accused shall peruse the report furnished
           by the police officer in terms aforesaid and only
           after recording its satisfaction, the Magistrate will
           authorise detention;
11.5. The decision not to arrest an accused, be
           forwarded to the Magistrate within two weeks
           from the date of the institution of the case with a
           copy to the Magistrate which may be extended by
17
the Superintendent of Police of the district for the
             reasons to be recorded in writing;
11.6. Notice of appearance in terms of
Section 41-
A
CrPC
be served on the accused within two weeks
             from the date of institution of the case, which
             may be extended by the Superintendent of Police
             of the district for the reasons to be recorded in
             writing;
11.7. Failure     to   comply     with   the    directions
             aforesaid shall apart from rendering the police
             officers concerned liable for departmental action,
             they shall also be liable to be punished for
             contempt of court to be instituted before the High
             Court having territorial jurisdiction.
11.8. Authorising detention without recording
             reasons as aforesaid by the Judicial Magistrate
             concerned shall be liable for departmental action
             by the appropriate High Court."7
      the directions given by the Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar's

      case are extremely elaborate and has taken into consideration,

      the liberty of the individual accused of offences where the

      punishment is not more than seven years imprisonment.
18.   This judgement was passed by the Supreme Court in the year

      2014. Yet, after the passage of nearly 7 years, the directions

      passed are observed more in breach than in compliance.
In order

      to ensure that the benevolent effect of the judgement is not

      restricted only to those offences arising from matrimonial cases

      u/s. 498-A and
s. 406
IPC, the Supreme Court
laid down in
the

      following words that "We hasten to add that the directions

      aforesaid shall not only apply to the cases under Section 498-
7Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar
- (2014) 8 SCC 273, Paragraph 11 to 11.8 at
page 281
18
A
IPC
or
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in

         hand, but also such cases where offence is punishable with

         imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years

         or which may extend to seven years, whether with or without

         fine"8.
19.      The underlying concern of the Supreme Court regarding the

         approach of the Courts below in bail matters was reflected yet

         again in
Dataram Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and

         Another9
, where a two-judge bench of the Supreme Court, in the

         very first paragraph observed, "......A fundamental postulate of

         criminal jurisprudence is the presumption of innocence,

         meaning thereby that a person is believed to be innocent

         until found guilty. However, there are instances in our

         criminal law where a reverse onus has been placed on an

         accused with regard to some specific offences but that is

         another matter and does not detract from the fundamental

         postulate in respect of other offences. Yet another important

         facet of our criminal jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is

         the general rule and putting a person in jail or in a prison or

         in a correction home (whichever expression one may wish to

         use) is an exception.
Unfortunately, some of these basic

         principles appear to have been lost sight of with the result

         that more and more persons are being incarcerated and for
8
Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar
- (2014) 8 SCC 273, Paragraph 12 at page 281

9   (2018) 3 SCC 22
19
longer periods. This does not do any good to our criminal

      jurisprudence or to our society"10.
20.   More recently, in Arnab Goswami's case, the Supreme Court

      once again focussed its attention on liberty of the individual. The

      Supreme Court emphasised on the role of the District Judiciary

      and the High Court to be more proactive when it comes to dealing

      with cases of personal liberty rather than dealing with it in a

      mundane manner.
Paragraph 70 of the judgement deserves to be

      reproduced in full in which the Supreme Court observes, "More

      than four decades ago, in a celebrated judgment in
State of

      Rajasthan v. Balchand          [State of Rajasthan
v. Balchand,

      (1977) 4 SCC 308 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 594], Krishna Iyer, J.

      pithily reminded us that the basic rule of our criminal justice

      system is "bail, not jail" [ These words of Krishna Iyer, J. are

      not isolated silos in our jurisprudence, but have been

      consistently followed in judgments of this Court for decades.
Some of these judgments are : State of U.P. v. Amarmani

      Tripathi, (2005) 8 SCC 21 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1960 (2)

      and Sanjay Chandra v. CBI, (2012) 1 SCC 40 : (2012) 1 SCC

      (Cri) 26 : (2012) 2 SCC (L&S) 397] . The High Courts and

      courts in the district judiciary of India must enforce this

      principle in practice, and not forego that duty, leaving this

      Court to intervene at all times. We must in particular also

      emphasise the role of the district judiciary, which provides

      the first point of interface to the citizen.
Our district

      judiciary    is   wrongly     referred    to   as   the   "subordinate
10Dataram Singh Vs. State of UP and Another
- (2018) 3 SCC 22, at paragraph 1,
page 22.
20
judiciary". It may be subordinate in hierarchy but it is not

subordinate in terms of its importance in the lives of citizens

or in terms of the duty to render justice to them. High Courts

get burdened when courts of first instance decline to grant

anticipatory bail or bail in deserving cases. This continues in

the Supreme Court as well, when High Courts do not grant

bail or anticipatory bail in cases falling within the parameters

of   the   law.   The    consequence   for   those   who   suffer

incarceration are serious. Common citizens without the

means or resources to move the High Courts or this Court

languish as undertrials. Courts must be alive to the situation

as it prevails on the ground--in the jails and police stations

where human dignity has no protector. As Judges, we would

do well to remind ourselves that it is through the

instrumentality of bail that our criminal justice system's

primordial    interest   in   preserving   the   presumption   of

innocence finds its most eloquent expression. The remedy of

bail is the "solemn expression of the humaneness of the

justice system" [ Arghya Sengupta and Ritvika Sharma,

'Saharashri and the Supremes', (The Wire, 23-6-2015)

available at <https://thewire.in/economy/saharashri-and-

the-supremes>] . Tasked as we are with the primary

responsibility of preserving the liberty of all citizens, we

cannot countenance an approach that has the consequence

of applying this basic rule in an inverted form. We have given

expression to our anguish in a case where a citizen has

approached this Court. We have done so in order to reiterate

principles which must govern countless other faces whose
21
voices should not go unheard"11 (emphasis added). The

      portions bearing added emphasis, reveals the importance given

      by the Supreme Court to the District Judiciary in bail matters. It

      gently disapproves of the District Judiciary being referred to as

      the Subordinate Judiciary and goes on the say that the District

      Judiciary is only administratively subordinate to the High Court

      but on the judicial side, it is just as responsible for upholding the

      liberty of the average citizen as is the High Court and the

      Supreme Court.
21.   It is all very well to reproduce the benevolent observations of the

      Supreme Court in Arnab Goswami's case while glossing over the

      reality that exists on the ground relating to the District Judiciary.

      The District Judiciary is the bulwark against executive excess. It

      is the first line of defence, and for a large number of the citizens,

      perhaps the last. The existence of the rule of law in the state is

      reflected by the responsiveness of the District Judiciary to

      matters relating to personal liberty and freedom of the individual.

      The hesitancy of the District Judiciary to adhere to the rule of

      'bail and not jail' is understandable. There exists a widespread

      fear amongst judges of the District Judiciary that they may be

      questioned by the High Court, or complaints may be preferred

      against them by disgruntled lawyers or litigants whenever they

      pass orders granting bail which in turn, results in a vigilance

      enquiry against them.
11Arnab Manoranjan Goswami Vs. State of Maharashtra
- (2021) 2 SCC 427 -
paragraph 70 at page 473.
22
22.   Whenever a judge of the District Judiciary is proceeded against

      by the vigilance on account of a bail order or an acquittal in a

      high-profile case, it results in a domino effect where other judges

      of the District Judiciary feel intimidated and consider it practical

      to dismiss bail applications and enter convictions and remain

      safe from imputations of dishonesty and the associated enquiry

      that follows it. Even an inquiry by the High Court in which the

      Judge may eventually be exonerated, which may seem innocuous

      for those of us sitting in the High Court, has a debilitating effect

      on the psyche of the Judge in the District Judiciary. The fact that

      there has been an inquiry against a Judge for granting bail or an

      acquittal sees a fall in his image amongst his peers. Resultantly,

      they clam up and refuse bail in even the most trivial of offences.

      The High Court sees numerous cases coming up before it,

      concerned with the minor offences which are triable by the Court

      of the JMFC.
23.   The combined effect of some members of the bar and disgruntled

      litigants, ever ready to complain against judges by anonymous

      communication coupled at times with an overzealous District

      Judge (Vigilance and Inspection), out to prove the worth of his

      existence, whose overbearing presence and attitude of selectively

      examining the orders passed by the Judges of the District

      Judiciary relating to anticipatory bail, regular bail and acquittals

      (especially in those cases relating to heinous offences or cases

      which acquire prominence in the print, electronic and social

      media), has a demoralising effect on the Judges of the District

      Judiciary for whom such action is the proverbial sword of
23
Damocles,    perpetually   hanging   over   their   heads,   always

      threatening to drop.
24.   The office of the District Judge (Vigilance and Training) continues

      to have a debilitating effect on independence and individuality of

      the judges of the District Judiciary. The post is a surplus

      appendage, akin to a vestigial organ in the body of the Judiciary

      in the State of Madhya Pradesh. The post is occupied by a Judge,

      senior enough to occupy the post of the District Judge. His duties

      involve calling at random, the judgements and orders passed by

      the Judges of the District Judiciary and examine them for quality

      and integrity. A position of immense power and influence over

      the Judges of the District Judiciary. As it is, the District Judge

      constantly reviews the work of those under him and gives his or

      her assessment in the ACR's of the Judges who are working under

      him. Sometimes, the post can be occupied by an individual who

      to prove his preeminent importance to the High Court, as a

      conduit of information, can assess the orders of the Judges and

      comment upon the same being passed with a dishonest motive

      only because in his or her opinion, the order is bad in law. This

      demotivates the Judges of the District Judiciary, especially in

      criminal cases from doing justice and may convict in the absence

      or inadequacy of evidence and dismiss bail applications even in

      cases in which were fit to be granted bail. It would not render the

      District Judiciary less efficient if the post is done away for good.

      Instances of judges of the District Judiciary being proceeded

      against by the High Court on the administrative side for

      discretion exercised in bail matters would demoralise others who
24
would consider it safest to dismiss bail applications as proof of

      their integrity.
25.   An adverse report from the District Judge (Vigilance and

      Inspection) can be sufficient to initiate an enquiry by this Court

      against the Judge in question. The post of the District Judge

      (Vigilance and Inspection) is a surplusage with potential to cow

      down Judges of the District Judiciary and gives a sublime

      message to them to dismiss bail applications and enjoy a career

      in the District Judiciary without facing any inquiry. The

      continued existence of the post of District Judge (Vigilance and

      Inspection) is questionable. It belies reason why the orders

      passed by a Judge of the District Judiciary must be scrutinised

      by his peer in a purely administrative capacity, for quality or

      otherwise, when the District Judge scrutinises them every year

      while preparing the ACR of the Judges. Besides, if a party is

      aggrieved by an order, it has the right to challenge the order

      before the Court higher in the judicial hierarchy.
26.   Justice William O. Douglas, a former Judge of the U.S Supreme

      Court, in his dissenting opinion in Stephen S. Chandler V.

      Judicial Council of the Tenth Circuit of the United States

      observed "No matter how strong an individual Judge's spine,

      the threat of punishment - the greatest peril to judicial

      independence - would project as dark a shadow whether cast

      by political strangers or by judicial colleagues. A federal

      Judge must be independent of every other Judge.... Neither

      one alone nor any number banded together can act as censor
25
and place sanctions on him. It is vital to preserve the

      opportunities for judicial individualism"12 (emphasis added).
27.
In
Ramesh Chander Singh Vs. High
Court of Allahabad13, a

      judge of the District Judiciary in Uttar Pradesh was imposed the

      punishment of withholding of two increments with cumulative

      effect and being reduced in rank from Additional District and

      Sessions judge to Civil Judge (Senior Division). His alleged

      misconduct was passing a judicial order granting bail to an

      accused in a double murder case after taking illegal gratification

      from the accused. The Judge who conducted the enquiry against

      the Petitioner in this case disbelieved the allegation of illegal

      gratification and held the same to be not proved. However,

      observations were made that the order was passed with an

      oblique     motive,     insufficient     grounds      and     extraneous

      consideration. The enquiry report does not reveal as to what these

      oblique      motive,     insufficient     ground      and     extraneous

      considerations were. Two other co-accused persons were already

      granted bail by the High Court. He failed before the High Court

      in challenging the decision of the full Court. On appeal to the

      Supreme Court, it was held "........ A Sessions Judge was

      competent to grant bail and if any disciplinary proceedings

      are initiated against the officer for passing such an order, it

      would adversely affect the morale of subordinate judiciary

      and no officer would be able to exercise this power freely and

      independently"14.
The Supreme
Court further held
"This Court


12 Extracted from
C. Ravichandran Iyer Vs. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee
- (1995) 5
SCC 457 at page 469.
13 (
2007) 4 SCC 247
14 Ramesh Chander Singh Vs. High
Court of Allahabad - (2007) 4 SCC 247 -

Paragraph 11 at page 254
26
on several occasions has disapproved the practice of

      initiation of disciplinary proceedings against officers of the

      subordinate judiciary merely because the judgments/orders

      passed by them are wrong. The appellate and revisional

      courts have been established and given powers to set aside

      such orders. The higher courts after hearing the appeal may

      modify or set aside erroneous judgments of the lower courts

      ..."15. Needless to state, the Supreme Court set aside the order of

      the full Court and reinstated the Petitioner on the post of AD&SJ

      with full consequential benefits.
28.   More recently, in
Krishna Prasad Verma Vs. State of Bihar16
, a

      judge of the District Judiciary was proceeded against for

      misconduct. The charge against him was of having granted bail

      to an accused in a case under the NDPS where an earlier

      application of another accused was dismissed by the High Court.

      The other charge against him was having closed the evidence of

      the prosecution and thereby preventing it from producing

      evidence against the accused which led to his acquittal. As

      regards the charge of having overlooked the previous order

      passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court held that it could

      at the most be held as an act of negligence on the part of the

      judge.
As   regards    closing    of   the   prosecution's   evidence

      prematurely, the Supreme Court held from the record of the case

      that the prosecution was granted about 18 opportunities of

      producing the witnesses and it was only thereafter that the




15
Ramesh Chander Singh Vs. High
Court of Allahabad - (2007) 4 SCC 247 -
Paragraph 12 at page 255
16 (2019) 10 SCC 640
27
evidence was closed. The Supreme Court, while setting aside the

      punishment imposed upon the petitioner, underscored the

      importance of the independence of the District Judiciary. In

      paragraph 1, the Supreme Court held "In a country, which

      follows the Rule of Law, independence of the judiciary is

      sacrosanct. There can be no Rule of Law, there can be no

      democracy unless there is a strong, fearless and independent

      judiciary. This independence and fearlessness is not only

      expected at the level of the Superior Courts but also from the

      District Judiciary"17. Emphasizing upon the importance of the

      District Judiciary as the first and perhaps the last resort for a

      large part of our population, which is unable to approach the

      High Court or the Supreme Court on account of their poverty or

      lack of resources, the Supreme Court held "Most litigants only

      come in contact with the District Judiciary. They cannot

      afford to come to the High Court or the Supreme Court. For

      them the last word is the word of the Magistrate or at best

      the Sessions Judge. Therefore, it is equally important, if not

      more important, that the judiciary at the District level and

      at the Taluka level is absolutely honest, fearless and free

      from any pressure and is able to decide cases only on the

      basis of the facts on file, uninfluenced by any pressure from

      any quarters whatsoever"18.
It further held that where the order

      passed by a judge of the District Judiciary is incorrect or against

      the settled law, the same should not lead to administrative action




17
Krishna Prasad Verma Vs. State of Bihar
- (2019) 10 SCC 640 - Paragraph 1 at
page 640
18
Krishna Prasad Verma Vs. State of Bihar
- (2019) 10 SCC 640 - Paragraph 2 at

page 640
28
against Judge, unless from the record of the case and based upon

      evidence, malice, misconduct and corrupt practice is evident.
29.   The importance of having a District Judiciary unfettered and

      fearless cannot be underscored enough. In a state like Madhya

      Pradesh with widespread poverty, illiteracy and lack of resources,

      it is only a free, independent and fearless District Judiciary that

      can ensure that the end user of the justice system is given justice

      at the very first level and does not have to move higher up the

      hierarchy of Courts to get justice.
30.   The court hopes that the High Court may, on the administrative

      side, re-assess the necessity for the post of District Judge

      (vigilance and inspection). The existing system by which

      complaints against judges of the District Judiciary are dealt with

      are adequately sufficient in order to ensure that the demands of

      a person aggrieved by the conduct of a judge is suitably addressed

      and also ensures that the judge of the District Judiciary is

      adequately protected from frivolous complaints from disgruntled

      and maliciously motivated persons.
31.
In order to ensure that the directions passed by the Supreme

      Court in
Arnesh Kumar
's case is scrupulously implemented and

      followed by the police and the Judicial Magistrates in Madhya

      Pradesh, this court considers it essential to pass certain

      directions.
29
DIRECTIONS TO THE POLICE


31.1 where for an offence, the maximum imprisonment provided

     is up to 7 years, the accused shall not be arrested by the

     police as an ordinary course of action. Unless it is a special

     statute mandating such an arrest.
31.2 Before effecting an arrest in such a case, the police would

     have to record its reasons that the arrest was essential to

     prevent such person from committing any further offence, or

     for a proper investigation of the case, or to prevent the

     accused from causing the disappearance of evidence or on

     the basis of credible apprehension that the accused would

     tamper with evidence or prevent a witness from disclosing

     such facts to the court or to the police which thereby

     necessitates the arrest of the accused.
31.3 The State Police is directed to format and prepare a check

     list of pre-conditions fulfilled by the police under
section

     41(1)(b)(ii)
of the Cr.P.C, while arresting an accused for

     offences bearing a maximum punishment up to 7 years. It is

     mandatory to supply a copy of the check list along with the

     remand application, to the Magistrate authorised to further

     remand the accused to police or judicial custody.


31.4 Where decision is taken not to arrest the accused, the police

     shall forward an intimation to the Magistrate within two

     weeks of the registration of the FIR. This period may be

     extended by the Superintendent of Police of the district

     concerned with reasons to be recorded in writing.
30
31.5 Where interrogation of the accused is required, notice in

      terms of
section 41A
Cr.P.C or
s. 160
Cr.P.C be served on the

      accused within two weeks from the date of registration of the

      FIR which may be extended by the Superintendent of Police

      of the district concerned for reasons to be recorded in

      writing.
31.6 Where the police does not arrest the accused and upon notice

      u/s. 41A or 160
Cr.P.C
, the accused appears before the police

      and assists the police in the course of investigation, in such

      a situation, the police are not to arrest the accused unless,

      there exists compelling reasons which must be recorded, as

      given in paragraph 31.2.
31.7 If the police does not perform as required of them as

      hereinabove, it would constitute contempt of the order

      passed by this court in addition to such other action, which

      may be taken against the erring officer on the administrative

      side.
32.   DIRECTIONS TO THE JUDICIAL MAGISTRATES:-
32.1 The Magistrate, while exercising powers of remand, shall

      ascertain if the arrest effected by the police satisfies the

      requirements of section 41 of the CRPC as provided in

      paragraph 11.2 of
Arnesh Kumar
's case (see paragraph 17

      supra).
32.2 The Magistrate shall ascertain the availability of the check

      list as ordered by the Supreme Court in paragraph 11.3 of
Arnesh Kumar
's case.
31
32.3 If there is non-compliance of paragraph 11.2 and/or 11.3 of
Arnesh Kumar
's case, the Magistrate shall not authorise the

      further detention of the accused and shall release forthwith

      as the arrest itself is unlawful and therefore, his detention

      would also be rendered unlawful on account of the police not

      having fulfilled the requirements of section 41 of CRPC.


32.4 It is mandatory for the Magistrate authorising detention to

      record his independent satisfaction and also ensure in his

      order of remand that his satisfaction for further remand of

      the accused stands satisfied in compliance of paragraph 11.4

      of Arnesh Kumar's judgement.
32.5 The Magistrate shall also satisfy himself whether specific

      reasons have been recorded for the arrest of the accused and

      whether those reasons are relevant, raising a reasonable

      conclusion that one of the conditions for further detention

      of the accused as an under trial is satisfied.
32.6 Failure on the part of the Magistrate to perform as directed

      hereinabove, my see the initiation of proceedings against

      such Magistrate on the administrative side.
33.   As regards the grant of bail in offences involving punishment of

      more than seven years imprisonment, there can be no universal

      rule of thumb. It would defeat the very purpose of bail law, if bail

      were to be rejected only on account of the offence being heinous

      in nature. Weather an offence is heinous in nature is a matter of

      perception but, it would be reasonable to include in its ambit and

      scope such offences, which shock the conscience of a reasonable
32
person. Again, bail cannot be denied merely because the

      allegations relate to the commission of a heinous offence. The

      nature of the evidence, the antecedents of the offender, the

      circumstances in which the offence was committed etc., are also

      to be considered. However, what the Courts must consciously

      exclude is the cacophony of hyper opinionated and unmoderated

      voices on social, print and electronic media. Public perception

      must never be a factor while deciding a bail application. At the

      same time, prudent reasons ought to be briefly given to reflect the

      mind of the Court while deciding the application for bail.
34.   While considering an application for bail, the following may be

      kept in mind;
34A. Whether, granting bail to the under-trial would result in him

      attempting to overawe and influence the witness or influence the

      course of investigation, either by threat of dire consequences or

      by monetary inducement?
34B. Whether, the probability of the under-trial, upon his release,

      committing another crime while on bail, would be germane while

      considering grant of bail to recidivists or repeat offenders?

34C. Whether, there is a probability upon the release of the accused

      on bail that he would fall victim of any vengeful action by the

      Complainant?
34D. Whether, the release of the accused on bail would raise a

      reasonable apprehension of breach of peace, and social or civil

      unrest, on account of the nature of the offence alleged against

      him?
33
34E. Whether, the accused would destroy the evidence yet to be

      collected during investigation, upon his release on bail?

34F. Whether, the overwhelming nature of prima facie evidence

      against the accused is such that he may be tempted to abscond

      and evade the process of justice all together if he is enlarged on

      bail?
35.   The above considerations should be applied in a reasonable and

      judicious manner based upon the material on record. They,

      however, must not be applied in a pedantic manner only to deny

      the benefit of bail to the accused. Also, it must be borne in mind

      that the said considerations are not glossed over in order to grant

      the benefit of bail. Whichever way the application is decided,

      unless it is withdrawn, reasons ought to be given to reflect the

      prima facie appreciation of the material for or against the

      accused.
36.   The above notwithstanding, no undertrial ought to be kept in

      judicial custody, inordinately. There may be several factors

      delaying the trial which may not be attributable to the accused.

      The production and examination of prosecution witnesses is

      where the delay is maximum. In such cases, even if there is a

      perceived handicap in releasing the accused on bail, it may still

      be considered by placing stringent condition like higher quantum

      of personal bond and surety, to appearing before the Police

      periodically and registering his presence and in extreme cases,

      even asking the under trial to remove himself from the municipal

      limits of the district where the trial is taking place and the

      witnesses are situated. Of course, no rule of thumb can ever be
34
laid down as an indelible proposition which must be followed in

      every case of bail and the discretion must be left to the Court.
37.   The District Judiciary must create an environment where bail

      applications can be decided at the first tier of the justice system

      itself. There is no legislative provision that mandates the disposal

      of a bail application within a fixed period of time. However, the

      ends of justice do demand that it be so done in the shortest

      possible time. However, it must also be borne in mind that many

      a litigant may not have the wherewithal of approaching the next

      forum available within the shortest possible time. This Court has

      seen applications for bail in offences triable by the Court of

      Magistrate, coming for the first time after the accused has

      completed more than half the period of the total sentence.
38.   Therefore, the District Judiciary must instil confidence in the bar

      and the litigants alike in bail matters. Where, the Court is unable

      to grant bail because the investigation is still in process, the

      applicant can be asked if he wants to withdraw the application

      with liberty to file afresh after the charge sheet is filed. In some

      cases, certain documents may be necessary to effectively decide

      the application, it may be better to adjourn the proceeding giving

      short dates, rather than dismiss the application on merits forcing

      the applicant approach the High Court for bail. In other words,

      the endeavour must be to see that justice is done at the level of

      the District Court itself. The applicant may only be too willing to

      try his luck a second time before the District Courts itself as along

      as his application is not dismissed on merits. Such an option

      must be given to the applicant.
35
39.   The office is requested to send a copy of this order to the

      Director General of Police, who is further requested to

      circulate the same to all the districts and disseminate to the

      lowest functionary, the directions given by this Court in

      paragraph 31.1 to 31.7 are complied with and, if in any case

      where such compliance is found wanting after 01/07/2021,

      this court shall proceed to try the policemen acting in

      violation of this order for contempt of this Court's order.
40.   The office is requested to send a copy of this order to all the

      District Judges, who are further requested to circulate the

      same to all the Judicial Magistrates under them to ensure

      compliance with the directions given by this Court in

      paragraph 32.1 to 32.6 and any case where such compliance

      is found wanting after 01/07/2021, they may be proceeded

      on the administrative side.
41.   On the merits of this case, for what has been discussed and

      observed by this Court herein above, the application is allowed,

      and it is directed that the applicant shall be forthwith enlarged

      on bail upon arrest by the investigating officer, upon furnishing

      a personal bond in the sum of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten

      Thousand only) with one solvent surety in the like amount to the

      satisfaction of the arresting officer.
Certified copy as per rules.
(Atul Sreedharan)
      ss                                             Judge
Digitally signed by SHYAMLEE
SINGH SOLANKI
Date: 2021.05.18 16:53:29 +05'30'
Adobe Reader version: 11.0.8
