Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 1     AIR 1960
Citation: AIR 1960 SC 953
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/59397767/

[Cites
30
, Cited by
6
]
Bombay High Court
Felguera Gruas India Private Limited vs Tuticorin Coal Terminal Private ... on 11 January, 2018
Author:
S.J. Kathawalla
Bench:
S. J. Kathawalla
SSP                                             1                               Arbpl-366 of 2016


             IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                    ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO. 366 OF 2016
Felguera Gruas India Pvt. Ltd.
having its registered office at 10-50-24/A, 3rd floor,
Sravya Manor,Vishakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh-530003
through Mr. Nandan Kumar, Senior Manager (Legal)
and Company Secretary                                              ...Petitioner
             vs.
1.     Tuticorin Coal Terminal Pvt. Ltd.
       having its registered office at #3, C Wing,
       2nd floor
       Amerchand Mansion, 16, Madame Cama Road,
       Colaba, Mumbai-400 039
       also at: 3rd Floor, Manickam Towers,
       Palayam Kottai Road, Tuticorin-628 003
2.     Barclays Bank PLC
       having its Branch Office at 1st floor,
       Eros Corporate Tower, Nehru Place,
       New Delhi-110 019
3.     Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking
       Corporation Limited
       having its branch office at 6-3-1107 & 1108,
       Raj Bhavan
       Road, Somajiguda, Hyderabad-500 082                         ..Respondents



      ::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                       ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
 SSP                                        2                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


                                     ALONG WITH
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO.367 OF 2016
                                        WITH
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO.368 OF 2016
                                        WITH
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO.369 OF 2016
                                        WITH
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO.370 OF 2016
                                        WITH
                   ARBITRATION PETITION (L) NO.371 OF 2016


APPEARANCES
Mr. Darius Khambatta, Senior Advocate, along with Mr. Zal Andhyarujina instructed by
M/s. Res Legal for the Petitioner.
Mr. S.U. Kamdar, Senior Advocate, along with Mr. Chirag Kamdar, Mr. Dharam Juman
instructed by M/s. Argus Partners, for Respondent No.1.


                         CORAM: S. J. KATHAWALLA, J.
                         Judgment reserved on: 12th SEPTEMBER, 2017
                         Judgment pronounced on: 11th JANUARY, 2018
JUDGMENT
1.     The above Arbitration Petitions are filed by the Petitioner Felguera Gruas India

Pvt. Ltd. ("FGIPL") under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(The Act
"), seeking interim injunction against the encashment of the Advance/Down

Payment Bank Guarantees and Performance Bank Guarantees which are furnished by

the FGIPL to the Respondent No.1 - Tuticorin Coal Terminal Pvt. Ltd. ("TCTPL")
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                    ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           3                               Arbpl-366 of 2016


as agreed under the six purchase orders being No. 02 dated 23 rd August 2012; No.03

dated 23rd August 2012; No.1-B dated 28th November 2012; No.1-C dated 28th

November 2012; No.01, dated 23rd August 2012; and No.1-A dated 28th November

2012, placed on FGIPL by TCTPL, pursuant to the Letters of Intent dated 10 th July,

2012 and 1st November, 2012, entered into by FGIPL and TCTPL. The particulars of

the subject Bank Guarantees are set out in the prayer clauses of the above Arbitration

Petitions. Admittedly, the issues involved in all the above six Arbitration Petitions

are similar.
2.     FGIPL is a Company incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Act,

1956
. According to the FGIPL, it is in the business of undertaking turn key projects

across India.      It offers end to end services in design, testing, commissioning,

manufacturing, sourcing, supply and construction and has executed several major

projects in Ports.
3.     TCTPL is a Private Company incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
.             TCTPL ("Concessionaire") entered into a Concession

Agreement dated 11th September, 2010 with the Board of Trustees for Tuticorin Port

(V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust) ("Concessioning Authority") for Development of

North Cargo Berth-II (NCB-II) for handling bulk cargoes at Tuticorin Port on Design,

Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer basis. The Concession Agreement has been

entered for a period of 30 years. Upon completion of the project, ships shall come
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                       4                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


alongside the berth for discharging the cargo. The berth is equipped with ship

unloaders (already commissioned) for discharging the cargo from the ship. The

TCTPL/Concessionaire, shall for a period of 30 years undertake the activity of

discharging the cargo from the ship with the use of cranes, for which TCTPL shall be

entitled to the cargo handling charges levied per metric ton from the users of the

project facilities and services as per the tariff which shall be notified by TAMP from

time to time.
4.     In the year 2012, FGIPL offered its services to TCTPL for supplying as well as

designing, erecting and commissioning of stacker-cum-reclaimers, stacker and

conveyor system. Accordingly, FGIPL and TCTPL entered into a Letter of Intent

dated 10th July, 2012, for supply, design, erection and commissioning of stacker-cum-

reclaimers, pursuant to which TCTPL placed three Purchase Orders ('POs') all

dated 23rd August, 2012, in respect of supply, design, erection and commissioning of

stacker-cum-reclaimers and stacker for the NCB-II project at VOCPT, Tuticorin.

Additionally, TCTPL entered into another Letter of Intent dated 1 st November, 2012,

with FGIPL, pursuant to which TCTPL placed three POs all dated 28 th November,

2012, in respect of supply, design, erection, commissioning and handing over of

conveyor system for the VOCPT Project at Tuticorin.
5.     Therefore the entire contract between FGIPL and TCTPL comprised of the

six POs mentioned hereinabove.          Each PO had a clause for advance payment
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                   ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           5                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


against the submission of the original commercial invoice, advance/down payment,

bank guarantee and performance bank guarantee.           As stipulated, FGIPL issued the

Down Payment Bank Guarantee and Performance Bank Guarantee in favour of

TCTPL in respect of each PO. The Arbitration Agreement between the parties is

contained in
Article 41
of the General Terms and Conditions for procurement of

goods in respect of stacker and stacker-cum-reclaimers.
6.     As set out hereinabove, FGIPL has filed the above Arbitration Petitions under
Section 9
of the Act seeking injunction against TCTPL from invoking any of the

Advance/Down Payment Bank Guarantees or Performance Bank Guarantees

provided by FGIPL in favour of TCTPL.
7.     The first and the main contention of FGIPL is that the subject Bank

Guarantees are conditional. Since the terms of each of the Bank Guarantees are

identical, the relevant clauses of one such Advance/Down Payment Bank Guarantee

are reproduced hereunder :
"1. If the Delivery Obligation is not performed by the Seller in
             accordance with the terms of the PURCHASE ORDER, the
             Guarantor shall, within 7 (seven) days from the receipt of a demand
             by the Purchaser, pay to the Purchaser any sum not exceeding Rs.
             1,70,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore Seventy Lakhs Only) .
2. The obligation of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall be
            unconditional, absolute and irrevocable, irrespective of the
            genuineness, validity, regularity or enforceability of the PURCHASE
            ORDER or any other circumstances which might otherwise constitute a
            legal and/or equitable discharge of a surety or the Guarantor under the
            law relating to sureties. The Guarantor shall not be entitled to dispute
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            6                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


            or inquire into whether the Purchaser has become entitled to claim the
            said amount under the PURCHASE ORDER or not or whether the
            Supplier has committed any breach of the PURCHASE ORDER
            and/or the General Terms and Conditions applicable thereto or not or
            whether the Purchaser is entitled to recover any damages from the
            Supplier for breach thereof or not.
3. The Purchaser need not initiate any proceeding or claim against the
            Seller before lodging any claim under this Guarantee.
            ...
6. The liability of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall be
            primary, direct, and immediate, and not conditional, and/ or
            contingent upon pursuit by the Purchaser of any remedies that it
            may against the Seller and/ or any other person in relation to the
            Purchase Order.
7. The Guarantor hereby expressly waives:
...
D.         Demand for observance, performance and/ or enforcement
            of any terms and / or provisions of this Guarantee and/ or the
            Purchase Orders.
...
15.A demand for payment under this Guarantee shall be deemed to
            have been sufficiently made if a claim in writing is sent by post or hand
            delivered to Guarantor at its office and is received by the Guarantor.
(Emphasis supplied)
8.     The Articles of the Performance Bank Guarantees are identically worded as in

the case of Advance/Down Payment Bank Guarantees, save and accept
Article 1
,

which reads thus :
"1.      If the Delivery Obligation is not performed by the Seller in accordance
      with the terms of the purchase order, the Guarantor shall, within 7 (seven) days
      from the receipt of a demand by the Purchaser, pay to the Purchaser any sum not
      exceeding Rs.1,70,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore Seventy Lakhs Only)" (emphasis
      supplied).
9.     Learned Senior Advocate appearing for the FGIPL in support of his submission

that all the Bank Guarantees are conditional, mainly relied on
Articles 1
and
2
of the
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                         7                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


Advance/Down Payment Bank Guarantees and Performance Bank Guarantee, which

are set out hereinabove and submitted as follows :
(i)      That a plain reading of
Article 1
of the Advance Bank Guarantees shows that

the invocation and obligation of the bank under the Bank Guarantee is dependent and

conditional upon the delivery obligation not being performed by the seller/FGIPL in

accordance with the terms of the purchase order.
(ii)     That from a plain reading of
Article 1
of the Performance Bank Guarantees it is

evident that the payment under the Performance Bank Guarantees by the Bank is

conditional upon the seller's / FGIPL's failure to perform any of its obligations under

the purchase order and/or any breach/violation of the terms of the purchase order by

the seller/FGIPL.
(iii)
Article 2
of both the Advance as well as the Performance Bank Guarantees

makes it clear that it concerns the obligation of the guarantor under the guarantee and

provides that the same shall be "unconditional, absolute and irrevocable ....". This will

be irrespective of (i) the genuineness, validity, regularity or enforceability of the

Purchase Order and (ii) any other circumstance which might otherwise constitute a

legal and/or equitable discharge of a surety or the guarantor. Further the guarantor

shall not be entitled to dispute or enquire into whether the purchaser has become

entitled to claim the said amount under the purchase order etc. with respect to such

obligation.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                   ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           8                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


(iv)    That a conjoint reading of
Articles 1
and
2 (
and the other Articles of the Bank
Guarantees) with a view to avoid any provision of the Bank Guarantees being

rendered otiose, must necessarily proceed on an interpretation that
Article 2
stands

qualified by the conditionality provided for in
Article 1
and that the latter part of
Article 2
qualifies the two grounds mentioned in the earlier part of
Article 2.
Any

other construction would necessarily render
Article 1
otiose.
(v)     that from a perusal of
Article 1
of the Advance Bank Guarantee and the

Performance Bank Guarantee, it is evident that the intention of the parties was to

incorporate the terms and conditions of the relevant purchase orders into the Bank

Guarantees. This is apparent from the language of the Advance Bank Guarantee in so

far as it provides that, "if the delivery obligation" and from the Performance Bank

Guarantee in so far as it provides that, "if the seller fails to perform any of its obligation

under the purchase order breaches or violate any of the terms of the purchase order".
Therefore, by the aforesaid provisions in the Bank Guarantees, the delivery obligation

and the entire terms and conditions of the purchase order have respectively been

incorporated into the Advance Bank Guarantees and Performance Bank Guarantees

and it cannot be argued that there is merely a general reference to the purchase orders

in the Bank Guarantees.
10.     Mr. Khambatta submitted that in the event of this Court reaching a conclusion

that the Articles of the present Bank Guarantees cannot be harmoniously construed
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                       ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          9                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


on well settled principles of construction of commercial documents,
Article 1
will

prevail upon the later Articles and the demand by Respondent No. 1 can be made

only upon the fulfilment of conditions stated therein. This is because (i)
Article 1
is

the earlier clause, and it is well settled in cases of contract that if there is a conflict

between clauses, the earlier clause prevails; (ii)
Article 1
is the clause creating the

liability of the Bank and is the primary clause in the Bank Guarantees. Once the

liability of the Banks is created by
Article 1
in a certain way and with certain

parameters, that liability cannot be altered by subsequent clauses; (iii) the rule of

contra proferentem is also applicable and since the document of Bank Guarantee is

provided by TCTPL, the document must be construed against the maker.
In support

of the above submissions, Mr. Khambatta relied on the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex

Court in the cases of
Saheb Zada Mohammed Kamgar Shah vs. Jagdish Chandra Deo

Dhabal Deb
and others1 and
Radha Sundar Dutta vs. Mohd. Jahadur Rahim
and others2.
11.       Mr.Khambatta further submitted :
(i)       that the present case is for all intents and purposes similar to the case of
Hindustan Construction vs. State of Bihar and others
3 (HCCs case). He submitted that

in both, the Advance Bank Guarantees as well as the Performance Bank Guarantees,

the Bank has qualified its liability to pay the amount covered by the Guarantee by the

conditions stated in
Article 1.
It is only if these conditions are met that the whole of

1     AIR 1960 SC 953
2     AIR 1959 SC 24
3     1999 (8) SCC 436
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                    ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            10                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


the amount under the Bank Guarantee would become payable on demand. That

being so, the Bank Guarantee cannot be said to be unconditional or unequivocal;
(ii)       that it is relevant to note that in fact TCTPL is conscious of the fact that both

the Bank Guarantees were conditional upon the terms and conditions of the purchase

order. Accordingly, TCTPL in its respective Invocation Letters dated 10 th March,

2016, invoking the Advance Bank Guarantee and the Performance Bank Guarantee

have expressly stated that, "the delivery obligation is not performed by the seller" and that

the seller has failed to perform its obligation under the purchase order";
(iii)      That the subject Bank Guarantees does not make the beneficiary (i.e. TCTPL)

the sole Judge of whether the conditions are satisfied.
In this regard, Mr. Khambatta

relied on the decision of this Court in
Western Coal Fields & another vs. Rajesh
and

another4 ;
(iv)       that
Article 1
of the Bank Guarantee would require two conditions to be

satisfied (i) that the Letter Of Invocation         sets out the non-performance of the

Delivery Obligation (Advance Guarantee) or the failure to perform/breach/violation

of the Purchase Order (Performance Guarantee) (ii) that the statement in (i) above is

true and borne out by the facts. Mr. Khambatta relied on the decision of this Court in
Crest Communications Ltd. vs. State Bank of India
5 and submitted that
the said decision
indicates that both requirements have to be satisfied;
4      (2011) 6 All MR 722
5       (2000) 1 All MR 598 (Bombay)
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                      ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                              11                               Arbpl-366 of 2016


(v)      that TCTPL, therefore, deserves to be restrained from invoking the Bank
Guarantees which are conditional and which conditions are not satisfied.
12.      Mr. Kamdar, the               Learned Senior Advocate appearing for TCTPL, in

response, made the following submissions :
(i)      That a plain reading of the terms of the Bank Guarantees makes it clear that

each of the said Bank Guarantees are unconditional, absolute and irrevocable;
(ii)
Article 1
of the Bank Guarantee does not contemplate any condition for

invocation. It only makes a reference to the purchase order.
Article 2
makes it clear

that the Bank Guarantees are unconditional, absolute and irrevocable. Furthermore,

the wordings in
Article 2
of the Bank Guarantee that, "the Guarantor shall not be

entitled to dispute or enquire into whether the purchaser has become entitled to claim the said

amount under the Purchase Order or not or whether the supplier has committed any breach

of the Purchase Order and/or the General Terms and Conditions applicable thereto or not or

whether the purchaser is entitled to recover any damages from the supplier for breach thereof

or not", makes it clear that whether the performance is done by FGIPL or not, cannot

be disputed, questioned or enquired into by the bank and even if any claim is made by

the purchaser/TCTPL, or whether there is any breach or not by the

purchaser/TCTPL, are matters that cannot be looked into by the bank, which is the

counter-party to the Bank Guarantees.
(iii)    that it is trite law that the Bank Guarantees are independent contracts between
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                       ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          12                                Arbpl-366 of 2016
TCTPL and the Issuing Banks. Therefore, the question of enquiry by the counter

party Banks as to whether there is any breach or failure of the FGIPL under the

underlying purchase orders does not arise, particularly in the light of the fact that the

Bank Guarantees are absolute, unconditional and irrevocable, as also the fact that the

decision of TCTPL in that regard cannot be disputed or enquired into by the Bank, or

the decision whether FGIPL has committed a breach under the purchase order cannot

be questioned. In fact, the language of the second part of
Article 2
of the subject Bank

Guarantee makes any decision of TCTPL as regards a breach of performance of the

purchase order by the FGIPL conclusive, final, binding and unquestionable, in so far

as the Bank is concerned;
(iv)    that the contention advanced on behalf of FGIPL that this Court should

interpret the Bank Guarantees in a manner that
Article 2
, being subsequent to
Article

1
and irreconcilable therewith, therefore must give way to
Article 1
, is without merit.
Firstly,
Articles 1
and
2
of the Bank Guarantees are not irreconcilable and can stand

together.
Article 1
must be read harmoniously with the second part of
Article 2
, and

if that is done, it clearly shows that the Bank Guarantees are unconditional, absolute

and irrevocable.        Upon such harmonious reading, even the first part of
Article 2
would stand and no part of any clause of the Bank Guarantees would be required to be

discarded.
Articles 1
and
2
are capable of being harmoniously interpreted and so

long as harmonious interpretation is possible, it is well settled that such principle of

interpretation, including the one suggested by TCTPL should be adopted and any
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          13                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


other principle of interpretation should be resorted to only if it is not possible to

harmoniously interpret the various articles of a contract.
(v)        that a similar issue of interpretation of the terms of a bank guarantee arose

before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Mahatma Gandhi Sahakra Sakkare

Karkhane vs. National Heavy Engg. Corp. Ltd. and another
6 in respect of similar clauses

of a bank guarantee. The relevant clauses of the bank guarantee
in that case
provided

that the bank had undertaken to pay to the purchaser a sum of Rs. 92.40 lakhs upon

the failure of the supplier to conduct the trial test of the sugar plant by 24 th July, 2003

and also upon the failure of the sellers to commission the project (plant and

machinery) before December, 2003. The said clause thus contemplated that the bank

guarantee is payable upon the failure of the trial test and/or failure of commissioning

of the project by the dates specified in the bank guarantee itself. Clause 2 of the bank

guarantee in the said case provided that the bank guarantee was payable on demand

and without demur. It further provided that the purchaser was not required to adopt

any legal remedy that may be available to it and that the purchaser was to be the sole

judge as to whether the bank guarantee had become invocable. In the present case

too,
Article 2
contemplates that the demand made by TCTPL shall not be disputed or

enquired into by the Bank, the Bank also will not be entitled to enquire into whether

the said claim amount under the purchase order has not become payable or that

whether FGIPL has committed any breach of the purchase order. It is therefore


6     (2007) 6 SCC 470
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                       14                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


submitted on behalf of TCTPL that the language of
Article 2
of the subject Bank

Guarantee makes TCTPL the sole judge in determining whether there is breach of

the purchase order and accordingly whether any amount should be claimed under the

Bank Guarantee from the Guarantor i.e. the Bank. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in

its judgment after interpreting the clauses of the bank guarantee therein rejected the

submission that the said bank guarantee was conditional and held that clauses 1 and 2

of the said bank guarantee are capable of harmonious interpretation and no part of the

bank guarantee was to be discarded.
(vi)      that the decision in the case of HCC has been interpreted by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in various subsequent judgments, as set out by this Court in the case

of ITD Cementation Limited vs. Reliance Infrastructure Limited 7            and whilst so

discussing the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of HCC (supra),

this Court had also taken note of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Vinitec Electronics Pvt. Ltd. vs. HCL Infosystems Ltd.
8 where also the decision of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in the HCC (supra) was interpreted and distinguished.
(vii)     that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has in
Mahatma Gandhi
's case (supra) also

dealt with an argument on the basis of the HCC case and distinguished the same in

paragraph 28 of its judgment;
(viii) that the contention of FGIPL that the language of the Bank Guarantees makes

them conditional, ought not to be and should not be accepted because doing so would

7     (2014) 2 Bom CR 1
8     (2008) 1 SCC 544
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                  ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           15                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


make the whole of
Article 2
nugatory and redundant. Such course is not permissible

particularly when harmonious construction of both the Articles is available and the

Court, as a matter of rule, must apply and accept harmonious construction and it is

only when all possibilities of harmonious construction fail, that the Court is entitled

to go to the alternate method of interpretation, which is sought to be argued by the

learned Counsel for FGIPL.
(ix)      that the distinction sought to be made by FGIPL by contending that the

present guarantee does not expressly provide that TCTPL is to be the sole judge as to

whether the Bank Guarantees can be invoked or not, is patently erroneous and

incorrect, since the present guarantee expressly contemplates that any demand made

by TCTPL cannot be disputed or questioned by the Bank and the same is conclusive,

final and binding;
(x)         that the principles laid down in the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

in
Saheb Zada Mohd. Kamgar Shah
(supra) and
Radha Sundar Dutta
(supra) has no

application to the present Petitions as it is TCTPL's submission that harmonious

construction of
Articles 1
and
2
of the Bank Guarantees is possible and permissible.
(xi)       that the decision of this Court in the case of
Western Coalfields Ltd. vs. Rajesh
and another9 runs contrary to the various judgments of this Court as well as the

Hon'ble Supreme Court which make it clear that unconditional bank guarantees

cannot be treated as a contingent contract by referring to or relying upon the terms of


9     (2011) 6 All MR 722
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                      ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                        16                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


the underlying contract.
In any event
,
the said judgment
is considered and dealt with

by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of
S. Satyanarayana & Co. vs. West

Quay Multiport Pvt. Ltd.10
in paragraph 15, and by a learned Single Judge of this Court

in the case of
ANCL & Co. India Ltd. vs. Corporation Bank Ltd.
11, paragraphs 53 and

56;
(xii)     that therefore the contention of FGIPL that
Article 1
overrides
Article 2
of

the Bank Guarantee in the present case cannot be accepted;
(xiii) that the contention of the learned Counsel for FGIPL, as enumerated in

paragraphs 19 and 20 of the written submissions filed by FGIPL, that the satisfaction

must be arrived at, as to whether there is a breach or not, is plainly contrary to the

second part of
Article 2
of the Bank Guarantee and also directly contrary to paragraph

26 of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
BSES Ltd. vs. Fenner

India Ltd.12
;
(xiv) that the question whether FGIPL has performed the obligation under the

purchase order or not, is an issue which has to be decided only at the stage of trial, or

in the present case by the Arbitral Tribunal when the disputes are decided on its own

merits, because it pertains to the dispute with regard to the underlying contract and

not the Bank Guarantee.
In support of this submission, the learned Senior Advocate

for TCTPL relied on the decision of this Court in the case of
ANCL & Co.
(supra).
10 2015 SCC Online Bom 3352
11 2013 SCC Online Bom 78
12 (2006) 2 SCC 728
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                   ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          17                                Arbpl-366 of 2016
13.     On the issue of Bank Guarantee being conditional, Mr. Khambatta, in

rejoinder, made the following submissions on behalf of FGIPL :
(i)     that the judgment of this Court in the case of ITD Cementation Ltd. (supra) is

distinguishable from the present case, inter alia, on account of (i) the mobilisation

advance guarantee in ITDC case did not provide for any incorporation of the

contractual terms into the bank guarantee; (ii) the Bank Guarantees presently in

question      do not      contain clauses in pari materia to clauses 5, 6 and 9 of the

mobilisation advance guarantee in the ITDC case, (iii) the Performance Bank

Guarantee presently in question also materially differs from the Performance Bank

Guarantee in the ITDC case.              Firstly the contractual provisions were not

incorporated into the Bank Guarantee and secondly, clauses in the present Bank

Guarantee are materially different from Clauses 6, 7, 8 and 11 of the Performance

Bank Guarantee in the ITDC case, (iv) that it is based on these distinguishing

features that this Court concluded at paragraph 16 in the ITDC case that, "The

language of the Bank Guarantees therefore leaves no room for doubt that the Bank

Guarantees furnished by the Plaintiff to the Defendant No. 1 are unconditional and

irrevocable, (v) that clearly the judgment in the ITDC case revolved around the

aforesaid peculiar features of the bank guarantees involved               there, which are

distinguishable from the Bank Guarantees in the present case;
(ii)      Relying on clauses 16, 17 and 18 in the case of
Mahatma Gandhi Sahakra

Sakkare Karkhane
(supra) it was submitted on behalf of FGIPL that the judgment of
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          18                                Arbpl-366 of 2016


the Supreme Court
in that case
is entirely distinguishable for the following reasons:
(iii)      The terms and conditions of the contract
in that case
were not incorporated

into the bank guarantee as they are in the present case;
(iv)       A plain reading of the clauses provided that the sole discretion as to whether

the amount of the Bank Guarantee had become recoverable was conferred upon the

purchasers. There is no such provision in the Bank Guarantees in the present case;
(v)         The Hon'ble Supreme Court expressly found in para 19 that on a true

construction of the Bank Guarantee, the guarantor had essentially agreed that the

purchasers alone shall be the sole judge in the matter as to whether the amount of the

Bank Guarantee has become recoverable from the sellers or whether the seller had

committed any breach of the terms and conditions of the agreement. In the case of

the present Bank Guarantee, there is no such provision and that the present Bank

Guarantees can be invoked only in the circumstances referred under their
Article 1.
(vi)     That the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in
S. Satyanarayana &

Co.
(supra) and of the learned Single Judge in
ANCL & Co. India Ltd.
(supra),

neither overrules nor in any manner conveys that the decision of the Learned Single

Judge of this Court in
Western Coal Fields & another
(supra) is incorrect. Though the

Learned Senior Advocate for TCTPL has submitted that
the said judgment
runs

contrary to the various judgments of this Court, as well as the Hon'ble Supreme

Court, no such judgment is relied upon in support of this contention.
(vii)    That it is therefore reiterated that the subject Bank Guarantees are conditional
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                    ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          19                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016
and TCTPL cannot be allowed to invoke the same except in the circumstances

referred to under
Article 1.
14.    I have considered the oral as well as the written submissions on behalf of

FGIPL and TCTPL. I have also considered the case laws relied upon by them.
15.    As set out earlier, it is submitted on behalf of FGIPL that the Bank Guarantees

are conditional, whereas on behalf of TCTPL it is contended                    that the Bank

Guarantees are absolute, unconditional and irrevocable.
16.    As set out earlier, except
Article 1
of the Advance Bank Guarantees and
Article

1
of the Performance Bank Guarantees, the terms of each of the Bank Guarantees are

identical.
Article 1
of the Advance Bank Guarantee provides that, "if the delivery

obligation is not performed by the seller in accordance with the terms of the purchase order,

the guarantor shall within seven days from the receipt of a demand by the purchaser pay to

the purchaser any sum not exceeding Rs.1,70,00,000/-" and
Article 1
of the Performance

Guarantee provides that, "if the seller either fails to perform any of its obligations under

the purchase order or breaches/violates any of the terms         of the purchase order, the

Guarantor shall, within 7 working days from the date of receipt of a written demand from

the Purchaser pay to the Purchaser any sum not exceeding Rs. 85,00,000/-". However, a

mere reading of
Article 1
of the said Bank Guarantees in isolation is not enough to

hold as submitted by Mr. Khambatta on behalf of FGIPL, that the subject Bank

Guarantees are conditional ; that the intention of the parties was to incorporate the
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                        20                                Arbpl-366 of 2016


entire terms and conditions of the purchase orders in the Advance/Down Payment

and Performance Bank Guarantees ; that the Advance Bank Guarantees could be

invoked and the bank is obliged to pay upon such invocation, only upon being satisfied

that the delivery obligation was not performed by the seller/FGIPL in accordance

with the terms of the purchase order ; and the Performance Bank Guarantee could be

invoked and the bank is obliged to pay upon such invocation, only upon being satisfied

that the seller/FGIPL failed to perform any of its obligations under the purchase order

and/or any breach/violation of the terms of the purchase order by the seller/FGIPL.
17.     A conjoint reading inter-alia of
Articles 1
, 2
, 3
, 6
, 7D and
15
is relevant for

arriving at a decision as to whether the Bank Guarantees are conditional or

unconditional.
Article 2
of the Bank Guarantee provides :
(i)     That the obligation of the Guarantor Bank under the Guarantee shall be

unconditional, absolute and irrevocable, irrespective of the genuineness, validity,

regularity or enforceability of the purchase order or any other circumstances which

might otherwise constitute a legal and/or equitable discharge of a surety, or the

Guarantor under the law relating to sureties ;
(ii)    That the Guarantor Bank shall not be entitled to dispute or inquire into:
Whether the Purchaser / TCTPL has become entitled to claim the said amount under

the purchase order or not, or;
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                   ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                         21                                Arbpl-366 of 2016


         Whether the supplier / FGIPL has committed any breach of the purchase

order and/or the general terms and conditions applicable thereto or not , or;
Whether the Purchaser / TCTPL is entitled to recover any damages from the

Supplier / FGIPL for breach thereof or not.
Article 3
of the Bank Guarantee provides that the purchaser / TCTPL need not

initiate any proceeding or claim against the seller / FGIPL before lodging any claim

under the Guarantee.
Article 6
provides that the liability of the Guarantor/Bank under the Guarantee

shall be primary, direct and immediate, and not conditional and/or contingent upon

pursuit by the purchaser / TCTPL of any remedies that it may have against the

seller / FGIPL and/or any other person in relation to the purchase order.
Clause (D) of
Article 7
expressly waives demand for observance, performance

and/or enforcement of any terms and/or provisions of the guarantee and/or purchase

order.
Article 15
of the Bank Guarantee makes it clear that a demand for payment

under the guarantee shall be deemed to have been sufficiently made if a claim in

writing is sent by post or hand delivered to the Guarantor/Bank at its office and is

received by the guarantor.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                        22                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


       It is therefore clear that
Article 1
of the Advance Bank Guarantee as well as the

Performance Bank Guarantee have only made a general reference to the purchase

order and generally set out that if the delivery obligation is not performed by the

seller/FGIPL in accordance with the terms of the purchase order, or if the seller fails

to perform any of its obligation/s under the purchase order, or breaches or violates

any of the terms of the purchase order, the guarantor bank shall within seven days

from receipt of the demand from the purchaser make payment to TCTPL in a sum

not exceeding the amount for which the Bank Guarantee is provided. After the above

general reference to the purchase orders in
Article 1
, the subsequent Articles have

made it clear that the Bank Guarantees are absolute and unconditional by a clear

assertion that the bank shall not be entitled to dispute or inquire into whether

TCTPL has become entitled to claim the guaranteed amount under the purchase

order or not ; or whether FGIPL has committed any breach of purchase order and/or

general terms and conditions applicable thereto or not ; or whether TCTPL is entitled

to recover any damages from the Supplier/FGIPL for breach thereof or not. It is

further clearly asserted in
Articles 3
, 6
, 7(D)
and
15
of the Bank Guarantees that

TCTPL need not initiate any proceeding or claim against FGIPL before lodging any

claim under the guarantee; that the liability of the Guarantor/Bank under the

Guarantees shall be primary, direct and immediate, and not conditional and/or

contingent upon pursuit by the purchaser/TCTPL of any remedies that it may have

against the seller/FGIPL and/or any other person in relation to the purchase order ;
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           23                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


that the demand for observance, performance and/or enforcement of any terms

and/or provisions of the guarantees and/or purchase order is expressly waived ; and

that a demand for payment under the guarantees shall be deemed to have been

sufficiently made if a claim in writing is sent by post or hand delivered to the

Guarantor/Bank at its office and is received by the guarantor. It is required to be

made clear that only because TCTPL has in its invocation letters stated that, "the

delivery obligation is not performed by the seller" and that "the seller has failed to perform

its obligation/s under the purchase order", the submission of FGIPL that TCTPL is

conscious of the fact that the Bank Guarantees are conditional, cannot be accepted.
18.    Mr. Khambatta, as set out hereinabove, has submitted that the subject Bank

Guarantees do not make the beneficiary i.e. TCTPL the sole Judge of whether the

conditions for invoking the Bank Guarantees are satisfied. I am not in agreement with

the submissions made by Mr. Khambatta, since I am of the view that the language of
Article 2
i.e. "the Guarantor (Bank) shall not be entitled to dispute or inquire into whether

the purchaser (TCTPL) has become entitled to claim the said amount under the purchase

order or not or whether the supplier (FGIPL) has committed any breach of the purchase order

and/or the general conditions applicable thereto or not or whether the purchaser (TCTPL) is

entitled to recover any damages from the supplier (FGIPL) for breach thereof or not", clearly

establishes that the Purchaser/TCTPL is the sole Judge to decide as to whether the

conditions for invoking the bank guarantees are satisfied. It is not necessary that the

party invoking a bank guarantee cannot be treated as the sole Judge to decide whether
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           24                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


the conditions for invoking the bank guarantees are satisfied, unless the words 'sole

Judge' are found in the Bank Guarantee.
19.    As pointed out by Mr. Kamdar, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for

TCTPL, a similar issue of interpretation of the terms of Bank Guarantee had arisen

before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of
Mahatma Gandhi
(supra)

in respect of similar clauses of a Bank Guarantee. The relevant portion of the Bank

Guarantee
in that case
was reproduced by the Honble Supreme Court in paragraph 17

of its judgment which is reproduced hereunder:
"17. The relevant portion of the bank guarantee is extracted herein below:
"1. In consideration of the above premises, the Guarantor hereby
          undertakes to pay to the purchasers within 30 days of demand, without
          demur such a sum not exceeding Rs. 92,40,000/- (Rupees Ninety two
          lakhs forty thousand only), representing 3% of the contract price as the
          purchasers may demand upon the failure of the supplier to conduct the
          trial test of the sugar plant by 24th July, 2003 and also upon the failure
          of the sellers to commission the Project (Plant and Machinery) before
          December 2003.
2. The Guarantor shall pay to the purchasers on demand the sum without
          demur and without requiring the purchasers to invoke any legal remedy
          that may be available to them, it being understood and agreed FIRSTLY
          that the purchasers shall be the sole judge of and as to whether the amount
          of bank guarantee has become recoverable from the sellers or whether the
          sellers have committed any breach(es) of the terms and conditions of the
          said agreement and the extent of losses, damages, costs, charges and
          expenses caused to or suffered by or that may be caused to or suffered by
          purchaser's from time to time shall be final and binding to the Guarantor
          and SECONDLY that the right of the purchasers to recover from the
          guarantor any amount due to the purchasers under this guarantee shall
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                             25                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


          not be affected or suspended by reasons of the fact that any dispute or
          disputes have been raised by the sellers with regard to their liability or that
          proceedings are pending before any tribunal/ arbitrator(s) or court with
          regard thereto or in connection therewith and THIRDLY that the
          guarantor shall immediately pay the aforesaid guaranteed amount to the
          purchasers on demand and it shall not be open to the Guarantor to know
          the reasons of or to investigate or to go into the merits of the demands or to
          question or challenge the demand or to know any facts affecting the
          demand, and LASTLY that it shall not be open to the guarantor to
          require the proof of the liability of the sellers to pay the amount, before
          paying the sum demanded under Clause 1 above.
*                      *                       *
8. The invocation of this guarantee shall be by a letter as herein, signed by
         the purchasers and countersigned by the Commissioner of Sugar,
         Bangalore, Karnataka State.                           (emphasis supplied)

From the above Articles of the Bank Guarantee it becomes clear that
Article 1
of the

Bank Guarantee
in that case
provided that the Bank had undertaken to pay to the

purchaser a sum of Rs. 92.40 lakhs upon the failure of the supplier to conduct the trial

test of the sugar plant by 24 th July 2003 and also upon the failure of the sellers to

commission the project (Plant and Machinery) before December 2003. The aforesaid

clause thus contemplated that the Bank Guarantee is payable upon the failure of the

trial test and/or failure of commissioning of the project by the dates specified in the

Bank Guarantee itself.
Clause 2 of the bank guarantee in the
Mahatma Gandhi
case (supra) was in

terms similar to Clause 2 of the subject Bank Guarantees in the captioned Petitions.
Clause 2 of the said Bank Guarantee provided that the bank guarantee was payable on

demand and without demur. It further provided that the purchaser was not required
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                           ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                         26                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


to adopt any legal remedy that may be available to it and that the purchaser was to be

the sole judge as to whether the Bank Guarantee had become invokable. In the present

case also, Clause 2 contemplates that the demand by the Respondent shall not be

disputed or enquired into by the Bank, the Bank also will not be entitled to enquire

into whether the said claim amount under the purchase order has become payable, or

whether FGIPL has committed any breach of the Purchase Order. In fact, it is this

language of Clause 2 which makes TCTPL the sole judge in determining whether

there is a breach of the Purchase Order and therefore, whether any amount should be

claimed under the Bank Guarantee from the guarantor i.e. the Bank.
20.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Mahatma Gandhi
(supra) rejected

the argument that the Bank Guarantee therein was conditional and held that clauses 1

and 2 of the said Bank Guarantee are capable of harmonious interpretation and no part

of the Bank Guarantee was to be discarded. While arriving at the aforesaid finding the

Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:
"18.     A plain reading of Clauses (1) and (2) of the bank guarantee makes it
      abundantly clear that the guarantor had undertaken to pay to the appellant
      within 30 days of demand, without demur such an amount not exceeding
      Rs.92.40 lakhs. The sole discretion is conferred on the purchasers as to
      whether the amount of bank guarantee has become recoverable from the
      sellers or whether the sellers have committed any breach of the terms and
      conditions of the said agreement. The right of the purchaser to recover
      from the guarantor the guaranteed amount shall not be affected or
      suspended by the reasons of the fact that any dispute or disputes have been
      raised by the sellers with regard to their liability or that the proceedings
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                      ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          27                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


      are pending before any tribunal or court with regard thereto or in
      connection therewith.
19.       However, Shri Jayant Bhushan, learned senior counsel submitted
      that the purchasers were entitled to invoke the bank guarantee and
      demand the payment of money only upon the failure of the supplier to
      conduct the trial test of the sugar plant by 24 th July, 2003 and also upon
      the failure of the sellers to commission the project before December, 2003.
      This condition forms an integral part of the bank guarantee was the
      submission. We find it difficult to accept the submission. The guarantee
      executed by the guarantor (PNB) in favour of the purchaser (appellant)
      cannot be dissected in the manner suggested by the learned senior counsel
      for the respondent. Clauses 1 and 2 of the guarantee executed by the
      banker in favour of the purchaser are required to be read together. The
      respondent cannot be allowed to contend that there is a dispute as to
      whether it had failed to conduct the trial test of the sugar plant by
      24th July, 2003 and therefore bank guarantee cannot be invoked. The
      acceptance of the argument would make Clause 2 of the bank guarantee
      totally meaningless and inoperative. The guarantor essentially agreed that
      the purchasers alone shall be the sole judge in the matter as to whether the
      amount of bank guarantee has become recoverable from the sellers or whether the
      seller had committed any breach of the terms and conditions of the agreement.
      The dispute, if any, between the parties with regard to the liability in any
      proceedings either before the arbitral tribunal or court in no manner affects the
      right of the purchaser to invoke the bank guarantee and realise the guaranteed
      sum from the guarantor.(Emphasis supplied)
21.    FGIPL has relied on an earlier decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

case of HCC (supra). The facts of that case and the contents/language of the Bank

Guarantee therein are very different from that in the present case. In that case clause

9 of the Principal Agreement reads thus:
"9. ADVANCE MOBILIZATION LOAN:
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          28                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


         The Employer, will make an advance loan to the Contractor at 13 per cent
         simple interest per annum for the costs of mobilization in respect of the
         works in a lump sum amount equivalent upto 15 per cent of the Contract
         Price named in the Letter of Acceptance, payable in the proportionate
         amounts of foreign and local currencies as provided for in the Contract.
         Payment of the loan will be due under separate certification by the
         Engineer after (i) execution of the Form of Agreement by the parties
         thereto, (ii) Provision by the Contract of the Performance security in
         accordance with Clause 5, and (iii) provision by the Contractor of a Bank
         Guarantee by a Bank acceptable to the Employer in an amount equal to the
         advance loan, such Bank Guarantee to remain effective until the advance
         loan has been completely repaid by the Contractor out of current earnings
         under the Contract and certified accordingly by the Engineer. A form of
         bank guarantee acceptable to the Employer is indicated in
Section 9
.
         Annex. B. The advance loan shall be used by the contractor exclusively for
         mobilization expenditures, including the acquisition of Constructional
         Plant, in connection with the works. Should the Contractor misappropriate
         any portion of the advance loan, it shall become due and payable
         immediately, and no further loan will be made to the Contractor
         thereafter. The advance mobilization loan, shall be paid within 15 days of
         the date of certification."
The Bank Guarantee furnished by Hindustan Construction Company provided as
under:
"... ... ...In accordance with the provisions of the Conditions of
          Contract, Clause 9 (Advance Mobilisation Loan) of the above-
          mentioned contract, the Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd.,
          incorporated in Bombay under the
Companies Act, 1956
, and having
          their registered officer at Construction House, Walchand Hirachand
          Marg, Ballard Estate, Bombay-400 038 (hereinafter called 'the
          Contractor') shall deposit with the Executive Engineer, Kharkai Dam
          Division II, Icha, Chaliama, Post Kesargarhia, Dist. Singhbhum,
          Bihar, a bank guarantee to guarantee their proper and faithful
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            29                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


           performance under the said clause of the contract in an amount of Rs.
           10,00,000 (Rupees Ten lakhs only).
We, the State Bank of India, incorporated under
State Bank of India Act, 1955
,
      and having one of our branches at Nyayamurti C.N. Vaidya Marg, Fort,
      Bombay-400 023 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Bank'), as instructed by the
      Contractor, agree unconditionally and irrevocably to guarantee as primary
      obligator and not as Surety merely, the payment of the Executive Engineer,
      Kharkai Dam Division II, Icha, Chaliama, Post Kesargarhia, Dist. Singhbhum,
      Bihar, on his first demand without whatsoever right of objection on our part and
      without his first claim to the contractor, in the amount not exceeding Rs.
      10,00,000 (Rupees Ten lakhs only) in the event that the obligations expressed
      in the said clause of the abovementioned contract have not been fulfilled by
      the contractor giving the right of claim to the employer for recovery of the
      whole or part of the Advance Mobilisation Loan from the contractor under
      the contract. (emphasis supplied)

      We further agree that no change or addition to or other modification of the terms of
      the contract or of works to be performed thereunder or of any of the contract
      documents which may be made between the Executive Engineer, Kharkai Dam
      Division II, Icha, Chaliama, Post Kesargarhia, Dist. Singhbhum, Bihar, and the
      contractor, shall in any way release us from any liability under this guarantee, and
      we hereby waive notice of any such change, addition or modification"
22.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court, whilst interpreting the said Guarantee held that

the Bank Guarantee was conditional by observing in paragraphs 13 and 14 of its Order

as follows:
"12. Where the Bank, in the above Guarantee, no doubt, has used the
          expression "agree unconditionally and irrevocably" to guarantee payment
          to the Executive Engineer on his first demand without any right of
          objection, but these expressions are immediately qualified by following:
...in the event that the obligations expressed in the said
                clause of the abovementioned contract have not been
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                         30                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


               fulfilled by the contractor giving the right of claim to the
               employer for recovery of the whole or part of the Advance
               Mobilisation Loan from the contractor under the contract.
13. This condition clearly refers to the original contract between the
         HCCL and the defendants and postulates that if the obligations,
         expressed in the contract, are not fulfilled by HCCL giving to the
         defendants the right to claim recovery of the whole or part of the
         "Advance Mobilisation Loan", then the Bank would pay the amount
         due under the Guarantee to the Executive Engineer. By referring
         specifically to Clause 9, the Bank has qualified its liability to pay the
         amount covered by the Guarantee relating to "Advance Mobilisation
         Loan" to the Executive Engineer only if the obligations under the
         contract were not fulfilled by HCCL or the HCCL has
         misappropriated any portion of the "Advance Mobilisation Loan". It
         is in these circumstances that the aforesaid clause would operate and
         the whole of the amount covered by the "Mobilisation Advance"
would become payable on demand. The Bank Guarantee thus could
         be invoked only in the circumstances referred to in Clause 9
         whereunder the amount would become payable only if the obligations
         are not fulfilled or there is misappropriation. That being so, the
         Bank Guarantee could not be said to be unconditional or
         unequivocal in terms so that the defendants could be said to have had
         an unfettered right to invoke that Guarantee and demand immediate
         payment thereof from the Bank. This aspect of the matter was wholly
         ignored by the High Court and it unnecessarily interfered with the
         order of injunction, granted by the Single Judge, by which the
         defendants were restrained from invoking the Bank Guarantee.
         (emphasis supplied)



Therefore, in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the HCC's Case and the

language of the bank guarantee therein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that case held

that the bank guarantee therein was conditional. The contents of none of the Articles
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                       ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                             31                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


found in the subject Bank Guarantees, i.e.
Articles 2
, 3
, 6
, 7(D)
and
15
are found in the

HCC's Case and therefore the decision in that case will not apply to the present case.
23.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Mahatma Gandhi
's case (supra) has also dealt

with a similar argument based on the decision in
Hindustan Construction
's case (supra)

and has distinguished the same in paragraph 28, which is reproduced as hereunder:
"28. The learned counsel in support of his submission relied upon the
          decision of this Court in
Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. Vs. State of
          Bihar & Ors.
[ (1999) 8 SCC 436].
This Court in
Hindustan
          Construction Co.
(supra) having referred to the terms of clause (9) of
          principal contract between the parties therein came to the conclusion that
          the bank guarantee specifically refers to the original contract and
          postulates that the obligations expressed in the contract, are not fulfilled by
          HCCL, the right to claim recovery of the whole or part of the "advance
          mobilisation" then alone the bank was liable to pay the amount due under
          the guarantee to the Executive Engineer. The court found that the bank
          guarantee specifically refers to clause (9) of the principal agreement and it
          is under those circumstances came to the conclusion that the amount
          covered by the bank guarantee becomes payable and the same could be
          invoked only in the circumstances referred to in clause (9) of the principal
          agreement. The bank guarantee executed by the bank in the instant case in
          favour of the appellant herein does not contain any such clause. Mere fact
          that the bank guarantee refers to the principal agreement without referring
          to any specific clause in the preamble of the deed of guarantee does not
          make the guarantee furnished by the bank to be a conditional one. In the
          very said judgment this Court observed that "what is important, therefore,
          is that the bank guarantee should be in unequivocal terms, unconditional
          and recite that the amount would be paid without demur or objection and
          irrespective of any dispute that might have cropped up or might have been
          pending between the beneficiary under the bank guarantee or the person on
          whose behalf the guarantee was furnished. The terms of the bank
          guarantee are, therefore, extremely material. Since the bank guarantee
          represents an independent contract between the bank and the beneficiary,
          both the parties would be bound by the terms thereof. The invocation,
          therefore, will have to be in accordance with the terms of the bank
          guarantee, or else, the invocation itself would be bad."
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                           ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           32                              Arbpl-366 of 2016
24.    I am therefore, of the view that
Articles 1
and
2
of the subject Bank Guarantees

and the other Articles set out hereinabove can be harmoniously construed, and since I

do not find any conflict between
Articles 1
and
2
of the subject Bank Guarantees

and/or any other Article/s of the subject Bank Guarantees, I hereby hold that the

Bank Guarantees in question are absolute and unconditional. The submissions made

on behalf of FGIPL in support of their contention that the Bank Guarantees are

conditional, therefore cannot be accepted and the case laws relied upon by them do

not assist them. The distinction sought to be made by them, with regard to the case

laws relied upon by TCTPL, also cannot be accepted. The principles
laid down by
the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Saheb Zada Mohd. Kamgar Shah
(supra) and
Radha Sundar Dutta
(supra) also do not assist FGIPL. Since I am of the view that

there is no ambiguity qua the construction of the Bank Guarantees, the question of

applying the contra proferentum rule also does not arise.
25.    The next submission advanced by Mr. Khambatta on behalf of FGIPL is that

the conditions for invocation of the Bank Guarantees in question are not satisfied. In

support of this contention           Mr. Khambatta has relied on the correspondence

exchanged between FGIPL and TCTPL and has submitted that the said

correspondence shows that the work could not be completed till the scheduled

commissioning date only on account of the reasons attributable to TCTPL.                   Mr.

Khambatta has also submitted that the submission of TCTPL that the

correspondence between the parties were without prejudice as it was in the nature of
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           33                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


settlement, is also liable to be rejected. Since for reasons set out hereinabove, I have

already held that the Bank Guarantees are unconditional Bank Guarantees, the

question of 'the conditions for invocation of the Bank Guarantees in question' not

being satisfied, does not arise and the question of looking into the correspondence

relied upon by Mr. Khambatta in support of the above submission does not arise.
26.    It is settled law that a bank guarantee is an independent contract and a

challenge to the invocation/encashment of an irrevocable and unconditional bank

guarantee has to be considered without any reference to the underlying or main

contract or to the disputes/claims thereunder. However, the two exceptions which

have been carved out by several decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court under which

the invocation/encashment of such Bank Guarantee/s could be restrained are fraud

and irretrievable injury. FGIPL has averred in the Petitions that the invocation of the

Bank Guarantees would be fraudulent, more so because TCTPL has not challenged

the suspension of the works by FGIPL. It is trite law that a Court can restrain

encashment of bank guarantee in cases of established fraud in issuance of the bank

guarantee. The fraud has to be absolute and egregious, vitiating the very foundation of

the bank guarantee.         The Hon'ble Supreme Court has in its decision in
U.P. State

Sugar Corporation vs. Sumac International Ltd.13
(supra) held as follows:
"12. ....... When in the course of commercial dealings an unconditional
         bank guarantee is given or accepted, the beneficiary is entitled to realize
         such a bank guarantee in terms thereof irrespective of any pending

13 (1997) 1 SCC 568
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            34                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


         disputes. The bank giving such a guarantee is bound to honour it as per its
         terms irrespective of any dispute raised by its customer. The very purpose of
         giving such a bank guarantee would otherwise be defeated. The courts
         should, therefore, be slow in granting an injunction to restrain the
         realization of such a bank guarantee. The courts have carved out only two
         exceptions. A fraud in connection with such a bank guarantee would
         vitiate the very foundation of such a bank guarantee. Hence if there is such
         a fraud of which the beneficiary seeks to take advantage, he can be
         restrained from doing so. .... ...... ..... ...... In the case of
U.P.
         Cooperative Federation Ltd. v. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P)
         Ltd.
(1988 [1] SCC 174), which was the case of works contract where the
         performance guarantee given under the contract was sought to be invoked,
         this Court, after referring extensively to English and Indian cases on the
         subject, said that the guarantee must be honoured in accordance with its
         terms. The bank which gives the guarantee is not concerned in the least
         with the relations between the supplier and the customer; nor with the
         question whether the supplier has performed his contractual obligation or
         not, nor with the question whether the supplier is in default or not. The
         bank must pay according to the tenor of its guarantee on demand without
         proof or condition. There are only two exceptions to this rule. The first
         exception is a case when there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice.
         The fraud must be of an egregious nature such as to vitiate the entire
         underlying transaction.
Explaining the kind of fraud that may absolve a
         bank from honouring its guarantee, this Court in the above case quoted
         with approval the observations of Sir John Donaldson, M.R. in Bolivinter
         Oil SA v. Chase Manhattan Bank NA (1984 [1] AER 351 (All ER at p.
352) : (at SCC p.197)
          "The wholly exceptional case where an injunction may be granted is where
         it is proved that the bank knows that any demand for payment already
         made or which may thereafter be made will clearly be fraudulent. But the
         evidence must be clear both as to the fact of fraud and as to the bank's
         knowledge. It would certainly not normally be sufficient that this rests on
         the uncorroborated statement of the customer, for irreparable damage can
         be done to a bank's credit in the relatively brief time which must elapse
         between the granting of such an injunction and an application by the bank
         to have it charged".
This Court set aside an injunction granted by the High Court to restrain
         the realisation of the bank guarantee."
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            35                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016
27.    On the issue of the first exception viz. fraud, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

case of
Vinitec Electronics Pvt. Ltd. vs. HCL Infosystems Ltd.
(supra) held thus:
"25. This Court in more than one decision took the view that fraud, if
          any, must be of an egregious nature as to vitiate the underlying
          transaction. We have meticulously examined the pleadings in the
          present case in which no factual foundation is laid in support of the
          allegations of fraud. There is not even a proper allegation of any fraud
          as such and in fact the whole case of the appellant centres around the
          allegation with regard to the alleged breach of contract by the
          respondent. The plea of fraud in the appellant's own words is to the
          following effect:
" That despite the respondent HCL being in default of not making
          payment as stipulated in the bank guarantee, in perpetration of abject
          dishonesty and fraud, the respondent HCL fraudulently invoked the
          bank guarantee furnished by the applicant and sought remittance of the
          sums under the conditional bank guarantee from Oriental Bank of
          Commerce vide letter of invocation dated 16-12-2003."
26. In our considered opinion such vague and indefinite allegations
          made do not satisfy the requirement in law constituting any fraud much
          less the fraud of an egregious nature as to vitiate the entire transaction.
          The case, therefore does not fall within the first exception."
28.      FGIPL has pleaded fraud in the Petition primarily on the basis that TCTPL

has committed breaches of the underlying contract, has not even challenged the

suspension of the works by FGIPL, and as such the invocation of Bank Guarantees is

illegal and fraudulent. In my view, FGIPL has not made out any case of fraud, much

less a case of an absolute and egregious fraud to the knowledge of the Bank, which

would affect the very foundation of the Bank Guarantee, as is required in law. In view
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                          ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                          36                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


thereof it cannot be held that the invocation of the Bank Guarantee by TCTPL is

fraudulent as alleged by FGIPL.
29.    As regards the second exception viz. irretrievable injury, it has been repeatedly

held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that to avail of the said ground it must be decisively

established and proved to the satisfaction of the court that there would be no

possibility whatsoever of recovering the amount by the beneficiary.
In this context,

paragraph 14 of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
U.P. State Sugar

Corporation
(supra) is relevant and reproduced hereunder:
"14. On the question of irretrievable injury which is the second exception
         to the rule against granting of injunctions when unconditional bank
         guarantees are sought to be realised the court said
in
the above case
that
         the irretrievable injury must be of the kind which was the subject-matter
         of the decision in the
Itek Corporation
case (supra). In that case an
         exporter in the U.S.A. entered into an agreement with the Imperial
         Government of Iran and sought an order terminating its liability on
         stand by letters of credit issued by an American bank in favour of an
         Iranian Bank as part of the contract. The relief was sought on account of
         the situation created after the Iranian revolution when the American
         Government cancelled the export licences in relation to Iran and the
         Iranian Government had forcibly taken 52 American citizens as hostages.
         The U.S. Government had blocked all Iranian assets under the
         jurisdiction of United States and had cancelled the export contract. The
         Court upheld the contention of the exporter that any claim for damages
         against the purchaser if decreed by the American Courts would not be
         executable in Iran under these circumstances and realization of the bank
         guarantee/Letters of credit would cause irreparable harm to the plaintiff.
         This contention was upheld. To avail of this exception, therefore,
         exceptional circumstances which make it impossible for the guarantor to
         reimburse himself if the ultimately succeeds, will have to be decisively
         established. Clearly, a mere apprehension that the other party will not be
         able to pay, is not enough.
In the Itek case (supra) there was a certainty
         on this issue. Secondly, there was good reason, in that case for the Court
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           37                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


          to be prima facie satisfied that the guarantors i.e. the bank and its
          customer would be found entitled to receive the amount paid under the
          guarantee.
The above view is also reiterated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in paragraph 22 of its

decision in the case of
Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd. vs. Prem Heavy Engineerings

Works (P) Ltd.
(supra).
30.     However, Mr. Khambatta on behalf of FGIPL has made the following

submissions :
(i)     That the law
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the definition of

special equities is quite clear and the term special equities is wide enough to cover

any other miscellaneous issues that might arise among the parties, other than just

irretrievable injury/harm, as has been claimed by TCTPL.
(ii)    That in the HCC's case, the Supreme Court went on to hold that, "The

allegation of the defendants that HCCL itself had abandoned the work does not, prima

facie, appear to be correct and it is for this reason that we are of the positive view that the

"special equities" are wholly in favour of HCCL." The Supreme Court after analyzing

the bank guarantee in the case and the facts surrounding the contract between the

parties came to the finding that the special equities had arisen due to which an

injunction could be granted against the invocation and encashment of the bank

guarantee. In fact the Supreme Court does not even mention irretrievable injuries

while holding that Special Equities had arisen in favor of FGIPL.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                             38                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


(iii)    That in the case of
BSES Ltd.
(supra), the Supreme Court has clarified that "
"Hence, only one more point remains: whether encashment of the
              guarantees will create special equities (in particular, "irretrievable
              injury") in favour of the First Respondent? We are not satisfied on
              facts that such is the present situation."
The Supreme Court clearly comes to the conclusion that irretrievable injury is only

one of the aspects of Special Equity. The Supreme Court observed that:
"The second exception to the general rule of non-intervention is when
            there are "special equities" in favour of injunction, such as when
            "irretrievable injury" or "irretrievable injustice" would occur if such an
            injunction were not granted."
It is apparent on analysis of this judgment that the Supreme Court does not intend to

use irretrievable injury as a synonym for Special Equities. Thereafter, the Supreme

Court goes on to hold that:
"Therefore, since this prayer is already pending before the Arbitral
          Tribunal, we see no situation of "irretrievable injustice" if, at the present
          moment, the Appellant is allowed to encash the bank guarantees. For justice
          can always be rendered to the First Respondent, if he succeeds before the
          Arbitrators. Nor do we see any special equity in favour of the First
          Respondent, when there is in fact a dispute that performance was prima
          facie not satisfactory, which enabled the Appellant to encash all or any of the
          four bank guarantees."
The Supreme Court in the subsequent paragraph in fact goes on to say that Special

Equities and irretrievable injustice are actually distinct criterion for granting an

injunction on encashment of the bank guarantee, when it says that neither have any

special equities been shown, nor has a situation of irretrievable injuries arisen.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           39                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


(iv)     That      the Supreme Court analyses special equities in U.P. Cooperative
Federation Ltd. Vs. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.
14, General Electric

Technical Services Company Inc. Vs. M/s. Punj Sons (P) Ltd. and another           15
                                                                                       and Svenska

Handelsbanken Vs. M/s. Indian Charge Chrome and others by saying16, "special equities

in the form of preventing irretrievable injustice between the parties". Irretrievable injustice

has clearly been held to be a form of Special Equities in these Judgments but it has

nowhere been said that irretrievable harm covers all forms of Special Equities and that

there can be no Special Equities other than irretrievable injustice/harm.
(v)      That, further in the case of
U.P. State Sugar Corporation Vs. Sumac

International Ltd.
(
supra) and Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd. Vs. Prem Heavy

Engineering Works (P) Ltd. and another
(supra) whilst relying upon Svenska

Handelsbanken Vs. M/s.
Indian Charge Chrome and others
(supra) and
U.P.

Cooperative Federation Ltd. Vs. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.
(supra),

the Bench held that fraud and irretrievable injury are the only two exceptions to the

rules for granting an injunction in matters of bank guarantee.
In both the

abovementioned judgments i.e. Svenska Handelsbanken Vs. M/s.
Indian Charge

Chrome and others
(supra) and
U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. Vs. Singh

Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.
(supra), irretrievable injury was discussed to be a

part of special equities and therefore it is apparent that in the subsequent judgments


14     (1988)1SCC174
15     (1991)4 SCC 230
16     (1994)1 SCC 502
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                       ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                             40                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


the intention of the Learned Judge clearly was to state that fraud and special equities

are the only two exceptions to the rules for granting injunction in matters of bank

guarantee, but because irretrievable injury is a part of special equities these judgments

did not feel the need to clarify and show a distinction between irretrievable injury and

special equity.
(vi)     That in fact, the case of
Vinitec Electronics Private Limited Vs. HCL Infosystems
17

cited by the TCTPL is against it, in as much as the said Judgment makes it clear that

there can be other instances of Special Equities without actually stating them:
"The next question that falls for our consideration is as to whether the
           present case falls under any of or both the exceptions namely whether there
           is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice and a fraud of the beneficiary
           from which it seeks to benefit and another exception whether there are any
           'special equities' in favour of granting injunction."
"Whether encashment of the bank guarantee would cause any
           'irretrievable injury' or 'irretrievable injustice'. There is no plea of any
           'special equities' by the appellant in its favour. So far as the plea of
           'irretrievable injustice' is concerned the appellant in its petition merely
           stated..."
It is submitted that, it is clear looking at the abovementioned para that whilst the

judgment holds irretrievable injury/injustice and Special Equities to be connected to

each other it is apparent that the Judgment does not intend to say that Special Equities

are synonymous with irretrievable injury/injustice. In fact when the Judgment says

"any special equities" it clearly means to say any special equities other than


17     (2008) 1 SCC 544
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                         41                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


irretrievable injury/injustice. This clearly shows that irretrievable injury/injustice has

been held to be a part of special equities and not the whole of it.
(vii)    That though in the case of
Roadway Solution India Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), the

Learned Single Judge felt it necessary to establish a strong connection between

irretrievable injustice and special equities, but it would not be right to read the

judgment as if to say that special equities and irretrievable injuries are the same.
31.      Mr. Khambatta thereafter submitted that in the present matter there are

overwhelming circumstances creating a situation of special equities in favour of an

injunction such as:
(i)      TCTPL has consistently admitted that the said sum of Rs. 32 crores is due and

payable to FGIPL and that it has never exercised any of its contractual remedies

and/or protested and/or disputed FGIPL's suspension of work due to such non-
payment. In fact, TCTPL has accepted and acquiesced in the said suspension and/or

has confirmed the position that work need not resume till further payment is made by

TCTPL.
(ii)     That TCTPL had agreed its liability to the tune of Rs. 32 Crores for works

completed by FGIPL as per the six Purchase Orders in the meeting held on 5 th July,

2015 and reiterated subsequently vide various other communications exchanged

between both parties. That FGIPL and TCTPL during commercial discussions held

during February-March, 2016, had, inter-alia, agreed and arrived at revised contract
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                        42                                Arbpl-366 of 2016


price, extra/ escalation costs, timeline for completing remaining works and right of

suspending works in case substantial payments were not made by TCTPL. TCTPL

had agreed to pay the escalation cost despite being aware that the contract was a fixed

price contract with an express provision, being Clause 3.1, against any escalation. The

very fact that both parties were discussing the terms for the resumption of works,

including revisiting the contract due to the inability of TCTPL to pay for the works,

also strengthens FGIPL's contention that special equities are greatly in its favour and

against the invocation of the Bank Guarantees.
(iii)    A perusal of the Directors' Report and the Auditor's Report filed along with

the Balance Sheet for the period 01.04.2013 to 31.03.2014 revealed that TCTPL has

during the financial year 2013-2014 incurred huge losses.         FGIPL verily believes

that the financial situation of TCTPL has worsened since and that TCTPL has also

defaulted in payments of certain other sub-contractors. The attempt to invoke the

Bank Guarantees furnished by FGIPL to TCTPL was to tide over these financial

difficulties. TCTPL is becoming commercially insolvent day by day and is unable to

pay its debts.
(iv)     That if the Arbitral Tribunal ultimately decides in favour of FGIPL, it would

be impossible to recover the amounts under the Bank Guarantees from TCTPL,

causing great irretrievable injury/ injustice to    FGIPL. TCTPL being a Special

Purpose Vehicle has no other assets or businesses apart from its Concession
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                  ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                                43                                   Arbpl-366 of 2016


Agreement with V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust and the assets created therein.

FGIPL verily believes that all the loans given by the lenders to TCTPL are secured

by exclusive first charge on all the assets provided under the Concession Agreement.

FGIPL verily believes that lenders were also furnished the Corporate Guarantee by

ALBA Aisa Pvt. Ltd. (Holding Company of TCTPL). TCTPL is not making much

revenue or operating cash inflow since the project has not been commissioned, on

account of issues between TCTPL and V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust.
(v)     That the total value of the invoked Bank Guarantees is approximately Rs.

43,98,13,832/-. The aggregate of this amount and admitted dues of Rs. 32 crores,

comes to Rs. 75,98,13,832/-, which is greater than the total payments made by

TCTPL till date to FGIPL under the six purchase orders. Therefore, if the Bank

Guarantees are encashed by TCTPL, severe irretrievable injustice will be caused to

FGIPL. In support of the above submissions, FGIPL relied on paragraph 22 of

HCC's case which reads thus:
"22. We have scrutinised the facts pleaded by the parties in respect of both
         the Bank Guarantees as also the document filed before us and we are, prima
         facie, of the opinion that the lapse was on the part of the defendants who were
         not possessed of sufficient funds for completion of the work. The allegation of
         the defendants that HCCL itself had abandoned the work does not, prima
         facie, appear to be correct and it is for this reason that we are of the positive
         view that the "special equities" are wholly in favour of HCCL."
FGIPL has also relied on the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
Meena Advertisers vs. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
18
18 OMP (I) No. 344/2015 and I.A. No. 13973/2015 dated 16th July, 2015.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                               ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           44                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016
32.    The Learned Senior Advocate appearing for TCTPL has submitted that

special equities and irretrievable injustice are not two independent and separate

grounds for granting injunction against invocation of the Bank Guarantee and the

above submissions advanced by Mr. Khambatta cannot be accepted in view of the

several decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court having clearly laid down that the only

two grounds on which a beneficiary can be restrained from invoking the Bank

Guarantee are in case of absolute and egregious fraud vitiating the very foundation of

the Bank Guarantee and in case where injunction is sought to prevent irretrievable

injustice, which must be of the kind which was the subject matter of the decision in

the
Itek Corporation
case as held in paragraph 19 of the decision in
U.P.Sugar

Corporation
(supra) set out in paragraph 29 above.
In this regard Mr. Kamdar has

also relied on the decision of the Calcutta High Court in the case of
Texmaco Ltd. vs.

State Bank of India
and others19 and the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

case of
U.P. Co-operative Federation Ltd.
(supra).
33.    I am in agreement with the above submissions of Mr. Kamdar. The word

"special equities" came to be coined for the first time by Sabyasachi Mukharji J.

sitting as a judge of the Calcutta High Court in the case of
Texmaco Ltd. v. State Bank

of India and Ors.
(supra), in which he observed as follows:
"10. In my opinion, the position in law is as follows, whether the bank is
            obliged to pay and pay on what terms must depend upon both in the case
            of bank guarantee and in the case of letter of credit on the terms of the

19 AIR 1974 Cal 44
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                            45                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


            document. With respect to the Court of Appeal, it is not necessary for
            this Court to go to the extent of saying whether the performance
            guarantee stands on a similar footing of a letter of credit but so far as
            the Court of Appeal says the bank must pay according to the guarantee
            on demand, if so stipulated, without proof or conditions, I respectfully
            agree. The Court of Appeal has referred to the exception of a clear
            fraud. I venture to suggest there may be another exception in the
            form of special equities arising from a particular situation which
            might entitle the party to an injunction restraining the
            performance of bank guarantee. But in the absence of such special
            equities and in the absence of any clear fraud, the Bank must pay
            on demand, if so stipulated, and whether the terms are such must
            have to be found out from the performance guarantee as such."
(Emphasis supplied) [See at Page 49]


Sabyasachi Mukharji J., when sitting as a Judge of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

explained the above observation in the
Texmaco
case whilst deciding the case of
U.P.

Co-operative Federation Ltd. v. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.
(supra) in the

following terms:
"16. The Court of Appeal in England had occasion once again to
            consider this question in Elian and Rabbath v. Matsas and Matsas -
            (1966) 2 Lloyd's List Law Reports 495. In that case injunction was
            granted to prevent irretrievable injustice...
...
21. In the instant case, the learned Judge has proceeded on the basis that
            this was not an injunction sought against the bank but this was the
            injunction sought against the appellant. But the net effect of the
            injunction is to restrain the bank from performing the bank guarantee.
            That cannot be done. One cannot do indirectly what one is not free to do
            directly. But a maltreated man in such circumstances is not
            remedyless. The respondent was not to suffer any injustice which
            was irretrievable. The respondent can sue the appellant for
            damages. In this case there cannot be any basis for apprehension
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:26 :::
SSP                                           46                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


            that irretrievable damages would be caused if any. I am of the
            opinion that this is not a case in which injunction should be
            granted. An irrevocable commitment either in the form of
            confirmed bank guarantee or irrevocable letter of credit cannot be
            interfered with except in case of fraud or in case of question of
            apprehension of irretrievable injustice has been made out. This is
            the well-settled principle of the law in England. This is also a well-
            settled principle of law in India, as I shall presently notice from
            some of the decisions of the High Court and decisions of this Court.

            ...
24. I may notice that in India, the trend of law is on the same line.
In the case of
Texmaco Ltd. v. State Bank of India
and ors. - AIR
            1979 Calcutta 44, one of us (Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.) held that in
            the absence of special equities arising from a particular situation
            which might entitle the party on whose behalf guarantee is given to
            an injunction restraining the bank in performance of bank
            guarantee and in the absence of any clear fraud, the bank must pay
            to the party in whose favour guarantee is given on demand, if so
            stipulated, and whether the terms are such have to be found out
            from the performance guarantee as such. There the Court held that
            where though the guarantee was given for the performance by the party
            on whose behalf guarantee was given, in an orderly manner its
            contractual obligation, the obligation was undertaken by the bank to
            repay the amount on "first demand" and "without contestation, demur
            or protest and without reference to such party and without questioning
            the legal relationship subsisting between the party in whose favour
            guarantee was given and the party on whose behalf guarantee was
            given," and the guarantee also stipulated that the bank should forthwith
            pay the amount due "notwithstanding any dispute between the parties,"
it must be deemed that the moment a demand was made without protest
            and contestation, the bank had obliged itself to pay irrespective of any
            dispute as to whether there had been performance in an orderly manner
            of the contractual obligation by the party. Consequently, in such a case,
            the party on whose behalf guarantee was given was not entitled to an
            injunction restraining the bank in performance of its guarantee. It
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                             47                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


            appears that special equities mentioned therein may be a situation
            where the injunction was sought for to prevent injustice which was
            irretrievable in the words of Lord Justice Denning, M.R. in Elian and
            Rabbath v. Matsas and Matsas.
...
28. I am however, of the opinion that these observations must be strictly
            considered in the light of the principle enunciated. It is not the decision
            that there should be a prima facie case. In order to restrain the operation
            either of irrevocable letter of credit or of confirmed letter of credit or of
            bank guarantee, there should be serious dispute and there should be
            good prima facie case of fraud and special equities in the form of
            preventing irretrievable injustice between the parties. Otherwise
            the very purpose of bank guarantees would be negatived and the
            fabric of trading operation will get jeopardised.
...
34. On the basis of these principles I reiterate that commitments of banks
            must be honoured free from interference by the courts. Otherwise, trust
            in commerce internal and international would be irreparably damaged.
            It is only in exceptional cases that is to say in case of fraud or in
            case of irretrievable injustice be done, the Court should interfere."
(Emphasis supplied) [see at pages 183; 186; 187 - 188; 189; 190]
34.    The Learned Senior Advocate appearing for FGIPL has only tried to infer

from various sentences of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that there

could be other species of special equities. The submission is directly contrary to the

above Judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, where it has repeatedly held that

there are only two exceptions to the principle that Bank Guarantee invocation and

encashment should not be stopped by the Court except in cases of fraud and special

equities. Both these words have been interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                           ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                            48                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


a series of judgments.         Fraud has been held to be a fraud of an egregious nature

vitiating the entire underlying contract of bank guarantee; and special equities, to be

such special equities which result in irretrievable injustice.
In fact, an endeavour was

made to expand the exceptions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
BSES Ltd.
(supra) which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has rejected. The same is clear

from the following extracts taken from the Judgment set out hereunder:
"9. Mr. Rohtagi, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, urged that
          the settled law in this country is that a bank guarantee is an independent
          contract between the bank and the beneficiary thereof. Accordingly,
          irrespective of any dispute between the beneficiary and the party at whose
          instance the bank has given the guarantee, the bank is obliged to honour
          its guarantee, as long as the guarantee is unconditional and irrevocable.
          Our attention was drawn to the judgment of this Court in
U.P. Coop.
          Federation Ltd. v. Singh Consultant and Engineers (P) Ltd.
(1988) 1
          SCC 174 (hereinafter "U.P. Cooperative Federation"). It was pointed
          out
in that case
that a bank guarantee must be honoured in accordance
          with its terms as the bank, which gives the guarantee, is not concerned
          with the relations between the supplier and the customer. Neither is the
          bank concerned with the question whether any of them have failed in their
          contractual obligations or not. In other words, the bank must pay
          according to the tenor of its guarantee, on demand, without proof or
          condition.
10. There are, however, two exceptions to this rule. The first is when
          there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice and a fraud of the
          beneficiary from which it seeks to benefit. The fraud must be of an
          egregious nature as to vitiate the entire underlying transaction. The
          second exception to the general rule of non-intervention is when there are
          "special equities" in favour of injunction, such as when "irretrievable
          injury" or "irretrievable injustice" would occur if such an injunction were
          not granted. The general rule and its exceptions has been reiterated in so
          many judgments of this Court, that in
U.P. State Sigar Corporation vs.
          Sumac International Ltd.
, (hereinafter "U.P. State Sugar
          Corporation") this Court, correctly declared that the law was "settled" .
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                            49                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016
11.    Mr. Sorabjee, however, tried to expand upon the settled
          exceptions to the rule by first, relying on an order of this Court in
State of Haryana v. Continental Construction Ltd.
(hereinafter
          "Continental Construction Ltd.").
We are afraid that the short
          order in
Continental Construction Ltd.
(supra) appears to have
          been made on the narrow facts of that case and does not constitute a
          precedent binding us. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, a line of
          judgments of this Court have long settled the law relating to the
          invocation of bank guarantees.
12.     Second, Mr. Sorabjee placed reliance on a number of foreign
          judgments, especially that of the Queen's Bench Division in TTI Team
          Telecom Ltd. v. Hutchison 3G UK Ltd., wherein, the rule and its
          exceptions in England have been elegantly summarized. Mr. Sorabjee
          placed special emphasis on the following propositions:
....                        ....                    .....
13. Mr. Sorabjee, finally contended that in Singapore, where
          commercial cases are expeditiously disposed of, the Court of Appeal in
          Samwoh Asphalt Premix Pte. Ltd. v. Sum Cheong Piling Pte. Ltd. has
          held that calling a performance guarantee for an oblique purpose was not
          permissible. Specifically, using it as a "bargaining chip", as a "deterrent"
or in an "abusive" manner, would invite an injunction from the court. He
          submitted that the Singapore court has gone so far as to say that the
          unconscionable calling of a bank guarantee was an exception independent
          of fraud.
14. We are afraid that in the face of the law succinctly laid down
          in
U.P. Cooperative Federation
(supra) and reiterated in numerous
          judgments of this Court referred to earlier, we are unable to accept
          the wide proposition of law
laid down in
the foreign judgments cited
          by Mr. Sorabjee. Whatever may be the law, as to the encashment of
          bank guarantees in other jurisdictions, when the law in India is
          clear, settled and without any deviation whatsoever, there is no
          occasion to rely upon foreign case law." (emphasis supplied)
35.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court has in the case of
Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd.

vs. Prem Heavy Engineering Works (P) Ltd.
and another20 observed as follows:
20 (1997) 6 SCC 450
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                          ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                           50                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


            "22. The second exception to the rule of granting injunction i.e. the
           resulting of irretrievable injury, has to be such a circumstance which
           would make it impossible for the guarantor to reimburse himself, if he
           ultimately succeeds. This will have to be decisively established and it
           must be proved to the satisfaction of the Court that there would be no
           possibility whatsoever of the recovery of the amount from the beneficiary,
           by way of restitution.
29. We also do not find any justification for the High Court in
           invoking the alleged principle of unjust enrichment to the facts of
           the present case and then deny the appellant the right to encash the
           bank guarantee. If the High Court had taken the trouble to see the
           law on the point it would have been clear that in encashment of
           bank guarantee the applicability of the principle of undue
           enrichment has no application". (emphasis supplied)
36.    In any event, the alleged admitted non-payment of claim by TCTPL to

FGIPL cannot create a special equity so as to injunct the invocation of the Bank

Guarantee. Whether there is any payment due or not under the underlying contract

is not the subject matter which can be considered or taken into account while granting

or refusing to grant injunction against invocation and/or encashment of bank

guarantee. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has in its decision in the case of
Mahatma

Gandhi Sahakra Sakkare Karkhane
(supra) held as under:
"25. ... It is specifically alleged that required funds were not available
         with the appellant. On account of non availability of funds there were two
         halts of nine months and five months during the execution of the project
         from 03.12.2001 to 14.08.2002 and from 14.08.2002 to 10.01.2003. It is
         further alleged that the appellant failed to arrange for all the pre-
         requisites. It is not necessary for the purpose of disposal of this appeal to
         notice all the allegations and averments filed by the respondents except to
         note that the main thrust of the allegation relate to alleged breach of the
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                           51                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


         conditions of the agreement by the appellant. ... Once it is held that the
         bank guarantee furnished by the banker is an unconditional one, the
         appellant in our considered opinion cannot be restrained from
         encashing the bank guarantee on the ground that a serious dispute
         had arisen between the parties and on the allegations of breach of
         terms and conditions of the agreement entered between the parties.".
(emphasis supplied)


In the case of
BSES Ltd. vs. Fenner India Ltd. and Anr.
(supra), it was held:
"27. This was also a case where, after having recovered
            certain amount from the running bills, a call was made on
            the bank guarantee in respect of the full guaranteed
            amount. In an observation with direct relevance for the
            present case, this Court pointed out that the bank was not
            concerned with the outstanding amount payable under the
            running bills: "The right to recover the amount under the
            running bills has no relevance to the liability of the Bank
            under the guarantee. The liability of the Bank remained
            intact irrespective of the recovery of mobilisation advance or
            the non-payment under the running bills. The failure on the
            part of (the Beneficiary) to specify the remaining
            mobilisation advance in the letter for encashment of bank
            guarantee is of little consequence to the liability of the bank
            under the guarantee."
In the case of
General Electric Technical Services Company Inc. v. Punj
Sons (P) Ltd.21
, it was held that:
"10. The High Court has observed that failure on the part of GETSCO
            to make a reference to mobilisation advance in the letter seeking
            encashment of the bank guarantee would be tantamount to suppression
            of material facts, in the sense that the mobilisation advance was, under
            the contract to be recovered from the running bills. It was further
            observed that disclosure of such facts would have put the bank to further
            inquiry as to what was the amount covered by those bills and what was
            the corresponding amount of the mobilisation advance and to what
            extent the amount covered by the bank guarantee remained payable. In
21 (1991) 4 SCC 320
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                        ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                            52                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


            any event, the High Court said, that GETSCO could not demand full
            amount of the bank guarantee on 17 April 1989. It seems to us that the
            High Court has misconstrued the terms of the bank guarantee and the
            nature of the inter-se rights of the parties under the contract. The
            mobilisation advance is required to be recovered by GETSCO from the
            running bills submitted by the respondent. If the full mobilisation
            advance has not been recovered, it would be to the advantage of the
            respondent. Secondly, the Bank is not concerned with the
            outstanding amount payable by GETSCO under the running bills.
            The right to recover the amount under the running bills has no
            relevance to the liability of the Bank under the guarantee. The
            liability of the Bank remained intact irrespective of the recovery of
            mobilisation advance or the non-payment under the running bills.
            ..." (emphasis supplied).
In the case of
ANCL & Co. India Ltd. v. Corporation Bank
(supra), it was held that:
"55. In my view, other correspondence exchanged between the parties
           need not be dealt with for the purpose of deciding whether the intent of the
           beneficiary to invoke the bank guarantee was for any other purpose other
           than for which such bank guarantee was furnished. Issue raised by Mr.
           Kamdar, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner that the
           petitioner has to recover substantial amount from the respondents or the
           issue raised by Dr. Sathe, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
           respondents that the petitioner had committed breaches of the contract
           and in view of the termination of the contract, respondents would be
           entitled to get the balance work done at the risk and cost of the petitioner
           and would have counter claim against the petitioner are concerned, I am
           of the view that both these issues can't be decided in the present
           proceedings while considering application for injunction in respect of the
           unconditional bank guarantee and such issues in my view can be decided
           only by the Arbitral Tribunal."
37.    FGIPL has in support of its contention that special equities have arisen in its

favour, has placed reliance on the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case

of
Hindustan Construction Company
(supra) and in particular, paragraph 22 thereof

which reads thus:
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                           53                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


       "22. We have scrutinized the facts pleaded by the parties in respect of both
       the Bank Guarantees as also the document filed before us and we are,
       prima facie, of the opinion that the lapse was on the part of the defendants
       who were not possessed of sufficient funds for completion of the work. The
       allegation of the defendants that HCCL itself had abandoned the work does
       not, prima facie, appear to be correct and it is for this reason that we are of
       the positive view that the "special equities" are wholly in favour of
       HCCL".
The Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Hindustan Construction

Company
(supra), as can be seen from Paragraph 9 of the Judgment, is purely on the

basis of the terms of the Bank Guarantee. The observations at para 22 therein was in

the context of a conditional bank guarantee. The Court has in the said case considered

the clauses of the bank guarantee and in paragraphs 12 and 13 held that the bank

guarantee was not an unconditional bank guarantee. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has

held that by referring specifically to Clause 9, the Bank has qualified its liability to pay

the amount covered by the Guarantee relating to "Advance Mobilisation Loan" to

the Executive Engineer only if the obligations under the contract were not fulfilled by

HCCL, or if HCCL has misappropriated any portion of the "Advance Mobilisation

Loan". The Hon'ble Supreme
Court further held
that it is in these circumstances that

clause 12 of the bank guarantee would operate and the whole of the amount covered

by the "Mobilisation Advance" would become payable on demand and the bank

guarantee thus could be invoked only in the circumstances referred to in Clause 9.

The Supreme Court has held that, that being so the bank guarantee could not be said

to be unconditional and unequivocal in terms so that the Defendants could be said to

have an unfettered right to invoke that Guarantee and demand immediate payment
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                         ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                        54                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016


thereof from the Bank. Further, the Court has also held at paras 19 and 20 that the

invocation was done wrongfully.
It was in the context of such bank guarantee that the

Hon'ble Supreme Court made observations in para 22 in the case of
Hindustan

Construction Company
(supra).
The Judgment and observations of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in para 22 of the Judgment in
Hindustan Construction Company
(supra) cannot by any stretch of reasoning be said to have diluted the law on bank

guarantees which has been reiterated repeatedly by the Hon'ble Supreme Court even

after the Judgement in the case of Hindustan Construction Company.
In the case of
Vinitec Electronics Pvt. Ltd. vs. HCL Infosystems Ltd.
22, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

expressly dealt with and distinguished the Judgment in the case of Hindustan

Construction Company at paragraphs 20 and 21 thereof.
38.    In the light of aforesaid judgments, the alleged admitted non-payment can

never be a ground of special equity because the Court cannot even go into that aspect

as it is a dispute arising under the underlying contract and not in respect of the Bank

Guarantee. In fact at the cost of repetition, I would again point out that under
Article

2
of the subject Bank Guarantees, it is agreed that the Guarantor Bank is not entitled

to dispute or enquire into whether the purchaser (TCTPL) has become entitled to

claim the amount under the Purchase Order or not, or whether the Supplier (FGIPL)

has committed any breach of Purchase Order and/or the General terms and

conditions applicable thereto or not, or whether the Purchaser (TCTPL) is entitled to


22 (2008) 1 SCC 544
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                           55                               Arbpl-366 of 2016


recover any damages from the Supplier (FGIPL) for breach thereof or not. It is also

clearly agreed that the Purchaser (TCTPL) need not initiate any proceeding or claim

against the Seller (FGIPL) before lodging any claim under the Guarantee. The

liability of the Guarantor under the Guarantee is primary, direct and immediate and

not conditional and/or contingent upon pursuit by the Purchaser (TCTPL) of any

remedies that it may have against the Seller (FGIPL) and/or any other person in

relation to the Purchase Order.
The aforestated          submissions advanced by Mr. Khambatta on            behalf of

FGIPL, therefore, cannot be accepted and are rejected.
39.       As regards the submission on behalf of FGIPL, that FGIPL will suffer

irretrievable injustice if the Bank Guarantees are permitted to be encashed as the

financial situation of TCTPL is precarious and the Bankers of TCTPL have stopped

disbursements to it, it is submitted on behalf of TCTPL as follows:
(i)     That TCTPL is a financially sound company and has already invested in excess

of Rs. 350 crores to develop and commission a Rs. 640 crore Coal Terminal for the

V.O. Chadambaranar Port Trust, Tuticorin;
(ii)     that the accounts of TCTPL are standard and regular with NIL overdue with

all its 7 consortium lenders as evidenced by the certificates issued by all its lenders

[Exhibit A (Colly.) / Pages 504-511/ Additional Affidavit in Petition (L) No.

366/2016] and disbursements have been made to TCTPL as late as on 11th March,
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                     ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                              56                                  Arbpl-366 of 2016


2016 as evidenced by TCTPL 's Bank Account Statement [Exhibit B / Pages 512-515/

Additional Affidavit to Petition (L) No. 366/2016];
(iii)    that an amount of over Rupees Sixty One crores has already been paid by

Respondent No. 1 to FGIPL pursuant to the Purchase Order.
40.      TCTPL has also produced a letter dated 5th July, 2017, issued by the Bank of

India to TCTPL which reads as under:
" 1. The subject project is for providing port handling infrastructure and
          has been financed by the consortium of seven lenders comprising Bank of
          India (Lead Bank), Oriental Bank of Commerce, Indian Bank, Indian
          Overseas Bank, India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd., Bajaj
          Finance and Export Import Bank of India.
2.    The account of all lenders with TCTPL is Standard Asset in the
          books of the Lenders as on date.
3. As on date amount disbursed by the lenders is Rs.255.10 crores and
          equity injected by Promoters is Rs. 170.07 crores totaling the incurred cost
          Rs. 425.17 out of the total assessed project cost of Rs. 645.50 crores. The
          total project cost of Rs. 645.50 crores is to be funded in the debt equity
          ratio of 60 : 40. Based on the confirmation received from the Company
          for bringing its equity and the available debt of the consortium of lenders,
          company seems to be well placed to meet its project expenses.
4. It is clarified that this information is furnished without any risk and
          responsibility on our part in any respect, whatsoever, more particularly
          either as a guarantor or otherwise. This certificate is issued on the specific
          request of M/s. Tuticorin Coal Terminal Pvt. Ltd."
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                          ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                         57                                 Arbpl-366 of 2016
41.    Though Mr. Khambatta has submitted that this letter only shows that TCTPL

is meeting their financial obligations and there is no default for more than 90 days,

the fact remains that there is no default on the part of TCTPL qua their financial

obligations till date. As regards the allegation that TCTPL is making losses, the same

cannot be a ground for the Court to grant an injunction against TCTPL from

invoking the Bank Guarantees. TCTPL is yet to start the project commercially.
Prior to the commencement of its commercial operations it certainly cannot be

expected to make profits. However, it is important to note that the Civil Engineering

Department of VOCPT has sent a communication to TCTPL dated 4th August,

2017, wherein the independent Engineer M/s. CES (India) Pvt. Ltd. had issued a

provisional certificate of the same date which is attached to the said communication.
The certification by the independent Engineer appointed under the Concession

Agreement dated 11th September, 2010 is to the effect that the independent Engineer

is satisfied that the project can be safely and reliably placed into commercial service in

terms of the said agreement and the project was provisionally declared fit for entry

into commercial operation. The said satisfaction provisionally declared, is subject to

works that were found to be incomplete or deficient which are specified in a "Punch

List". The Punch List appears as an annexure to the said provisional certificate and

records 4 items remaining to be completed as on 4th August, 2017. These items are

as follows:
(i)    Conveyor - The mechanised conveyor system yet to be installed.
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                      ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                                58                                Arbpl-366 of 2016


(ii)     Stackyard Machines (Stacker Reclaimers - 2 Nos. and 2 No.stacker) -- Major

erections completed and not yet commissioned.


(iii)    Dust suppression and Fire Fighting systems.


(iv)     Electrical and plumbing works in stackyard.
Therefore save and except for the four items, there is prima facie evidence of the fact

that the VOCPT             is satisfied      with the readiness of    TCTPL         to commence

commercial operations.
42.      Though it is submitted on behalf of FGIPL that TCTPL does not have any

assets of its own and FGIPL will be left high and dry if it is unable to execute the

award passed in Arbitration in their favour by the Arbitral Tribunal, as correctly

pointed out by Mr. Kamdar, Learned Senior Advocate appearing for TCTPL, the

promoters of TCTPL have already infused capital of Rs. 170 crores in the project.

The Concession Agreement executed by and between FGIPL and TCTPL is for 30

years. During this period TCTPL will be entitled to recover tariff from the users of

the Project Facilities and services. The cargo handling charges are levied per metric

ton of cargo which is discharged from the ship. The total estimated revenue during

the balance concession                 period shall be Rs. 10,067.14 crores which shall be

apportioned in the following order as per the Concession Agreement:
(i)      Taxes and Statutory dues;
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                          ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                             59                               Arbpl-366 of 2016


(ii)     License Fees;


(iii)    Construction/implementation Expenses relating to the project;


(iv)     Operations and Management expenses relating to the project;


(v)      Debt Service obligations;


(vi)     Royalty payable to the Government and liquidated damages (52.17%);


(vii)    Towards any Reserve requirement; and


(viii) Concessionaire (TCTPL).
43.      Again, TCTPL has also filed a counter claim in the sum of Rs. 600 crores

before the Arbitral Tribunal. The Court cannot proceed on the basis that the claim of

FGIPL will be accepted by the Arbitral Tribunal whereas the counter claim of

TCTPL will be dismissed. FGIPL had also filed a Company Petition being Company

Petition No. 780 of 2015               before the Company Court seeking winding up of

Respondent No. 1 on the ground that TCTPL has admitted to pay Rs. 32 crores to

FGIPL but has failed to pay the same and is therefore unable to pay its debts. The

said Petition has been rejected. It is also pertinent to note that as regards the

admission of liability, the Learned Company Judge has recorded in his Order that, " I

find that the admissions of liability were all as a result of negotiations which were in

anticipation of continuation of work under the contract and not as a result of the

termination of the contract".
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                      ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
SSP                                        60                                Arbpl-366 of 2016
44.    Therefore, FGIPL's submission that it will suffer irretrievable injustice if the

Bank Guarantees are permitted to be encashed, is rejected.
45.     In the circumstances, the above Arbitration Petitions are dismissed.
(S.J. KATHAWALLA, J.)
::: Uploaded on - 12/01/2018                    ::: Downloaded on - 13/01/2018 01:55:27 :::
