Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 3 KCCR 2649
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2019 KAR 466, (2019) 3 KCCR 2649
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/61471834/

[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
M/S Serve And Volley Outdoor vs M/S Times Innovative Media Ltd on 26 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 KAR 466, (2019) 3 KCCR 2649
Author:
John Michael Cunha
Bench:
John Michael Cunha
1                         R


     IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

           DATED THIS THE 26TH DAY OF APRIL 2019

                          BEFORE

      THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JOHN MICHAEL CUNHA

       WRIT PETITION NOS.14820-22 OF 2015(GM-RES)

BETWEEN:

1.   M/S SERVE & VOLLEY OUTDOOR
     ADVERTISING PVT LTD.,
     # 110, ANDREWS BUILDING
     M G ROAD
     BANGALORE-560 001
     REPRESENTED BY ITS BRANCH HEAD
     MR RAGHUVEER B T
     S/O THIRUMALAI
     AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS

2.   MR NITESH SHETTY
     S/O MR P V SHETTY
     AGED 33 YEARS
     # 110, ANDREWS BUILDING
     M G ROAD, BANGALORE-560 001

3.   MR VARGHESE EAPAN
     S/O LATE MR THOMAS VARGHESE
     AGED 57 YEARS
     R/AT 203, B, DDA LIG FLATS,
     MOTIA KHAN
     NEW DELHI-110 055
                                        ... PETITIONERS

(BY SRI: RAVI B.NAIK, SR.ADVOCATE A/W
    SRI: K.B.MONESH KUMAR, ADVOCATE)
                           2



AND:

M/S TIMES INNOVATIVE MEDIA LTD
4TH FLOOR,"A" WING MATULYA CENTRE,
SENAPATI BAPAT MARG,
LOWER PAREL (W)
MUMBAI-400013
REPRESENTED BY ITS
ASSISTANT VICE PRESIDENT,
MR CHANNAMALLIKARJUN B                ... RESPONDENT

(BY Ms: MANEESHA KONGOVI, ADVOCATE)


     THESE WRIT PETITIONS ARE FILED UNDER
ARTICLE 226
AND
227
OF CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, R/W SECTION 482 OF
THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE
, 1973 PRAYING TO QUASH
THE COMPLAINT DTD.1.9.2010 BEARING P.C.R.NO.9479/2010
IN CC NO.35669/2010 PENDING ON THE FILE OF THE HON'BLE
XIV ADDL. CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE, MAYOHALL,
BANGALORE FILED BY R-1 AGAINST THE PETITIONER UNDER
SECTION 200 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE
FOR THE
OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 138 OF THE
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT (ANNEX-A) AND QUASH THE
ORDER OF SUMMONS/PROCESS DTD.15.3.2011, PASSED BY
THE HON'BLE XIV ADDL. CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE,
MAYOHALL, BANGALORE AND FURTHER PROCEEDINGS IN
MATTER P.C.R.NO.9479/2010 IN CC NO.35669/2010 FILED BY
THE COMPLAINANT / RESPONDENT HEREIN UNDER SECTION
200 OF THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE
, 1973 READ WITH
138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881 (ANNEX-B).

     THESE WRIT PETITIONS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 08.03.2019 AND COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT THIS DAY, JOHN MICHAEL CUNHA. J,
MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
                                   3


                            ORDER
Petitioner No.1 M/s.Serve & Volley Outdoor Advertising

Pvt. Ltd., is a Company registered under the
Companies Act,

1956
carrying on the business of outdoor advertising across the

country. On 31.12.2005, petitioner No.1 Company entered into

a License Agreement with Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited

(DMRC) granting the petitioner advertising licenses in relation to

advertising on the display panels inside 21 metro stations.

Pursuant to this agreement, a payment as security deposit of

Rs.5,51,65,837/- was made by the petitioner to DMRC. As the

respondent   herein   M/s.Times       Innovative   Media   Ltd.,   was

involved in the business of out of home media, the petitioner

No.1 Company executed a back-to-back Exclusive Marketing

Services Agreement (EMS) with the respondent on 25.06.2008

for marketing the advertisement spaces which had been licensed

to it under the DMRC Agreement. This agreement contained the

following clauses:
a. Clause 5.1: Consideration to be paid by the
         Respondent to the Petitioner as per Schedule 2 to the
         Agreement, which was to be paid on advance invoices
4
on or before the 27th day of the previous month for a
          continuous period from 30.06.2008 to 30.12.2010.
b. Clause 5.1.2: The Respondent to indemnify the
          Petitioner in the event of a loss or damage caused to it
          on account of a breach by the Respondent.
c. Clause    6.1:   The   exact    same    amount     of
          Rs.5,51,65,837/- to be paid as Security Deposit to the
          Petitioner by the Respondent.
d. Clause 6.2: The Petitioner would not be liable to
          refund the   Security Deposit in the       event of a
          termination of the DMRC for reasons attributable to
          the Respondent.
e. Clause 11: A Corporate Guarantee for the value of
          the Security Deposit would be furnished by Serve and
          Volley Media Private Limited (sister concern of the
          Petitioner), to be enforced by the Respondent in
          accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
f. Clause 19(viii): All disputes to be resolved by
          arbitration as per the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
          1996
.
2.      In terms of Clause No.6.1 above, petitioner No.1

Company issued an undated cheque bearing No.518073 drawn
5
on Corporation Bank, M.G.Road Branch, Bengaluru for an

amount of Rs.5,51,65,837/- as security along with side letter in

favour of the respondent.       It is averred that right from the

commencement of the        agreement, respondent consistently

delayed and defrauded in making payments as per Schedule 2 to

the EMS Agreement dated 25.06.2008.             The petitioner -

Company time and again called upon the respondent to clear its

dues. On 26.04.2010, petitioner No.1 - Company addressed a

letter to the respondent to pay the dues immediately to avoid

termination of the License Agreement by DMRC. The respondent

sent a reply dated 03.05.2010 requesting the petitioner to return

the security deposit after adjusting the consideration which was

required to be paid by the respondent during the term of the

EMS Agreement.     Petitioner    No.1 - Company issued a "stop

payment" order on 04.05.2010 to its banker in view of the

breach of EMS Agreement by the respondent. According to the

petitioners, this was a conscious decision of the petitioner No.1
- Company in view of the fact that there was no legally

enforceable debt against the petitioners.
6
3.    Due to the default by the petitioner No.1 - Company

occasioned by the non-payment of dues by the respondent, the

DMRC terminated the License Agreement with the petitioners on

07.05.2010.        As disputes arose between the parties, petitioner

No.1 - Company invoked the arbitral clause. Despite arbitration

having commenced, respondent filed a complaint on 1.09.2010

before the XIV Addl. CMM, Bengaluru to initiate proceedings

under
section 138
of Negotiable Instruments Act against the

petitioners. Learned Magistrate having taken cognizance of the

offences,     issued       summons      to     the         petitioners     in

C.C.No.35669/2010.          The petitioners filed Criminal Petition

No.6997/2011 under
section 482
Cr.P.C., seeking to quash the

complaint     in     C.C.No.35669/2010       and     the     order     dated

15.11.2010 taking cognizance of the same. By judgment dated

9.2.2012,     this     court   dismissed     the     Criminal        Petition

No.6997/2011 on the ground that, whether the cheque is

supported by consideration or whether the cheque is not issued

for recovery of legal movable debt or liability has to be decided

by the trial court.      Aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner

No.1 - Company          preferred S.L.P. (Crl.) No.2744/2012 before
7
the Hon'ble Supreme Court and by order dated 08.07.2014, the

SLP was also dismissed. After dismissal of the SLP, the Arbitral

Tribunal passed its final award, determining the dues of the

petitioners and declared that the petitioners were obliged to pay

only an amount of Rs.18,36,164/- to the respondent.                     In

compliance of the said award dated 24.07.2014, petitioner No.1
- Company issued a cheque for a sum of Rs.18,36,164/- along

with a covering letter dated 01.08.2014 to the respondent. The

respondent refused to accept the said amount and returned the

same vide letter dated 18.08.2014.          Aggrieved by the award of

the Arbitral Tribunal, respondent herein filed an application

under
section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

before the High Court of Delhi and the same is pending

consideration.
4.      Respondent    has     filed    a   detailed   statement    of

objections inter alia contending that as per the terms of EMS

Agreement, the respondent was to provide an interest free,

refundable    security   deposit       of   Rs.5,51,65,837/-    to     the

petitioners. The said security deposit was duly furnished by the
8
respondent to the petitioners.     As a security towards the said

deposit, the petitioners   provided an undated cheque bearing

No.518073 for an amount of Rs.5,51,65,837/-.          The liability to

pay the security deposit to the respondent arose on termination

of   the   License   Agreement     dated   7.5.2010       between   the

petitioners and the DMRC. After the petitioners communicated

to   the   respondent   about    the   termination   of    the   License

Agreement by DMRC, respondent claimed reimbursement of its

losses and refund of the security deposit within fifteen business

days failing which the respondent warned that it would deposit

the said undated cheque. Since the petitioners in reply refused

the liability to refund the security deposit, the respondent

proceeded to date and deposit the cheque with its banker i.e.,

HDFC Bank Ltd., New Delhi. The cheque was dishonoured and

returned with the advice "payment stopped by the drawer". The

respondent issued a legal notice dated 20.07.2010 to which

petitioner issued an untenable reply and hence, the respondent

filed a complaint in C.C.No.35669/2010 under
section 138
of

Negotiable Instruments Act. The petitioners sought to quash the

said proceedings in Criminal Petition No.6997/2011. The said
9
petition came to be dismissed on 9.2.2012. Even the SLP filed

by the petitioners against the said order came to be dismissed

by the Hon'ble Supreme Court by order dated 08.07.2014. The

proceedings in C.C.NO.35669/2010 are impugned yet again in

the instant writ petitions and therefore, the petitions are barred

in law and equity.     Award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal is

challenged by the respondent under
section 34
of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1966 and hence, the matter is sub judice

as on date.    The findings in the arbitral award by itself cannot

lend   the   petitioners   a   ground   for   quashing   the   criminal

proceedings.     Thus, contending that the petitioners are not

entitled for any relief before this Court, the respondent has

sought for dismissal of the petition.
5.     Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned counsel

appearing for the respondent have submitted their arguments in

line with the contentions urged by the respective parties.
10
6.    In   support    of   his    submissions,   learned   Senior

Counsel appearing for the petitioners has placed reliance on the

following decisions:-
1.
Indus Airways Private Limited & others Vs
        Magnum Aviation Private Limited & another
, (2014) 12
        SCC 539;
2.   M/s Swastik Coaters Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s Deepak
        Brothers & Another, 1997 (1) A.P.L.J. 423 (HC);
3.    M/s Balaji Seafoods Exports (India) Ltd., Rep by
        its Director, Chalapathy and another Vs Mac Industries
        Ltd., S.Pichalah, Managing Director, Rep by its
        Authorised Person U. Vijayakumar, 1999 (I) CTC 6;
4.   M/s
Vempati Balaji and others Vs D.Vijaya
        Gopala Reddi and another
, 1998 SCC OnLine AP 396;
5.
Shanku Concretes Pvt. Ltd. And others Vs State
        of Gujarat and another
, 1999 SCC OnLine Guj 366;
and
6.  M/s
Supply House Vs Ullas & another
, 2006 Cri L
        J 4330
7. The sum and substance of the argument of the learned

counsel for the petitioners is that as on the date of issuance of

the cheque, no liability had arisen and hence, there was no

cause    of   action   for   initiation   of   proceedings   against   the

petitioner. The cheque in question was issued as a security in
11
terms of the EMS Agreement between the petitioner No.1 -

Company and the respondent. In view of the disruption of the

contract, the parties had referred the dispute for resolution by

the Arbitral Tribunal. Before the Arbitral Tribunal, the petitioners

as well as the respondent laid their claims and counter claims.

The dispute regarding the refund of the security deposit was also

one of the disputes referred for resolution of the Arbitral

Tribunal.
8.    Referring to the relevant portion of the award passed

by the Arbitral Tribunal, learned Senior Counsel has emphasized

that the forfeiture of security deposit of Rs.5,59,54,746/- was

one of the claim referred to and considered by the Arbitral

Tribunal. The said claim is answered in para 114 of the award.

The relevant part thereof reads as under:
"3.    Whether the claimant's non-compliance
            with the conditions of the License Agreement,
            including non-payment of License Fee by the
            Claimant to DMRC resulted in the termination
            of    the   License   Agreement?   If   so,   its
            consequences?
12
Answer: The Claimant is entitled to only some
           of its claims, as also liable to refund a part of
           the Security Deposit to the Respondent, as
           detailed above."
In the final award, the Arbitral Tribunal by working out the

claims and counter claims made by the respective parties in

Clause (7) has passed an award which reads,

           "The   amounts     awarded   in   favour   of   the
           Claimant and payable by the Respondent shall
           be aggregated.     The sum of Rs.2,00,00,000/-
together with interest at the rate of 24% per
           annum from 01.06.2010 till the date of the
           award, awarded in favour of the Respondent
           would be adjusted against the aggregated sum
           awarded in favour of the Claimant.              The
           Claimant shall pay the balance amount of
           Rs.18,36,164/- to the Respondent within a
           period of 1 month from the date of this award,
           failing which the Claimant will pay interest on
           the said balance amount at the rate of 10%
           per annum to be calculated from the date of
           the award till the date of actual payment.
(Note: The balance amount payable by the
           Claimant to the Respondent is rounded off to
           the nearest rupee.)
13
9.         It is the submission of the learned counsel for the

petitioner that the liability of the petitioners arising out of the above

contract having been adjudicated and determined by the Arbitral

Tribunal at Rs.18,36,164/-, the respondent is not entitled to

enforce the said cheque for a liability of Rs.5,51,65,837/-.
10.        In view of the submission of the learned Senior Counsel

for the petitioners that the petitioner No.1 was always ready and

willing to discharge the liability due by it as on the date of the

issuance of the cheque and the said liability having been quantified

at Rs.18,36,164/- and the same was paid to the respondent

towards full and final settlement, but the same having been refused

to be received by the respondent, it was suggested as to why the

alleged offence could not be compounded in terms of
section 147
of

the Negotiable Instruments Act? The parties were reminded of the

decision    of     the   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court   in
METERS    AND

INSTRUMENTS PRIVATE LIMITED & Others vs. KANCHAN MEHTA
,

AIR 2017 SC 4594, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held :
"Where the cheque amount with interest and
                 cost as assessed by the Court is paid by a
14
specified date, the Court is entitled to close
            the proceedings in exercise of its powers under
Section 143
of the Act read with
Section 258
Code of Criminal Procedure."
It was also brought to the notice of the parties that in
the said

decision
it was held that,

            "Though compounding requires consent of
            both the parties, even in absence of such
            consent, the Court, in the interest of justice,
            on being satisfied that the complainant has
            been duly compensated, can in its discretion
            close   the   proceedings   and    discharge   the
            accused."
11.   The     learned   counsel    for     respondent      however

expressed his reservation to the suggestion and submitted that

the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in METERS

AND INSTRUMENTS PRIVATE LIMITED referred to supra, cannot

be applied to the facts of the present case. Placing reliance on

the decision in
JIK INDUSTRIES LIMITED & Others vs. AMARLAL

V. JUMANI & Others
reported in
AIR 2012 SC 1079 and

NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED vs. PRANAY SETHI &

Others
reported in AIR 2017 SC 5157, learned counsel built up
15
an argument that while issuing directions in METERS AND

INSTRUMENTS PRIVATE LIMITED referred to supra, Hon'ble

Supreme Court has failed to consider the
ratio
laid down in
JIK

INDUSTRIES LIMITED wherein it is held that pursuant to

insertion of section 147 in the
Negotiable Instruments Act
, even

though the offence under the
Negotiable Instruments Act
which

was previously non-compoundable in view of section 320 sub-

section (9) of the Code is made compoundable, that does not

mean that the effect of
section 147
is to obliterate all statutory

provisions of section 320 of the Code relating to the mode and

manner of compounding of an offence. In para 58 of
the above

decision
it is held that,

             "
Section 147
will only override section 320(9)
             of the Code in so far as offence under
Section
             147
of N.I. Act is concerned."
In concluding para 73 of
the said judgment
, Hon'ble Supreme

Court has observed as under:-
"If this Court upholds the contention of the
             Appellant that as a result of incorporation of
Section 147
in the
Negotiable Instruments Act
,
             the entire gamut of procedure of Section 320
16
of    the   Code   are    made       inapplicable   to
           compounding of an offence under the
N.I. Act
,
in that case
the compounding of offence under
Negotiable Instruments Act
will be left totally
           unguided      or   uncontrolled.           Such     an
           interpretation apart from being an absurd or
           unreasonable one will also be contrary to the
           provisions of
Section 4(2)
of the Code, which
           has been discussed above. There is no other
           statutory     procedure       for   compounding     of
           offence under
N.I. Act
. Therefore,
Section 147
of the Negotiable Instruments Act must be
           reasonably construed to mean that as a result
           of the said Section the offences under
N.I. Act
are    made    compoundable,         but   the    main
           principle of such compounding, namely, the
           consent of the person aggrieved or the person
           injured or the complainant cannot be wished
           away nor can the same be substituted by
           virtue of
Section 147
of N.I. Act.
(underlining supplied)


To buttress this argument, learned counsel has also placed

reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY referred to supra and has

emphasized that,
17
""A decision or judgment can be per incuriam
           any provision in a statute, Rule or Regulation,
           which was not brought to the notice of the
           court. A decision or judgment can also be per
           incuriam if it is not possible to reconcile its
           ratio with that of a previously pronounced
           judgment of a co-equal or larger Bench."
Thus it is contended that the
ratio
laid down in
JIK INDUSTRIES

LIMITED & Others referred to supra, having not been considered

in METERS AND INSTRUMENTS PRIVATE LIMITED & Others

referred to supra, respondent cannot be forced to accept

Rs.18,36,164/- in lieu of total liability of Rs.5,51,65,837/- in

discharge whereof the cheque was issued by the petitioners.

Thus the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is

that the Co-ordinate Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court which

rendered the decision in METERS AND INSTRUMENTS PRIVATE

LIMITED & Others referred to supra, having not over-ruled the

judgment in JIK INDUSTRIES LIMITED & Others, the only

appropriate course for the subsequent Bench was to refer the

matter to the Larger Bench.
18
12.      Learned counsel has also raised serious objection to

entertain the instant petition in view of the earlier order passed

by this Court in Criminal Petition No.6997/2011 wherein this

Court has dismissed the petition filed under
section 482
of

Cr.P.C., holding that to quash the very same proceedings on the

ground whether the cheque is supported by consideration or

whether the cheque is not issued for recovery of legal movable

debt/liability, it is for the accused to establish the same before

the trial court.    In view of this order, it is contended that the

second petition for the same relief under
section 482
Cr.P.C.,

cannot be entertained and the respondent cannot be deprived of

the opportunity to substantiate its claim before the trial court.

In support of this argument, learned counsel has referred to the

order passed by this Court in Criminal Petition No.6613/2011

filed by the petitioners herein seeking to quash the criminal

proceedings initiated by the respondent herein based on the

same transaction. In the said order, this Court placing reliance

on the decision in GURCHARAN SINGH & Another vs. ALLIED

MOTORS Ltd. & Another reported in (2005) 10 SCC 626 has held

as follows:-
19
"Passing of the award by the Arbitral Tribunal
            may be a defence to such a complaint, but to
            what extent the defence would be valid, shall
            depend upon the facts and circumstances of
            each case.   Therefore, mere making of the
            award cannot be a ground to stall or stay the
            proceedings initiated under
Section 138
of N.I.
            Act.
13.    Further, learned counsel submitted that the award

passed by the Arbitral Tribunal is under challenge as per
section

34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 before the High

Court at Delhi and therefore, there is no ground to quash the

proceedings or to permit the petitioners to compound the alleged

offences.
14.    I   have   bestowed    my   anxious   thought     to   the

submissions made at the Bar and have carefully scrutinized the

material on record and the decisions relied on by the respective

counsels.
15.    Regarding maintainability of the second petition

under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. in view of dismissal of the earlier

petition filed by the petitioners under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. is
20
concerned, suffice it to refer to the law expounded by the

Hon'ble   Supreme     Court    in
SUPERINTENDENT          AND

REMEMBRANCER OF LEGAL AFFAIRS, WEST BENGAL vs.

MOHAN SINGH AND OTHERS
reported in (1975) 3 SCC 706.

In the said case, the question debated before the Hon'ble

Supreme Court was whether the High Court had jurisdiction to

make the order dated April 7th 1970 quashing the proceeding

against respondent Nos.1, 2 and 3 therein, when on an earlier

application made by the first respondent, the High Court had by

its order dated December 12th, 1968 refused to quash the

proceedings before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various views

held by different High Courts were canvassed as to the scope

and ambit of the inherent power of the High Court under Section

561A vis-a-vis an earlier order made by it. Dealing with the said

issue, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that Section 561A

(corresponding to
Section 482
Cr.P.C of 1973) preserves the

inherent power of the High Court to make such orders as it

deems fit to prevent abuse of the process of Court or to secure

ends of justice and the High Court must, therefore, exercise its

inherent powers having regard to the situation prevailed at a
21
particular point of time when its inherent jurisdiction is sought to

be invoked.` Further, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the

High Court was, in the circumstances, entitled to entertain the

subsequent application of respondent Nos.1 and 2 and consider

whether on the facts and circumstances then obtaining the

continuance    of   the     proceeding   against   the   respondents

constituted an abuse of process of Court or its quashing was

necessary to secure the ends of justice.       In the instant case,

even though the earlier petition filed by the petitioners in

Cr.P.No.6997/2011 was dismissed by this Court on the ground

that whether the cheque is supported by consideration or

whether the cheque is not issued for recovery of legal debt or

liability is required to be established by the accused before the

trial court, since then, the quantum of debt or liability due by the

accused having been determined by the Arbitrator and the same

having been confirmed by the High Court of Delhi, this Court is

not precluded to exercise its inherent powers based on the

prevailing situation to decide as to whether in the changed

circumstances, the        continuation of proceeding against the

petitioners amount to abuse of process of Court or its quashing
22
is necessary to secure the ends of justice. In that view of the

matter, the first contention urged by the petitioners regarding

maintainability of the instant petition is liable to be rejected and

is accordingly rejected.
16.     Coming    to    the    question   of   sustainability   of

prosecution instituted against the petitioners/accused for the

alleged offence punishable under
section 138
of N.I. Act is

concerned, the very case of the complainant is that the cheque

in question was issued as security in terms of the EMS

agreement. The terms of the contract detailed above clearly

indicate that at the time of issuance of cheque, no liability had

arisen. Complainant has admitted the factual position that the

cheque was issued as security and that "in consideration of its

obligation and liability to refund the security deposit under the

EMS agreement of the said letter, accused No.1 handed over to

the complainant undated Cheque bearing No.518073 drawn on

Corporation     Bank,      M.G.     Road   Branch,    Bengaluru       for

Rs.5,51,65,837/-."
17.
In identical situation relying on the ruling rendered

by the High Court of Madras, Gujarat High Court in
SHANKU
23
CONCRETES     PVT.       LTD.,   AND     OTHERS      VS.   STATE   OF

GUJARAT AND ANOTHER
, 1999 SCC ONLINE GUJ 366 has

observed as under :
This court relies on the decision cited by
           Mr. Majmudar of the High Court of Madras
           (supra), (1999 Cur Cri R 424), wherein a
           principle is laid down that to attract
Sec.138
of
           the Negotiable Instruments Act, it must be
           pointed out that there was subsisting liability or
           debt on the date when the contract was
           entered into. In that given case before the High
           Court of Madras, the contract expressly made it
           clear that the cheques were handed over as
           security. In this case, it is clear from the
           agreement entered into between the parties
           that after borrowing the money, making a
           statement to repay the same at some future
           date,   the    cheques    were   issued   for   due
           performance. Therefore, the transaction from
           its very nature or from the intention of the
           parties, as reflected in the agreement executed
           between the parties, is purely of a civil nature,
           for which a civil suit has already been filed. The
           very fact that the payment was agreed to some
           future date and there was no debt or liability on
           the date of delivery of the cheques, will take
24
the case out of the purview of the
Section
           138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act."
(underlining supplied)
18.   The same view is taken by Kerala High Court which

is approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
INDUS AIRWAYS

PRIVATE LIMITED AND OTHERS vs. MAGNUM AVIATION

PRIVATE LIMITED AND ANOTHER
reported in (2014) 12

SCC 539, in para 13 whereof it is held as under:-
The Kerala High Court in
SUPPLY HOUSE
           vs. Ullas
, 2006, Cri LJ 4330 had an occasion to
           consider
Section 138
of the N.I. Act. In that
           case, the post-dated cheque was issued by the
           accused along with the order for supply of
           goods. The supply of goods was not made by
           the complainant. The accused first instructed
           the bank to stop payment against the cheque
           and then requested the complainant not to
           present the cheque as he had not supplied the
           goods. The cheque was dishonoured. The single
           Judge of the Kerala High Court held,
                        ".........Ext.P1       cheque   cannot
                 be   stated   to   be   one   issued   in
                 discharge of the liability to the tune
                 of the amount covered by it, which
                 was really issued, as is revealed by
                 Ext. D1, as the price amount for 28
25
numbers     of   mixies,          which   the
                    complainant had not supplied. ....."
19.   This view was dissented by the Delhi High Court on

the reasoning that the issuance of the cheque at the time of

signing of such contract has to be considered against the liability

as the amount written in the cheque is payable on the date

mentioned in the cheque. The Delhi High Court was of the view

that if the liability is not construed in that manner, the whole

purpose of making dishonour of the cheque as an offence stands

defeated. But the reasoning of the High Court of Delhi did not

find favour with the Hon'ble Supreme Court and in para 15 of the

decision in Indus Airways Private Limited and Others, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has observed thus:-
The above reasoning of the Delhi High
            Court is clearly flawed inasmuch as it failed to
            keep in mind the fine distinction between civil
            liability   and   criminal    liability    under
Section
            138
of the N.I. Act. If at the time of entering
            into a contract, it is one of the conditions of the
            contract that the purchaser has to pay the
            amount in advance and there is breach of such
26
condition then purchaser may have to make
good the loss that might have occasioned to the
seller but that does not create a criminal
liability under
Section 138
. For a criminal
liability to be made out under
Section 138
,
there should be legally enforceable debt or
other liability subsisting on the date of drawal
of the cheque. We are unable to accept the
view of the Delhi High Court that the issuance
of cheque towards advance payment at the
time   of   signing   such   contract   has   to   be
considered as subsisting liability and dishonour
of   such   cheque     amounts    to    an    offence
under
Section 138
of the N.I. Act. The Delhi
High Court has traveled beyond the scope
of
Section 138
of the N.I. Act by holding that
the purpose of enacting
Section 138
of the N.I.
Act would stand defeated if after placing orders
and giving advance payments, the instructions
for stop payments are issued and orders are
cancelled. In what we have discussed above, if
a cheque is issued as an advance payment for
purchase of the goods and for any reason
purchase order is not carried to its logical
conclusion either because of its cancellation or
otherwise and material or goods for which
purchase order was placed is not supplied by
the supplier, in our considered view, the cheque
27
cannot be said to have been drawn for an
           existing debt or liability.
20.   The Hon'ble Supreme
Court further held
that the

view taken by the Andhra High Court in M/s.
SWASTIK COATERS

PVT. LTD., vs. M/S. DEEPAK BROTHERS AND ANOTHER
, 1997

(1) A.P.L.J. 432 (HC), Madras High Court in M/s
BALAJI

SEAFOODS EXPORTS (INDIA) LTD.,           REP. BY ITS DIRECTOR,

CHALAPATHY AND ANOTHER vs. MAC INDUSTRIES LTD.,             S.

PICHALAH, MANAGING DIRECTOR
, 153, MOUNT ROAD, MADRAS

15, REP. BY ITS AUTHORISED PERSON U. VIJAYAKUMAR, 1999

(I) CTC 6, Gujarat High Court in
SHANKU CONCRETES PVT. LTD.,

AND OTHERS vs. STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANOTHER
, 1999 SCC

ONLINE GUJ. 366 is the correct view and in consonance with the

scheme of
Section 138
of N.I. Act.
21.   The above principle squarely applies to the facts of

the present case. As already discussed above, the cheque in

question was issued by the petitioners as security for the

performance of the terms and conditions of the EMS agreement

entered into between the parties. It was not intended to be
28
encashed until the liability to enforce the security had arisen.

Apparently for this reason, the cheque was not dated. Therefore,

it cannot be said that the cheque in question was issued in

discharge of the debt or liability amounting to Rs.5,51,65,837/-

as contended by the respondent. Undeniably, the liability to

enforce the security deposit arose only on cancellation of the

licence agreement between the petitioners and DMRC i.e., on

07.05.2010. It is only thereafter, respondent claimed refund of

the security deposit and since the petitioners disputed the

liability, respondent proceeded to date and deposit the cheque

with his banker. These facts, therefore, make it evident that the

respondent was entitled to enforce the security only to the

extent of the debt/liability due and payable by the petitioners as

on date and not for the entire security amount. The dispute with

regard to the actual liability due and payable by the petitioners

arising out of the EMS agreement having been determined by

the Arbitrator, it stands concluded that    the petitioners were

liable to refund only an amount of Rs.18,36,164/-, and not

the amount shown in the subject cheque.
29
22. Though in the objection statement, respondent has

taken up a plea that the award rendered by the Hon'ble

Arbitrator was challenged before the High Court of Delhi, yet,

after   conclusion   of   arguments,   learned   counsel   for   the

petitioners has produced copy of the final order passed by the

High Court of Delhi dated 15.03.2019 which shows that the High

Court of Delhi has upheld the award passed by the Arbitrator.

Insofar as the liability of the petitioners to refund the security

deposit is concerned, in para 34 of the above judgment, Hon'ble

High Court of Delhi has held that "applying the principles held in

Associate Builders(supra), considering the nature of the disputes

and the findings arrived at by the Arbitral Tribunal, no

interference is called for. The argument of Mr. Mehta that since

the Tribunal had awarded the payment of the outstanding

amount along with interest, part forfeiture of the security deposit

is contrary to the agreement, is not tenable. It is too simplistic

to argue that the breach has been compensated with payment of

interest."
30
23.   The above finding conclusively sets at rest the

controversy raised in the instant case that on the date of drawal

of the cheque, the petitioner No.1 was liable to pay only

Rs.18,36,164/- and not Rs.5,51,65,837/- shown in the cheque.

Under the said circumstances, the respondent/complainant was

not entitled to present the said cheque for encashment.
24. Law is now well settled that for a criminal liability to be

made out for an offence under
Section 138
of the Act, there

should be legally enforceable debt or other liability subsisting on

the date of drawal of the cheque. The unimpeachable documents

discussed above clingingly point out that as on the date of

drawal of the cheque i.e., as on 10.6.2010, petitioner No.1 did

not owe any debt or liability to the complainant to the extent of

Rs.5,51,65,837/-. That apart, the respondent/complainant being

the holder of an undated cheque, no doubt, had authority in

terms of
Section 20
of the N.I.Act to complete the instrument by

filling the date therein so as to make it negotiable, but, under no

circumstances, he had an authority or power to recover from the
31
person delivering the instrument anything in excess of the

amount intended by him to be paid thereunder. That exactly is

the consequence flowing from an inchoate instrument dealt in
Section 20
of N.I. Act. To be precise,
Section 20
of N.I Act lays

down that 'Where one person signs and delivers to another a

paper stamped in accordance with the law relating to negotiable

instruments then in force in [India], and either wholly blank or

having written thereon an incomplete negotiable instrument, he

thereby gives prima facie authority to the holder thereof to make

or complete, as the case may be, upon it a negotiable

instrument, for any amount specified therein and not exceeding

the amount covered by the stamp. The person so signing shall

be liable upon such instrument, in the capacity in which he

signed the same, to any holder in due course for such amount;

provided that no person other than a holder in due course shall

recover from the person delivering the instrument anything in

excess of the amount intended by him to be paid thereunder'..
32
25. In addition to the above provision, the explanation

appended to
Section 138
of N.I. Act leaves no manner of doubt

that in order to constitute an offence under
Section 138
of N.I.

Act, there should be legally enforceable debt or other liability

subsisting as on the date of drawal of the cheque. In other

words, drawal of the cheque towards discharge of an existing

debt or a quantified liability and the consequent dishonour

thereof for insufficient funds is sine qua non for making out an

offence under
Section 138
of N.I. Act. In the case in hand,

though the cheque in question was delivered to the respondent

on the date of execution of the EMS agreement on 25.6.2008

yet, for the purpose of
Section 138
of N.I.Act, the cheque in

question is deemed to have been drawn only when the date was

filled and the instrument was presented for encashment on

22.06.2010. Since the material on record manifest    that as on

that date only a sum of Rs.18,36,164/- was due and payable to

the complainant/respondent, the petitioner No.1 was well within

its rights to issue a mandate to the banker to stop payment of

the aforesaid cheque which was not intended to be paid for
33
Rs.5,51,65,837/-.   As a result, no offence is committed by the

petitioners either on account of the mandate issued to the

banker to stop payment of the aforesaid cheque, or on account

of the dishonour of the aforesaid cheque. Consequently, it has to

be held that the prosecution instituted against the petitioners for

dishonour of the subject cheque being contrary to the provision

of
Section 138
of N.I. Act is illegal and abuse of process of court

and therefore, is liable to be quashed in entirety.
However, as petitioner No.1 has come forward to pay the

liability due by it and in fact, had offered to pay Rs.18,13,164/-

to respondent as stated in the petition, and the same has been

refused by the respondent, in order to put an end to the lis

between the parties, in exercise of the inherent jurisdiction

under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. and in order to prevent abuse of

process of court and to secure ends of justice, the petitioner

No.1 is directed to deposit the said amount together with

interest, if any, before the trial court, within 30 days from the

date of this order, in which event, the proceedings initiated
34
against the petitioners for the alleged dishonour of cheque in

C.C.No.35669/2010(arising out of PCR No.9479/2010) on the file

of XIV Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru shall stand

quashed.
Petitions stand allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Sd/-
JUDGE




     Bss/mn/-
