Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: AIR 1995 SC 2339
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/62700518/

[Cites
43
, Cited by
15
]
Delhi High Court
State vs Bashir Ahmed Ponnu & Ors on 8 December, 2014
Author:
Mukta Gupta
Bench:
Pradeep Nandrajog
,
Mukta Gupta
*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                 Judgment Reserved on: October 10, 2014
%                                Judgment Delivered on: December 08, 2014

+                       CRL.A. 1065/2014
      STATE                                              ..... Appellant
                        Represented by:     Mr.Varun Goswami, APP for
                                            the State with SI Dalip Kumar,
                                            Spl.Cell/NDR.
                        versus


      BASHIR AHMED PONNU & ORS                 ..... Respondent
                   Represented by: Mr.Dinesh Sharma, Advocate
                                   for Respondent Nos.1 to 3.
                                   Ms.Saahila Lamba, Advocate
                                   for Respondent No.4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA

MUKTA GUPTA, J.
1.    The State is aggrieved by the decision of the learned Additional
Sessions Judge acquitting the respondents Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz
Ahmed Lone, Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor for the offences
punishable under
Section 120B
/
121
/
121-A
/
122
/
123
IPC &
Section
17
/
18
/
20
/
21
/
23
of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (in short the
UAP
Act
), acquitting Bashir Ahmed for offence punishable under
Section
489(B)
/
489 (C)
of IPC and Shahid Gafoor for offences punishable under
Section 186
/
353
/
307
of IPC and
Section 25
/
27
of the Arms Act, though
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                            Page 1 of 49
Shahid Gafoor stands convicted for offence punishable under
Section 14
of
the Foreigners Act.
2.    The prosecution case in nutshell is that in the first week of January
2007 a secret information was received that Commander of Pakistan based
banned militant organization Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) having code name
"Alpha-9" had instructed one Haider (code name-Doctor) r/o Pakistan and
District Commander of Sopore area in J&K to carry out Fidayeen attack at
some prominent places in the national capital and for this purpose
„fidayeens‟ would be sent from Pakistan through Indo-Bangladesh border.
On enquiries made, further information was received that Haider @ Doctor
was planning to send arms, ammunition and explosives to the fidayeens in
the Capital from J&K.     On February 04, 2007 at 2.00 PM a specific
information was received in the office of Special Cell/ NDR, Lodhi Colony,
New Delhi that the said Haider @ Doctor had sent one Bashir r/o Sopore,
J&K along with two other Kashmiri militants from Kashmir valley, who
were having huge consignment of arms, ammunition and explosive material
in their possession, which was to be delivered to a Pakistani Fidayeen in
Delhi and they would be coming to Delhi by Malwa Express and delivering
the consignment to the Pakistani fidayeen at Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg
(DDU Marg), Rouse Avenue near the Ranjeet Singh Flyover and in case raid
is conducted they can be apprehended along with consignment of arms,
ammunition and explosive material. A raiding team was constituted and it
was found that Bashir Ahmed Ponnu @ Maulvi, Fayaz Ahmed Lone and
Abdul Majeed Baba, who came by Malwa Express, met Shahid Gafoor and
passed on the consignments when they were all apprehended. Bashir, Fayaz
and Abdul were overpowered, however Shahid Gafoor tried to run away
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                            Page 2 of 49
after firing on the police officials and thus cross-firing ensued in which none
was hurt. Finally Gafoor was apprehended and PETN explosives, timer,
non-electronic silver colour detonators, hand grenades and 100 notes of 500
rupees currency notes were recovered besides 10,000 USD.
3.    The defence of the respondents is of false implication and they
themselves appeared as defence witnesses. Bashir stated that he was doing
the business of fruits at Sopore bus stand, J&K. In the last week of January
2007 when he was coming from Calcutta to Srinagar by Malda Express,
while he was purchasing food items at Ambala Railway Station, he was
illegally detained by the officials of Special Cell and falsely implicated. He
denied the recoveries from him including 100 notes of USD of denomination
100/- each. Similarly, Fayaz stated that on January 28, 2007 he was in
Ludhiana in relation to his business of Kashmiri Shawls where he was
apprehended by officials of Special Cell, brought to Delhi and falsely
implicated. Shahid stated that he was doing the business of readymade
garments and had gone to Kathmandu from where he was apprehended by
the officials of Special Cell, brought to Delhi and kept in illegal detention
from January 13, 2007. Abdul Majeed Baba deposed that he was doing the
business of fruits in Fruit Mandi and was coming from Calcutta to New
Delhi by Rajdhani Express and when he reached the New Delhi Railway
station on January 29, 2007 he was apprehended, illegally detained and
falsely implicated.
4.    Prosecution to prove its case examined 24 witnesses.          The main
witnesses of the prosecution are SI Dalip Kumar PW-1, SI Rahul Kumar
PW-2, SI Devender Singh PW-14, Inspector Sanjay Dutt PW-16, Inspector
Subhash Vats PW-20, DCP Alok Kumar PW-23 and Addl. DCP Sanjeev
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 3 of 49
Yadav PW-24 who are the members of the raiding party and had
apprehended the accused persons. Besides the same PW-3 Vinit Sharma the
owner of STD/PCO Booth, and PW-5 Jitender who was a public witnesses
are also relevant witnesses.
5.    Full contours of the evidence of the prosecution has been spoken of
by SI Dalip Kumar PW-1 who deposed that in the first week of January
2007 an information was received that Alpha-9, Commander of JeM
instructed Haider @ Doctor, the District Commander of JeM in Sopore Area
of J&K to carry out the fidayeen attack at prominent place in national capital
and thus some fidayeen were sent through Indo Bangladesh border. To
develop this information a team led by Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma
which included him i.e. Dalip Kumar and other staff of Special Cell under
the supervision of ACP Sanjeev Yadav was formed. Technical surveillance
was mounted and contacts were developed. On February 04, 2007 at about
2.00 PM a specific information was received telephonically in the office of
Special Cell that on the instructions of said Commander of JeM, the District
Commander Haider (code name Doctor) has sent one Bashir Ahmed r/o
Sopore with two other Kashmiri militants with huge amount of arms and
ammunition and explosive material etc. to Delhi to hand over the same to
the Pakistani Fidayeen terrorist at DDU Marg near Ranjeet Singh Flyover,
Rouse Avenue, Delhi. All the three JeM militants would come by Malwa
Express at New Delhi Railway Station. A team led by Inspector Mohan
Chand under the supervision of ACP Sanjeev Yadav and DCP Special Cell
Ashok Kumar including Dalip Kumar, Inspector Badrish Dutt, Inspector
Sanjay Dutt, Inspector Subhash Vats, SI Rahul Kumar, SI Devender Singh,
SI Ramesh Lamba, SI Kailash Singh Bisht, SI Rakesh Malik and other
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 4 of 49
police staff left the office of Special Cell, Lodhi Colony in four private cars,
three official vehicles and three two wheelers at around 6.00 PM. The team
reached near New Delhi Station Ajmeri Gate near Wimpy Restaurant at
around 6.35 PM where they met the secret informer. Malwa Express was to
arrive at 8.30 PM at platform No.3. 7-8 passersby were requested to join the
raiding team, however none agreed except one namely Jitender r/o
Shahdara. Part of the team took position near the stairs of over-bridge at
platform No.3 and part of the team was deployed at DDU Marg near Ranjeet
Singh Flyover. At about 9.05 PM Malwa Express arrived at platform No.3
and the passengers alighted from the train. At about 9.10 PM the informer
pointed out three passengers out of which he recognised one as Bashir
Ahmed. All three of them came out of the station from Ajmeri Gate side
where Bashir went to a STD booth and made a call. The team members
secretly followed all three of them and Inspector Subhash Vats in the
meantime found out the contact number where Bashir Ahmed had made the
call. He was informed that Bashir Ahmed had made a STD call at J&K
number. After making the call the three started moving towards DDU Marg
via Bhavbhuti Marg Minto Road and reached the bus stop at DDU Marg
near Ranjeet Singh flyover where a person having a black colour bag on his
shoulder was already present. The said Bashir Ahmed met that person and
took out a card board box from inside his bag and handed over the same to
him.   The person checked the card board box after opening the same.
Immediately the raiding party asked them to surrender disclosing them their
identity. The person who was present at the bus stop and to whom the card
board box was handed over whose name later was revealed as Shahid
Gafoor r/o Pakistan left his bag and card board box on the footpath; took out
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 5 of 49
his pistol and started to run towards ITO while firing on the police party.
Police party also retaliated. In the meantime the other three i.e. Bashir
Ahmed Ponu, Fayaz Ahmed Lone and Abdul Majeed Baba were
apprehended by members of the raiding team. Shahid Gafoor took position
behind a tree situated on the way to Arya Samaj Mandir at DDU Marg and
fired on the police party. After 15 minutes the firing stopped and then the
militant was asked to surrender on which he threw his pistol on the way and
came out from the back side of the tree when he was overpowered.
6.    SI Dalip Kumar further deposed that from the pistol of Shahid Gafoor
live cartridge was found in the barrel and one live cartridge was found in the
magazine while one empty magazine was also found lying near the pistol.
The recovered pistol and the live cartridges were seized and sealed. Then
the card board shoe box lying on the footpath was checked in which a black
polythene was recovered which had 30 slabs of yellow colour PETN
explosive material.    Each slab was wrapped in separate transparent
polythene. Beneath the recovered explosive, a transparent plastic container
was recovered in which four non-electronic silver coloured detonators and a
timer was recovered. A wad of 100 notes of the denomination of `500/- was
recovered in the same card board box. The recovered explosive material
was weighed which was found to be 3 Kg out of which 2 samples of 10
gram each were taken out and kept in black colour small plastic containers
and converted into a cloth parcels. The remaining recovered 2.980 kg was
kept in the small black colour polythene and converted into a sealed parcel.
The recovered four non-electric detonators were kept in separate plastic
container and sealed. Similarly, the timer and the notes were also sealed.
The blue and grey colour bag in possession of Bashir was checked which
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 6 of 49
contained a wad of hundred USD of denomination hundred each which were
wrapped in a yellow colour envelope and concealed in the bottom pocket of
the bag beneath the other clothes and other articles. The same were also
seized and sealed. The bag recovered from Fayaz was also checked which
contained a stainless steel container recovered under the clothes from which
a black colour polythene was recovered which had four black colour hand
grenades with brown colour packing tape wrapped on all the hand grenades.
The suitcase with Abdul Majeed was checked which contained two hand
grenades one blue colour and the other of military green colour kept in black
colour polythene. The same was also seized and sealed. The black colour
canvas bag which was thrown by Shahid Gafoor was also seized and sealed.
The other witnesses of the raiding party as noted above also deposed in sync
with SI Dalip Kumar except minor variations which are bound to be there in
the testimony of the witnesses.
7.    The learned trial court acquitted the respondents on the basis of the
following findings:
"A)    No witness has been examined by the prosecution in
             corroboration to the fact of the special staff team
             visiting J & K and West Bengal for development    of
             secret information in January, 2007.
B)     DD entry recorded in respect of secret information
             having been received in January, 2007 and the first DD
             entry recorded on 04.02.2007 have not been proved nor
             any related documents were    ever placed on record or
             exhibited.
C-i) According to PW-24 the Investigating Officer Mr.Sanjeev
           Kumar       Yadav, STD slip Exhibit PX-2 seized from
           the accused No.1 Bashir was pasted on seizure memo,
           however the said fact is contradicted by PW3 Vineet.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 7 of 49
C-ii) Identification of Bashir Ahmed by PW-3 in the police
            station is against the established procedure of law and
            since no TIP was conducted, identification of accused
            Bashir by PW-3 cannot help the prosecution.
C-iii) PW-3 himself gave a clean chit to Bashir Ahmed when he
             did not find anything suspicious about him. Moreover,
             no one will carry the STD slip with him so as to create
             evidence against him. Further no other person was
             examined by prosecution to strengthen the fact that
             Bashir Ahmed came to STD booth of PW-3 to make call
             to Pakistan.
D-i) During the firing by the accused Shahid Gafoor, why
           only the police officials wearing Bullet Proff (BP) jackets
           were hit and not the ones without BP jackets?
D-ii) Further why no bullet hit accused Shahid Gafoor even on
            his feet despite such heavy firing on him.
D-iii) Further no witness has stated that any bullet was found
             near the tree or seized behind which Gafoor was hiding
             and firing.
D-iv) Further one of the empty cartridge fired by Shahid
            Gafoor was picked from the ground but it had no mark
            DUST or SOIL in terms of deposition of PW-4 (CFSL
            A.R.Arora)
      D-v) Further why no bullets were found in any of the BP
           jackets when PW-4 examined the same?
E-i)   Despite the palpable danger involved, PW-6 Jitender did
             not ask for BP jacket despite being present on the spot at
             the time of firing.
E-ii) Contradiction in statement of PW-6, PW-12, PW-8 to
            PW-10 and PW-20 as to how many police officials
            actually wearing BP jackets.
F-i)   The identity of PW-6 has been disputed by defence
             arguing that his signatures on exhibits PW-1/A to PW-
             1/C are different than the ones on his deposition in the
             court and the name of his father is differing on different
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 8 of 49
dates of deposition.
F-ii) How PW-6 identified the secret informer when admittedly
            no police official was in uniform?
F-iii) Why PW-6 never stated about fire shots having hit 4
             members of the police team?
F-iv) According to PW-6 the accused names were Bashir,
            Lambu and Chotu and however this fact is no where
            mentioned in any of the documents relied upon by the
            prosecution.
F-v) According to the prosecution 10,000 USD were
           recovered from the possession of one of the accused, but
           PW-6 stated that the said recovery of 50,000 USD was
           made from the bag.
F-vi) PW-6 has stated that his statement was recorded by SI
            Dalip Kumar at 01.30 AM that how rukka was recovered
            at 03.00 AM
      F-vii) PW-6 did not know the colour or print of the shoe box, he
             did not know the documents signed by him were in Hindi,
             English or Urdu, whether the seal was of plastic wood,
             iron.
G)     Despite the danger of Fidayeen and Bomb, no bomb
             disposal squad was requisitioned or informed knowing
             well that no one in the team could defuse the bomb.
H)     As per the requirement of law, the seal after use is to be
             handed over to the public witness where he has been
             joined in the investigation but in the instant matter it was
             not handed over to PW5 who was the only public witness
             in the instant matter which seal was handed over to PW2,
             though the abovesaid was also contradicted by PW5 by
             stating that the seal was handed over to PW1.
I)     Colour of the detonators yellow by PW-6, silver by other
             witness, further colour of hand grenades brown by PW-6,
             but prosecution says black.
J)     Despite PCR having reached the spot, no witness from
             PCR or local Police was joined in investigation nor cited
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 9 of 49
as witness.
K)     IO PW-24 being party to all proceedings, right from
             receipt of information till the raid should not have been
             the investigator of his own case thus causing prejudice to
             accused. AIR 1995 SC 2339
      L)     The prominent places of Delhi to be attack were not
             named or known to the entire police team.
M)     The FIR was registered at 03.00 AM in the morning of
             05.02.2007and in terms of the procedure FIR is required
             to be put up before the learned MM within 24 hours
             however, the same was put before the learned MM at
             10.00 AM on 06.02.2007 and this delay has not been
             explained?
N)     The railway ticket being unreserved ticket could have
             been issued to anyone and it is highly unbelievable that
             accused would travel in general compartment with
             explosives and cash as well as US dollars in their bags.
      O)     The photographs taken during the operation of seizure
             etc. were not produced during trial and were sought to be
             brought on record belatedly and none of the witnesses
             claimed that the photographs were taking during their
             examination.
P)     The railway authorities were not informed about the fact
             that accused were travelling in MALWA express coming
             to Delhi with explosives.
Q)     Discrepancy in the version of witnesses about the police
             team leaving the spot after the operation and other
             formalities i.e. 1.30 AM, 02.00 AM, 03.00 AM, 05.00 AM
             and 07.00 AM.
R)     161 Cr.P.C. statement of PW-6 Jitender was recorded by
             SI Dalip Kumar at 01.30 AM, however according to
             record the same was recorded by PW-24 at 03.00 AM.
S)     Though PW-6 has signed the seizure memos of explosives
             etc. recovered as witness, he is not a witness to personal
             search memo and arrest memos of the accused.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 10 of 49
T)     Though the accused were apprehended between 09.30
             and 10.00 PM of 04.02.2007 their arrest was done at
             05.00 AM on 05.02.2007.
U)     Unexplained delay of 16 days in sending exhibits/ parcels
             from Malkhana to FSL.
V)     Despite recovery of highly explosive material, MHC (M)
             was not informed or directed to take precautions nor
             steps were taken for diffusion or destruction of the
             same in time which raises suspicion.
W)     There was no legal evidence to substantiate the US
             Dollars were fake except the report of US embassy which
             is hit by
Section 62
of the Evidence Act."
8.    The legal position with regard to interference by the High Court in an
appeal against acquittal is well settled. The principles to be kept in mind by
the Appellate Court while dealing with the appeals against the order of
acquittal have been laid down by the Supreme Court in the decision reported
as (
2010) 6 SCC 1 Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma Vs. State (NCT of
Delhi
) as under:
" (i) There is no limitation on the part of the appellate court to
           review the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is
           founded.
(ii) The appellate court in an appeal against acquittal can
           review the entire evidence and come to its own
           conclusions.
(iii) The appellate court can also review the trial court's
            conclusion with respect to both facts and law.
(iv) While dealing with the appeal preferred by the State, it is
           the duty of the appellate court to marshal the entire
           evidence on record and by giving cogent and adequate
           reasons set aside the judgment of acquittal.
(v) An order of acquittal is to be interfered with only when
           there are "compelling and substantial reasons" for doing
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 11 of 49
so. If the order is "clearly unreasonable", it is a
           compelling reason for interference.
(vi) While sitting in judgment over an acquittal the appellate
           court is first required to seek an answer to the question
           whether findings of the trial court are palpably wrong,
           manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable. If the
           appellate court answers the above question in the negative
           the order of acquittal is not to be disturbed. Conversely, if
           the appellate court holds, for reasons to be recorded, that
           the order of acquittal cannot at all be sustained in view of
           any of the above infirmities, it can reappraise the evidence
           to arrive at its own conclusion.
(vii) When the trial court has ignored the evidence or misread
            the material evidence or has ignored material documents
            like dying declaration/report of ballistic experts, etc. the
            appellate court is competent to reverse the decision of the
            trial court depending on the materials placed."
9.    On marshalling of evidence it is thus to be seen whether the findings
arrived at by the learned trial court are cogent and convincing or perverse
and whether there are compelling and substantial reasons for interfering with
the order of acquittal and whether in all probabilities the order of acquittal
cannot be sustained.
PERVERSE FINDINGS
10.   Finding (A) of the learned Trial Court that no witness was examined
by the prosecution to corroborate the fact that Special Staff team visited
J&K and West Bengal to develop secret information in January 2007 is a
wholly perverse finding. Besides investigation, prevention and surveillance
is an important task of the police.         Besides technical surveillance,
surveillance is kept by using anonymous methods and in case the factum
that surveillance is being kept and information developed is revealed the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 12 of 49
very purpose for which the surveillance is kept would be defeated. Thus
there would be hardly evidence with the police to corroborate their actions
during surveillance.
11.   Some of the findings of the learned trial court are factually incorrect
resulting in consequent perverse findings as is demonstrated hereinafter.
Learned trial court in its finding No.E(ii) held that there was contradiction in
the statement of PW-6, PW-12, PW-8 to PW-10 and PW-20 as to how many
police officials were actually wearing bullet proof jackets. A perusal of the
record would show that only PW-6 and PW-20 deposed with regard to the
police officers wearing the bullet proof jackets. There is no statement of
PW-8 Rakesh Kumar, PW-9 Jitender, PW-10 SI Nanak Chand in this regard.
As a matter of fact PW-12 was not even a member of the raiding team and is
Deputy Secretary (Home) Govt. of NCTD who had forwarded the sanction
for prosecution. PW-6 Jitender deposed that the police was not putting the
bullet proof jacket when he met them and had put the same at 9.15 PM and
about 7-8 police personnel put the bullet proof jacket and they took it off at
about 11/11.30 PM. As far as he was concerned, he did not ask for bullet
proof jacket. PW-20 Inspector Satish Vats stated that DCP Special Cell,
Inspector Sanjay Dutt, Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma and SI Dalip Kumar
were wearing bullet proof jackets. However, in his cross-examination he
stated that DCP, ACP, Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma, Inspector Sanjay
Dutt and some other members of the raiding party were wearing bullet proof
jacket and he did not recollect whether SI Dalip was wearing the bullet proof
jacket or not. The testimony of PW-1, PW-2, PW-14 and PW-16 has been
ignored by the learned trial court on this count. PW-1 SI Dalip Kumar
stated that there were 35 police personnel present and there were only 9 to
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 13 of 49
10 bullet proof jackets. Further PW-2 SI Rahul Kumar stated that DCP,
ACP, Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma and Inspector Dalip were hit by the
bullet fired by the person but saved because of bullet proof jackets. He
further stated that all these four bullet proof jackets were seized vide memo
Ex.PW-2/B and sealed. In cross-examination, he stated that about 8 to 10
members of the raiding party were wearing bullet proof jackets and the
public witness was not wearing the bullet proof jacket. PW-14 SI Devender
Singh stated that DCP Alok Kumar, ACP Sanjeev Kumar, Inspector
M.C.Sharma, SI Dalip Kumar and 2-3 more members of the raiding party
had worn bullet proof jackets and the bullet proof jacket was not given to the
public witness Jitender. PW-16 Inspector Sanjay Dutt deposed that he along
with Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma Alok Kumar and SI Dalip Kumar who
were nearest to Shahid Gafoor were hit with the bullet fired by Shahid
Gafoor but were saved due to bullet proof jackets. Thus a perusal of the
statements of all these witnesses would show that the consistent version of
the prosecution witnesses was that around 8 to 10 police personnel were
wearing bullet proof jackets and no bullet proof jacket was given to Jitender
the public witness and that four officers who were in front i.e. DCP Alok
Kumar, ACP Sanjeev Kumar, Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma and SI Dalip
were hit by bullets but were saved due to bullet proof jackets.
12.   A sequel to these are the findings No. D(i) & E(i) of the learned trial
court. It is a matter of common knowledge that whenever firing operations
take place, all officers or the assailants as the case may be are not in the
front and strategies are adopted as to whom the cover fire is to be given.
Thus the people who are in the range of attack only are in the need of
wearing bullet proof jackets. A public witness would be kept in a cover at
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 14 of 49
the end and thus he would not need a bullet proof jacket. Thus the findings
D(i) and E(i) of the learned trial court that why only police officials wearing
bullet proof jackets were hit and why despite palpable danger involved, PW-
6 Jitender was not asked for bullet proof jacket are perverse.
13.   Further findings No. D(ii) to D(iv) & F(iii) are also perverse and need
to be rejected. The purpose of the police officials was to apprehend Shahid
Gafoor while he was running away and not to kill him and thus all efforts
are made to ensure that no bullet is hit in the counter attack and at the same
time the assailant‟s arms and ammunitions are got exhausted so that he can
be apprehended. Thus the finding that why no bullet hit accused Shahid
Gafoor even on his feet despite such heavy firing is perverse as the firing
was not to hit him but to apprehend him. The finding that no witness stated
that any bullet was found near the tree or seized behind which Gafoor was
hiding ignores the seizure memo Ex.PW-2/A which speaks about the
recovery of 13 empty cartridges of 9 MM and 7 empty cartridges of 30 bore
recovered from the spot. 13 empty cartridges belonged to the weapons used
by the police officials and 7 empty cartridges belonged to the weapon used
by Shahid Gafoor. The same were duly seized, sealed and exhibited during
the trial. Further one of the empty cartridges fired by Shahid Gafoor which
was picked from the ground had no dust or soil on it as per PW-4 CFSL
Expert Shri A.R.Arora. The same would not belie the prosecution case as
the mud was not wet and the dust could not have been detected as the
cartridges was kept in pullanda of clothes when they were seized, thus the
dust if any would have been wiped off by the same. Witnesses including
public witness Jitender have consistently stated about the firing which took
place between Shahid Gafoor and the police party. While noting in finding
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 15 of 49
D(v) that no bullets were found in any of the BP jackets when examined by
PW-4, the learned trial court failed to notice the detailed FSL report which
on examining the four bullet proof jackets noticed bullet holes on it. The
four bullet proof jackets on which bullet had hit were duly exhibited. The
opinion of the expert regarding bullet proof mark on the jackets proves the
case of the prosecution and it is not necessary that all or any bullet should
get stuck in the bullet proof jackets. Further, merely because PW-6 did not
depose about the fire shots having hit the four members of the police team
would not discredit the version of the other witnesses. In such a detailed
exercise it is not necessary for each witness to observe each and every fact
and by passage of time certain facts do skip while deposing as memory fades
and nobody is expected to narrate the version in a parrot like version.
14.   The findings No. F(i) and F(ii) are also perverse. PW-6 Jitender
stated that the police officials duly introduced him and he joined the raiding
party. Thus a person who was an outsider would have been known to him as
a Secret informer and he could have identified him. Further a witness is
required to state facts in issue and not everything which can be possibly
foreseen by the defence to find the loopholes. Merely because PW-6 signed
differently on the exhibits and in deposition, the finding of disputed identity
of PW-6 is unwarranted especially when this fact has not been put to PW-6
Jitender in his cross-examination that he is not the same person who was
present during the search operation and the incident. Further the learned
trial judge lost sight of the fact that PW-6 Jitender clearly stated that he did
not want to disclose his full details as the accused persons had been
intimidating him during the course of hearing and thus he even did not
produce his ID Card but offered to show the same to the learned court,
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 16 of 49
which also explains his signing the statement by putting the initials before
court.
15.      The findings (G), (P) and (V) of the learned trial court that despite
the danger of Fidayeen and bomb, no bomb disposal squad was
requisitioned or informed knowing well that no one in the team could defuse
the bomb; railway authorities were not informed about the fact that accused
were travelling in Malwa Express coming to Delhi with explosives and that
the MHC (M) was not informed or directed to take precautions nor steps
were taken for diffusion or destruction of the same in time which raises
suspicion are wholly perverse. The information received on February 04,
2007 at about 2.00 PM was that on the instructions of the Commander of
JeM, the District Commander Haider (code name Doctor) has sent one
Bashir Ahmed r/o Sopore with two other Kashmiri militants with huge
amount of arms and ammunition and explosive material etc. to Delhi to hand
over the same to a Pakistani Fidayeen (terrorist) at DDU Marg near Ranjeet
Singh Flyover, Rouse Avenue, Delhi. Thus, the information was of carrying
arms, ammunitions and explosive materials and not that an explosion would
be caused. The trial court failed to notice the distinction between a ready to
use explosive being carried and being carried explosive material in an
unassembled form which cannot explode being carried and thus there was no
need of bomb disposal squad or informing the railway authorities or
cautioning the MHC(M).
The learned Trial Court failed to notice the distinction between
primary explosives, secondary explosives and the propellants. In general,
the primary and secondary explosives detonate and the propellants
deflagrate. Primary explosives such as mercury fulminates/lead styphnate/
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 17 of 49
lead azide are considered very sensitive explosives and can detonate even
when subjected to a spark, flame, friction or a heated wire which causes a
crystal to reach its ignition temperature. However, the secondary explosives
which        are      PETN       (Pentaerythritol      Tetranitrate),       RDS
(Cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine), TNT (Trinitrotoluene) and HNS (Hexanitro
Stilbene) are less sensitive to most initiation stimuli than primary explosives
and are thus safe to carry. The initiation of secondary explosives generally
requires the shock wave energy from a primary explosive.                Further a
secondary explosive will not detonate when subjected to a spark, flame or a
hot wire as will a primary explosive. Secondary explosives like PETN or
RDX will cause a deflagration only under certain confined and continuous
conditions. Thus the secondary explosives which are less sensitive are used
in a wide variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. It is thus
common knowledge that till the point explosion is to be caused the
secondary explosives, the detonators, the timers etc., are all stored in
separated conditions and only on being combined can be used as an
explosive along with electrical fitting completing the circuit when they are
to be exploded.
16.     The finding (L) of the learned Trial Court that the prominent places of
Delhi to be attacked were not known to the entire police team is also
perverse. The said prominent places to be attacked would not be even
known to all the accused and are generally informed to the last player in
action through the people who are commanding such actions.
17.     The finding (N) of the learned trial court that it was highly
unbelievable that the accused would travel in general compartment with
explosives and cash as well as US dollars in their bags with unreserved
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 18 of 49
tickets is also perverse. The best course for any person committing unlawful
activity is to mix up with the crowd in the general compartment than in the
first-class or second-class compartment and get away unidentified.
FACTUALLY INCORRECT FINDING
18.   The finding F(iv) of learned trial court that the names of Bashir,
Lambu and Chotu are nowhere mentioned in any of the documents relied by
the prosecution and hence how PW-6 came to know about the same is
wholly erroneous and factually incorrect finding.       PW-6 Jitender has
deposed that accused persons disclosed their names as Bashir, Lambu and
Chotu. Further the seizure memo Ex.PW-1/D which is duly signed by PW-6
Jitender as witness mentions the names of all accused from whom recoveries
were made and the memo is also signed by all the accused on the same page
where-after PW-6 Jitender has signed (page 468 of the paper book).
ERRONEOUS FINDING/ INCORRECT APPRECIATION
19.   As regards findings No.F(v) and (W) all the witnesses have stated
with regard to recovery of 10,000 USD and the seizure memo as well as the
report of the Embassy also proves the same.         Merely because in his
testimony PW-6 stated that the recovery was of 50,000 USD the version of
prosecution would not be belied. Further the report of the US Embassy with
regard to the currency being fake has been exhibited as PX-5 along with the
photocopies of the currency notes. No objection has been taken to the mode
of proof of the said document during the trial and hence in view of the
decision reported as (
2003) 8 SCC 752 R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounder Vs.
Arulmigu Viswesaraswami & V.P. Temple & Anr.
no challenge to the proof
of the document can be made at this stage.
Learned counsel for the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                             Page 19 of 49
respondents during the course of arguments and in the written submissions
have stated that they never objected to the admissibility of this document
under Section 62 of the Indian Evidence Act as held by the learned trial
court but under Section 162 of the Cr.P.C.
20.   Finding No.(J) that PCR officials or local police personnel were not
joined in the investigation is also based on incorrect appreciation of facts as
PCR officials and local police had reached the spot after the incident had
occurred. They were not the eye-witnesses to the incident or recoveries and
thus were not required to be examined and cited as witnesses.
21.   The finding F(vii) of the learned trial court that PW-6 did not know
the colour or print of the shoe box, whether the documents signed by him
were in Hindi, English or Urdu and whether the seal was of plastic, wood or
iron is erroneous based on incorrect appreciation of evidence.           PW-6
deposed that shoe box lying at the spot was printed but he did not remember
its colour. He further stated that he could not tell as to what was printed on
the said box. There is a lot of difference in not knowing whether it was
coloured or printed and not remembering the print. Further PW-6 in his
cross-examination stated that he did not remember whether the documents
which he signed were in Hindi, English or Urdu and not that he did not see
those documents.     He clarified that he had read the contents of the
documents and some of the documents were mentioning the recovered
articles/ substance. He clarified that he could not read Urdu and he did not
remember if he had signed any paper written in Urdu. He clarified that he
signed his statement in English. Further with regard to the seal also he
stated that he did not remember whether the same was made of plastic,
wooden or iron and not that he did not see it. This witness further clarified
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 20 of 49
that SI Dalip Kumar did the writing work at the spot and also identified the
spot in the site plan shown to him. He further clarified that SI Dalip Kumar
obtained his signatures on the papers at different time at the spot only,
thereby showing as and when any document was prepared, signatures of
PW-6 were taken. Further the question in cross-examination whether you
signed the documents were in Hindi, English or Urdu was a vague question
put and thus no specific answer could be given to the same as the witness
had signed a number of documents. It is inappropriate to draw an inference
of vagueness from the testimony of a witness on the basis of answers to
vague and sweeping questions.
22.   Finding No.(I) regarding variation in the deposition of the witnesses
that PW-6 deposed that the colour of the detonators were yellow whereas
other deposed that the same were silver and PW-6 deposed the colour of
hand grenades was brown whereas prosecution says black is also erroneous
based on incorrect appreciation of facts. Inspector Sanjay Dutt PW-16, SI
Dalip Kumar PW-1, SI Rahul Kumar PW-2, ACP Sanjeev Kumar PW-24
have all stated that four black colour hand grenades with light brown colour
tape over the lever were recovered from the possession of Fayaz Ahmed
Lone whereas Jitender has given no colour of the same and only in cross-
examination stated that the hand grenades were of brown colour. This is
because the lever of the grenades had a brown colour tape wrapped on them.
Further all the witnesses have stated the detonators were of silver colour
whereas PW-6 states it to be yellow. It may be noted that PETN recovered
was yellow and thus confusion to PW-6 who was a common public man
unaware of the different explosives can‟t be ruled out.
23.   Finding No.(M) that the FIR was not sent to the Magistrate on
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                             Page 21 of 49
February 05, 2007 itself is also erroneous and is factually incorrect in noting
that the FIR was registered at 03.00 AM which is the time when rukka was
sent on February 05, 2007. It is to be noted that on February 05, 2007 itself
the respondents were produced before the learned CMM along with the case
diaries which obviously had the FIR as well. It was only an additional copy
of the FIR which was sent to the Ilaka Magistrate.
24.   Finding Nos.C-(i) and (iii) are also erroneous. The contradiction
sought to be introduced with regard to seizure of the slip Ex.PX-2 as
deposed by PW-24 ACP Sanjeev Yadav that it was pasted on the seizure
memo which is contradicted by PW-3 Vinit is also incorrect as when the
STD booth slip was seized from Bashir, Vinit was not present. He only
identified the slip which was issued by him at the shop which obviously was
not pasted at that time. Further the findings of the learned trial court that
why would Bashir keep the STD slip in his pocket to create evidence and
that no other witness was examined to strengthen the fact that Bashir came
to the STD booth of PW-3 to make the call are also erroneous. Bashir was
not in the knowledge that he being followed or he will be apprehended and
keeping the receipts in the pocket is a natural course of conduct except
where people are in the habit of throwing the document then and there.
Further it is not necessary that at all times in a day there are a number of
people at the STD booth to make phone calls and thus it was not possible for
either the investigating agency to get other people to identify Bashir having
made phone calls from the STD booth of PW-3. The learned trial court
failed to appreciate that law does not require corroboration of the
corroborative evidence. The onus on the prosecution is to prove the fact in
issue beyond reasonable doubt by substantive evidence and if possible by
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 22 of 49
corroboration of the same and not to further corroborate even the
corroborative evidence.
25.   The findings of the learned trial court at F(vi) and (Q) with regard to
discrepancy in the version of the witnesses leaving the spot and recording
the statement of PW-6 at 1.30 AM whereas ruqqa was sent at 3.00 AM is
erroneous. The witnesses were not expected to give exact time and a rough
estimation of time could only be given by them. The rukka was sent at 3.00
AM and as per PW-24 his statement was recorded at 3.00 AM. Further PW-
6 stated that he returned back home at 4.00 AM the next day, thus fortifying
that he was present throughout the proceedings even after the rukka was
dispatched.
26.   The findings (S) and (T) of the learned trial court that though PW-6
had signed the seizure memos of the explosives recovered as witness but he
did not witness personal search memo and arrest memo and though accused
were apprehended between 9.30PM and 10.00 PM on February 04, 2007
their arrest was done at 5.00 AM on February 05, 2007 are also erroneous.
The proceedings at the spot are bound to take time. Though the process of
apprehension started at around 9.30 PM on February 04, 2007 however the
accused try to flee away. Bashir Ahmed, Fayaz Ahmed and Abdul Majeed
were apprehended but Shahid Gafoor tried to run away after firing on the
police officials and thus counter firing ensued resulting in apprehension of
the accused Shahid only at around 11.30 PM where after seizure memos
were prepared which were duly witnessed by PW-6 and rukka was sent at
3.00 AM on February 05, 2007 where after statement of PW-6 was recorded
and PW-6 left the spot. The formal arrest of the accused was the final
culmination of the proceedings which took place at 5.00 AM on February
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 23 of 49
05, 2007 by which time PW-6 had already left and thus he could not have
witnessed the personal search memo and arrest memo of the accused.
REMAINDER FINDINGS
27.   With regard to finding No.(K) no doubt PW-24 ACP Sanjeev Kumar
was a member of the raiding party, however he was not the complainant
since in the present case the entire investigation was carried out then and
there at the spot and was required to be carried out by an officer not below
the rank of ACP, thus PW-24 conducted the investigation and he not being
the complainant, the investigation conducted by a member of the raiding
team would not vitiate the proceedings. In the decision reported as AIR
1995 SC 2339 Megha Singh Vs. State of Haryana relied upon by the learned
trial court the police officer who conducted the search of the accused and
recovered the pistol and the cartridges and on whose complaint First
Information Report was lodged conducted the investigation. In the light of
these facts the Court held that the officer was not only the complainant in
the case but carried on the investigation and examined witnesses under
Section 161
Cr.P.C. and such practices to say the least should not be
resorted so that there may not be any occasion to suspect fair and impartial
investigation. In the present case, since the offences under the provisions of
the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
were also involved, the
investigation was required to be conducted by an officer not below the rank
of ACP. PW-24 ACP Sanjeev Kumar though a member of the raiding party
was not the complainant. The first information report was lodged on the
complaint of SI Dalip Kumar and thus the decision in the case of Megha
Singh has no application to the facts of the present case.
Dealing with a
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 24 of 49
similar situation in the decision reported as (
2005) 5 SCC 151 State of
Rajasthan Vs. Ram Chandra
wherein the member of the raiding team gave
the notice under
Section 50
NDPS Act and the High Court acquitted the
accused on the ground that when a member of the raiding party complies
with the provisions of
Section 50
the same was not sufficient compliance of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act and thus vitiated the proceedings, the Supreme
Court held that the High Court proceeded on the basis that there may be bias
on the part of the officer because he was accompanying the officer
authorized to conduct search, however such a presumption is not legally
available and the question of prejudice or bias has to be established and not
inferred.
In the decisions reported as (2004) 5 SCC 230 S. Jeevanantham
Vs. State and (2004) 5 SCC 223 State Vs. V.Jayapaul the Court did not
accept the plea that an officer who was the complainant cannot be the
investigating officer on the ground that the question of prejudice or bias has
to be established and not inferred and in any event there cannot be any legal
presumption in that regard.      As noted above in the present case the
investigating officer was not the complainant but only a member of the
raiding party.
28.   The finding that no witness deposed that the photographs were taken
is factually incorrect as PW-1 deposed that at the time of apprehension of
the accused persons and at the time of preparing the seizure memo and the
process of the seizure, the photographs of that scene were taken by one of
the team members. No doubt the prosecution has failed to exhibit the DD
entry recorded on February 04, 2007 and the photographs as noted in the
findings (B) and (O) but the same are lying on the trial court record. Even it
placed belatedly the trial court could have got them exhibited as per law as
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 25 of 49
PW-1 had already deposed in this regard in his testimony.
In the decision
reported as (
2004) 4 SCC 158 Zahira Habibulla H.Sheikh & Anr. Vs. State
of Gujarat & Ors.
the Supreme Court held that if deficiency in investigation
or prosecution is visible or can be perceived by lifting the veil trying to hide
the realities or covering the obvious deficiencies, Court has to deal with the
same with iron hand appropriately within the framework of law. It is as
much the duty of the prosecutor as of the Court to ensure that full material
facts are brought on record so that there might not be miscarriage of justice.
The
Court further held
that the trial should be a search for the truth and not
about technicalities and the Presiding Judge must cease to be a spectator and
a mere recording machine and should become a participant in the trial
evincing intelligence, active interest and eliciting all relevant materials
necessary for reaching the correct conclusion to find out the truth and
administer justice with fairness and impartiality both to the parties and to the
community.
29.   The finding of the learned Trial Court (C-ii) that since no TIP was
conducted the identification of Bashir by PW-3 Vinit was of no help is also
erroneous. No doubt there is a lapse on the part of prosecution in not having
got conducted the TIP of Bashir by Vinit PW-3, however it is trite law that
dock identification is substantive evidence and TIP is only an aid in
investigation. It is accordingly considered a safe rule of prudence to look
for corroboration of the sworn testimony of the witnesses in Court as to the
identity of the accused who are strangers to them, in the form of earlier
identification proceedings. This rule of prudence, however, is subject to
exceptions when, for example, the Court is impressed by a particular witness
on whose testimony it can safely rely without search of other corroborations.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 26 of 49
Failure to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the
identification in Court and the weight to be attached to such identification
should be a matter for the Court of fact and in appropriate cases it may
accept the evidence of identification even without insisting on corroboration.
(See 2005 (9) SCC 631 Munshi Singh Gautam (D) & Ors. Vs. State of
M.P.). In the absence of TIP the identification by the witness in the Court
has to be seen with caution whether the witness had sufficient time to see the
accused or not. In the present case Bashir Ahmed made a phone call from
the STD booth of Vinit PW-3 and thus Vinit had sufficient time to see the
Bashir. Not being a case of fleeting a glimpse the identification in the Court
for the first time by PW-3 Vinita can be relied upon.
30.   The finding (H) of the learned trial court that the seal after use was
not handed over to PW-6 as is the requirement of law is erroneous. This
finding is also factually incorrect in noting that the seal after use was handed
over to PW-2. As per the deposition, seal after use was handed over to SI
Raman Lamba. Though there are some decisions of the Single Benches of
this Court who have considered the non-handing over of the seal after use to
a public person as a lapse however there is no mandate of law that seal after
use has to be handed over to the public witness. The legal position as to
whether in the absence of any mandatory or even a directory provision in
whole of the Criminal P.C. and the Punjab Police Rules requiring that the
seal used by the Investigating Officer for sealing case property must be
handed over to a third person forthwith and further that in cases where it
might at all have been so done then the non-official must be put into the
witness-box and any failure to do so would vitiate the whole proceedings
was considered by a full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 27 of 49
decision reported as 1982 Crl.L.J. 1176 Piara Singh Vs. State of Punjab. It
is held that it was not mandatory for the Investigating Police Officer to hand
over the seal used by him for sealing the incriminating articles and the
samples to a non-official immediately or soon thereafter and that the non-
appearance or non-production of such a non-official who was entrusted with
the seal would by itself be not fatal to the prosecution case. We are in
agreement with the said decision and would note the relevant paras of the
full Bench decision in Piara Singh as under:-
" 9. Even the requirement of sealing the case puppetry, when
      made into a parcel, far from in any way advancing the stand of
      the petitioner that the Investigation Officer must be
      immediately divested of the seal used therefore appears to be a
      clear pointer to the contrary. Though these rules expressly
      visualise and provide in detail for the taking into possession
      and custody of case property and the marking labelling and
      sealing thereof in order to fix their identity and prevent any
      mixing up or tampering with the same, yet it is not even
      remotely hinted anywhere in the statutory provision that after
      sealing the parcel the seal with which the wax is imprinted
      should immediately be handed over to anyone else for any
      prescribed period of time. Therefore the absence of any
      mandate in this context would show that it is not the
      requirement of the law that the seal used for imprinting the -
      wax on the parcel must be ousted from the possession of the
      Investigating Officer, The statutory provisions do not seem to
      presume any inherent or inveterate suspicion of the responsible
      Investigating Officers upon whose efficiency and integrity the
      investigation into the cognizable crime inevitably rests.
10. Nor is there any indication in the whole gamut of the
      provisions of the Criminal P. C, and the Punjab Police Rules
      as also in any executive instructions issued in this context that
      in those cases where such a seal might have been entrusted to a
      non-official, the latter must necessarily be produced as a
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 28 of 49
witness Similarly I find no basis in the aforesaid provisions for
      the elongated stance that unless such witness is produced the
      whole case of the prosecution even though resting otherwise on
      cast iron foundation must crumble to the ground because of
      this infirmity alone. Without further enlarging on this aspect, it
      deserves notice that the learned Counsel for the petitioner was
      compelled to concede that there is neither any mandatory nor
      even a directory provision requiring that the seal used by the
      Investigating Officer must be handed over to a third person
      forthwith and further that in cases where it might at all have
      been so done then the non-official must be put into the witness-
      box and any failure to do so would vitiate the whole
      proceedings.
12. That the law does not visualise a plethora of seals with
      every Investigating Officer to be handed over to non-officials
      after their use and to remain in their custody. for an unlimited
      or unspecified period is otherwise manifest when viewed from
      another angle as well. It was conceded by the learned Counsel
      for the petitioner that in the varied gamut of the statute and the
      Rules in this context there is no specific provision that each
      Investigating Officer must be officially provided with a large
      number of individual and personal seals which alone would
      make it possible for them to comply with the stand taken by the
      learned Counsel. In fact the admitted stand before us was that
      even though the relevant instructions do provide for the articles
      in that investigating kit of the Police Officials but herein also
      there is no requirement of any official seal. It is plain that there
      is no provision of either providing a large number of personal
      official seals to the Investigating Officer or further that these
      should be handed over to private persons for an unspecified
      period of time. Therefore the statutory provisions seem to be a
      clear pointer to the contrary to what is sought to be advocated
      on behalf of the petitioners by their learned Counsel.
13. Now apart from the absence and indeed the contra-
      indications from the statutory provisions themselves I am
      impelled by the undermentioned fourfold reason (to be _
      elaborated hereinafter) to take the view that the stand taken on
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                 Page 29 of 49
behalf of the petitioners is not only counter productive but for
      ought one knows might well be fraught with public mischief:
(i)   The basis of the whole argument stems from an
             inveterate and ingrained suspicion and assumption that
             responsible police officers would tamper with the seals
             and forge and fabricate evidence with regard to the case
             property in their custody,
(ii) There can be no guarantee that the non-official to
             whom such a seal is entrusted would be one of
             unimpeachable integrity far above a responsible police
             official amenable to administrative discipline.
Consequently even the handing over of such a seal in no
             way ensures its being misused,
(iii) There can be no warranty that the seal so
             entrusted to a third person cannot be duplicated.
(iv) If the police officers are to be entrusted with a
             plethora of official seals there can be no guarantee or
             possibility that all of them would be beyond duplication
             and substantially and materially different from each
             other,
14. What first calls for notice in this context is the fact that
      the seal used in the course of investigation by responsible
      police officials would obviously be governmental property and
      there is neither a mandate nor any inference for passing them
      on to private persons. The relevant provisions of para 22.16(2)
      of the Rules are indicative that the whole purpose thereof is
      that the sealed property should bear the imprint of the seal of a
      responsible police officer who is enjoined with the safe custody
      thereof and disposal in accordance with law. In a way,
      therefore responsibility is cast on the police officer whose seal
      has been used that the parcel or the seal does not pass into
      irresponsible hands. The whole thrust of the provisions seems
      to be to cast the burden on the responsible police officer for the
      safe custody of the parcel and case property. To direct on the
      contrary that such a seal should be handed over during the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 30 of 49
material period to any non-official is something which may
      absolve the concerned officer of further responsibility without
      resting the same in law on any other. Such a view would
      provide no guarantee that the person to whom the seal is
      entrusted would necessarily be of a higher calibre and
      integrity. It had to be conceded before us that any third person
      entrusted with such a seal is under no legal obligation or
      discipline to keep it under safe custody or not allow it to be
      passed on into unworthy hands bent upon tampering with the
      case property. Nor can it be ensured that such a person would
      not himself become a party to any design or attempt to do so at
      some stage. In essence the argument on behalf of the petitioner
      seem to lead to anomalous results in the sense that the handing
      over of the seal to a third person would absolve the responsible
      police official who is within the bounds of discipline and
      administrative control, and pass it into the hands which are not
      amenable to any legal or administrative liability and about
      whose conduct there can be neither any guarantee nor the
      sanction of punitive action.
15. Again the argument ab inconvenient in this contest also
      calls for pointed notice. It was not disputed before us that in a
      busy police station, worth the name, occasions may arise for
      sealing property or parcels etc. to the extent of a hundred times
      or more within a month. Can it be made the requirement of the
      law that every time a seal is used for the sealing of a parcel or
      property the same should be handed over to a non-official and
      a fresh or new seal be manufactured for sealing the next parcel
      or in any case the property in the succeeding cases. Is a police
      official who has once used the seal and handed it over to the
      third person then barred to proceed with the investigation and
      sealing the case property or the samples thereof till he gets
      manufactured another seal for the said purpose? Where is the
      guarantee that the new seal made would not be identical or
      similar and thus totally distinguishable from the first one? By
      what method can it possibly be ensured that the hundreds of
      seals that may become necessary in this context would be so
      individually distinguishable from each other in order to prevent
      any similarity in the imprints on the sealing wax for detecting
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 31 of 49
any alleged tampering with the sealed samples. It appears to
      me that accepting the stance taken on behalf of the petitioner
      may well hamstring the responsible police officer from
      continuing with the investigation and official functions and in
      the ultimate analysis lead to no meaningful results worth the
      name for ensuring the purity of investigation.
16. Equally then I am unable to see how the mere handing
      over of a seal to a third person by the Investigating Officer
      would in any way ensure or guarantee against the tampering. It
      appears to me that the whole argument herein stems from an
      inveterate and deeply ingrained mistrust of public officials
      which is sought to be elongated to the length of criminality,
      This approach has been repeatedly disapproved and dispelled
      by the final Court.
In
Aher Raja Khima v. State of Saurashtra
,
      AIR 1956 SC 217 (1956CriLJ 421 Para 40), Chandrasekhara
      Aiyar J., has observed as follows :
The presumption that person acts honestly applies as
             much in favour of a police officer as of other persons,
             and it is not a judicial approach to distrust and suspect
             him without good grounds therefor. Such an attitude
             could do neither credit to the magistracy nor good to the
             public. It can only run down the prestige of the police
             administration."
31.   The finding (U) of the learned trial court that there was unexplained
delay of 16 days in sending exhibits/parcels from Malkhana to FSL is
erroneous and does not dent the prosecution case as before sending the said
specimen to the FSL, necessary formalities are to be done and in view of the
heavy pendency at the FSL priority letters are also required to be got issued.
The trial court has sought to discard the prosecution case also on the ground
that there was unexplained delay of 16 days in sending exhibits of parcels
from malkhana to FSL. In the decision reported as (2008) 8 SCC 557
Hardip Singh Vs. State of Punjab the Supreme Court held that so far as the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 32 of 49
question of delay in sending the samples to the FSL is concerned, the same
in our opinion has no consequence for the fact that the recovery of the said
sample from the possession of the appellant stands proved and established
by cogent and reliable evidence led in the trial. The case property was kept
in safe custody till it was deposited in the custody of chemical examiner
Chandigarh who found the seals intact which proves and establishes that
there was no tampering with the aforesaid seals in the sample at any stage
and thus the delay of about 40 days in sending the sample did not and could
not have caused any prejudice to the appellant therein. In the present case
despite lengthy cross-examination it could not be demonstrated that there
was any tampering of the seals or that the case property was not kept intact
in the malkhana. A perusal of the record shows that on February 05, 2007
ASI Paramjeet Singh PW-21 MHC(M) at Police Station Special Cell Lodhi
Colony received 21 sealed parcels mark as PT, S-1 & S-2, Ex.1 to Ex.15 and
P-1, M-1 and the last parcel not being marked.        ACP Sanjeev Yadav
deposited the said parcels duly sealed along with CFSL form and on
February 20, 2007 six sealed parcels out of which four sealed with the seal
of „DK‟ mark as PT, S-1, Ex.2 & Ex.3 and the two remaining parcels
marked as M-1 and without mark were sent to the CFSL office through HC
Krishna Ram who appeared as PW-15. On March 21, 2007 Ct.Ran Singh
along with SI Dalip Kumar took 5 sealed parcels duly sealed with the seal of
„DK‟ from the malkhana to the officers of NSG Samal Khan where the hand
grenades were destroyed in the presence of two public witnesses and the
certificate issued.   Further Ct.Nagender Kumar PW-18 took two sealed
parcels from MHC(M) Police Station Special Cell of which one parcel
contained four bullet proof jackets and the second arms and ammunitions
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                             Page 33 of 49
and deposited the same in CFSL. The suggestion to ASI Paramjeet Singh
MHC(M) is not that the seals on the samples were tampered with but that all
these pullandas were sealed in the malkhana before February 05, 2007 and
that all the accused persons were already in police custody before February
04, 2007 which fact was denied by the I.O. Similarly, the other three
witnesses i.e. Ct.Nagender PW-18, HC Krishna Ram PW-15, Ct.Ran Singh
PW-5 have also not been suggested that there was any tampering with the
seals when the parcels were in their custody.
32.   In view of the aforesaid discussion it is clearly demonstrable that the
findings of the learned trial court as discussed from aforementioned
paragraphs 10 to 26 did not warrant the acquittal of the respondents. The
rest of the findings from paragraphs 27 to 31 also in view of the legal
position as explained in the corresponding paragraphs do not warrant an
acquittal in view of the cogent and convincing evidence as noted in the
preceding paragraphs of the judgment. No doubt that while convicting an
accused for serious offences stricter standards should be applied, however
the prosecution is required to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and
not with hundred-percent proof. Variations in the testimony of the witnesses
are bound to take place in view of the differences in observability, power to
retain facts and to be able to depose the same after a passage of time. The
legal position regarding burden of proof on the prosecution is well settled
and we need just note a few decisions thereon.
In the decision reported as (2002) 8 SCC 372 Sardul Singh Vs. State
of Haryana it was held:
"8. There cannot be a prosecution case with a cast-iron
      perfection in all respects and it is obligatory for the courts to
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 34 of 49
analyse, sift and assess the evidence on record, with particular
      reference to its trustworthiness and truthfulness, by a process
      of dispassionate judicial scrutiny adopting an objective and
      reasonable appreciation of the same, without being obsessed
      by an air of total suspicion of the case of the prosecution. What
      is to be insisted upon is not implicit proof. It has often been
      said that evidence of interested witnesses should be scrutinized
      more carefully to find out whether it has a ring of truth and if
      found acceptable and seems to inspire confidence, too, in the
      mind of the court, the same cannot be discarded totally merely
      on account of certain variations or infirmities pointed or even
      additions and embellishments noticed, unless they are of such
      nature as to undermine the substratum of the evidence and
      found to be tainted to the core. Courts have a duty to undertake
      a complete and comprehensive appreciation of all vital features
      of the case and the entire evidence with reference to the broad
      and reasonable probabilities of the case also in their attempt to
      find out proof beyond reasonable doubt."
In the decision reported as (
1992) 2 SCC 86 State of U.P. Vs. Ashok
Kumar Srivastava
it was held:
"9. ........The circumstance relied upon must be found to have
      been fully established and the cumulative effect of all the facts
      so established must be consistent only with the hypothesis of
      guilt. But this is not to say that the prosecution must meet any
      and every hypothesis put forward by the accused however far-
      fetched and fanciful it might be. Nor does it mean that
      prosecution evidence must be rejected on the slightest doubt
      because the law permits rejection if the doubt is reasonable
      and not otherwise."
33.   Thus in our opinion the impugned judgment of the learned trial court
acquitting the respondents of the offences charged is erroneous in law.
34.   From the evidence on record it is proved that Bashir Ahmed Ponnu,
Fayaz Ahmad Lone and Abdul Majid Baba together came in Malwa Express
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 35 of 49
and alighted at New Delhi Railway Station at Platform No.3. A phone call
was made by Bashir Ahmed from the STD Booth of Vinit PW-3 outside the
station from the Ajmeri Gate side. Shahid Gafoor met three of them at DDU
Marg, near Ranjeet Singh Flyover and was having one black colour bag on
his shoulder. Bashir Ahmed took out a cardboard box from his bag and
handed over the same to Shahid Gafoor who checked the same after opening
when the police team after disclosing their identity asked them to surrender.
On this Shahid Gafoor left his bag and cardboard box on the footpath, took
out a pistol and started running towards ITO while firing on the police party.
However, Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed Lone and Abdul Majid Baba
were apprehended. After Shahid Gafoor was overpowered, barrel of his
pistol was checked wherein one live cartridge was found. Thus the live
cartridge and the pistol were seized. On opening the cardboard shoe box
lying on the footpath near the bus stop, a black polythene was recovered
which had 30 slabs of yellow colour of PETN explosive material, each slab
was wrapped in a separate transparent polythene. Beneath the recovered
explosive a transparent plastic container was recovered in which four non-
electronic silver colour detonators and a timer was recovered along with 100
notes of `500/- denomination. The recovered explosive material was
weighed which was found to be 3 kg out of which two samples of 10 grams
each were taken out and kept in a black colour small plastic container and
the same were converted into a cloth parcel and were sealed with the seal of
DK and marked as S1 and S2. The remaining recovered 2.980 kg explosive
was kept in the same black colour polythene and the same cardboard box
and was converted into a sealed parcel with the seal of DK and marked as
Ex.1. The recovered four non-electronic detonators were kept in a separate
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 36 of 49
plastic container and converted into a white cloth sealed pullanda sealed
with the seal of DK and marked as Ex.2. The recovered timer on which OK
6.00 was written was kept back in the same recovered plastic container and
converted into a white cloth pullanda sealed with the seal of DK and marked
as Ex.3. The recovered wad of hundred notes of `500/- was also converted
into a white colour cloth parcel sealed with the seal of DK and marked as
Ex.4.   Thereafter the blue and grey colour bag recovered from the
possession of accused Bashir Ahmed was checked in which a wad of
hundred US dollars in the denomination of hundred each was recovered
which were wrapped in a yellow colour envelope which was concealed in
the bottom pocket of the bag beneath the clothes and other articles. The
recovered wad of US dollars was converted into a cloth parcel pullanda
sealed with the help of thread and was marked as Ex.5. The other articles
found in the bag of Bashir Ahmed Ponnu were kept back in the bag and the
bag was converted into a parcel with the help of white cloth strip and
marked as Ex.6.      The blue, black and green colour Adidas make bag
recovered from the possession of accused Fayaz Ahmad Lone was checked
in which a stainless steel container was recovered under the clothes and
other articles. On opening the stainless steel container it had a black colour
polythene from which four black colour hand grenades were recovered on
which brown colour packing tape was wrapped on the lever of all the
recovered hand grenades. All the recovered hand grenades were kept in four
separate pullandas and converted into white cloth pullandas and marked as
Ex.7 to 10. The black colour polythene from which the aforesaid four hand
grenades were recovered was kept back in the same stainless steel container
and converted into a white cloth pullanda and marked as Ex.11. All the
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 37 of 49
other articles including the clothes were kept back in the recovered bag of
Fayaz Ahmad Lone and the bag was sealed with the help of white cloth strip
and marked as Ex.12. Thereafter the brown colour suitcase make Aristocrat
recovered from the possession of accused Abdul Mazid Baba was checked
in which a plastic container was recovered with yellow colour lid in which
two hand grenades, one blue colour and other of military green colour were
found in a black colour polythene. Brown colour packing tape was wrapped
on the lever of both the recovered hand grenades. The recovered hand
grenades and the black colour polythene were kept back in the same plastic
container and converted into a white cloth parcel sealed with the seal of DK
and marked as Ex.13. All the other articles recovered from the suitcase were
kept back in the suitcase and the same was sealed with the seal of DK with
the help of white cloth strip and marked as Ex.14. Thereafter the black
colour canvas bag which was thrown by accused Shahid Gafoor at the bus
stop was checked in which some clothes and personal belongings were
found. All the articles were kept back in the same black colour canvas bag
and sealed with the help of white cloth strip and marked as Ex.15. CFSL
form was filled. The seizure memos were got signed by the witnesses and
the accused. These facts have been duly deposed by the members of the
raiding team party and the public witness.
35.   PW-2 SI Rahul Kumar deposed that he took the sealed pullanda of US
dollars and handed over the same to Mr.C.Reed Beckmayor Security Officer
of US Embassy Chanakyapuri. Mr. Reed opened the sealed pullanda in his
presence and photocopied each note. Mr.Reed handed over to him the
photocopies of the notes along with the receipt on May 01, 2007. SI Rahul
Kumar again visited the US Embassy and collected the report.            The
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                             Page 38 of 49
photocopies of the notes in US dollar recovered were exhibited as Ex.PX4
along with the report of the US Embassy Ex.PX5. As per the report the
currency notes sent to the US Embassy were counterfeit as poor quality
paper was utilised and the embedded water mark, micro printing, embedded
security thread, ultraviolet properties and optical variable ink were absent.
36.   The CFSL report Ex.4/A opined the .30 pistol empty magazine and
cartridge cases to be arms and ammunitions. It was further opined that the
seven .30 fired cartridge cases were fired from the pistol recovered from
Shahid Gafoor. It was also opined that the physico chemical analysis and
TLC method confirmed the presence of "CE" based High Explosive in the
contents of Parcel No.S1, the four plain detonators were live ones, the
electronic timer device contained in Parcel No.Ex.3 was in working
condition and that the contents of parcel No.S-1, Ex.-2, Ex.-3 can form
components of Improvised Explosive Device (IED) and were therefore,
Explosive substance as defined in the
Explosive Substance Act, 1908
. The
six hand grenades recovered were taken and destroyed at Demolition Range
Manesar and certificates in this regard were issued vide Ex.PW-19/A and
Ex.PW-19/B. Vide Ex.PW-4/B it was opined that four bullet proof jackets
were having holes. BP-1 was having two holes on its front, whereas BP-2,
BP-3 and BP-4 were having one hole each on their front side.
37.   The defence of Bashir Ahmed Ponnu who appeared at DW-1 is that
he was doing the business of fruits at Sopore bus stand, J&K and in the last
week of January 2007 while he was coming from Calcutta to Srinagar by
Malda Express train and was purchasing food items at Ambala Railway
station, the officials of Special Cell who were in civil clothes apprehended
him and brought him to Delhi and illegally detained him and later falsely
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 39 of 49
implicated him in this case. Fayaz Ahmed Lone who appeared as DW-2 has
deposed that he was doing the business of Kashmiri Shawl and was in
Ludhiana in connection thereof when on January 28, 2007 he was
apprehended and illegally detained by the officials of the Special Cell in
civil clothes and brought to Delhi and later falsely implicated in this case.
Abdul Majeed Baba who appeared as DW-4 deposed that he was a resident
of Village Magrepora, PS Sopor, District Baramulla, J&K and was doing the
business of fruits in Fruit Mandi, J&K. On January 29, 2007 he was coming
from Calcutta to New Delhi by Rajdhani Express. When he reached New
Delhi Railway station and came out of the station and was waiting for an
auto he was apprehended by the officials of Special Cell who were in civil
clothes and illegally detained and later falsely implicated him in this case.
None of the respondents have produced any document with regard to their
travel. Fayaz has not shown any document as to where he was staying in
Ludhiana. No evidence has been produced which would cast a doubt on
their apprehension on February 04, 2007 at DDU Marg, Delhi. Thus we are
of the opinion that the defence of the respondents of being illegally detained
and falsely implicated is not substantiated even by preponderance of
probabilities.   Shahid Gafoor appeared as DW-3 and deposed that on
January 13, 2007 he had gone to Kathmandu in connection with business of
readymade garments. The officials of Special Cell who were in civil clothes
apprehended him and brought him to Delhi, illegally detained him and later
falsely implicated him in this case. No document has been shown by Shahid
Gafoor showing his entry into Nepal. Moreover the officials of Delhi Police
or for that matter of fact any police officer from India are not permitted to go
to Kathmandu and to conduct raids and this endeavour would have been
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 40 of 49
caught at the immigration counter. Thus we find no reason to accept the
defence of the respondents which has not been proved even by
preponderance of probability.
38.   OFFENCES COMMITTED BY THE RESPONDENTS.
A.    The learned Trial Court has convicted Shahid Gafoor for the offence
      punishable under
Section 14
Foreigners Act which we need not go
      into as no appeal has been filed by Shahid Gafoor challenging the
      same.
B.    From the evidence as noted above the prosecution has proved beyond
      reasonable doubt that Bashir Ahmed Ponnu was in possession of 100
      notes of US dollars of denomination of 100 each which he had
      reasons to believe to be counterfeit and which may have been used as
      genuine and thus we convict Bashir Ahmed Ponnu for the offences
      punishable under
Section 489B
and
489C
IPC.
C.    From the evidence as recorded above it has also been proved beyond
      reasonable doubt that Shahid Gafoor was in possession of a pistol of
      .30 bore and cartridges which were opined to be arms and
      ammunitions as per the report Ex.4/A and that Shahid Gafoor used the
      said arms and ammunitions to fire at the raiding party when they
      sought to apprehend him and 5 of the bullets hit 4 officers on their
      bullet proof jackets and in the absence of bullet proof jackets the
      injuries would have caused death of the officers and is therefore guilty
      of committing an act with the intention of causing murder of the
      Police officers. Shahid Gafoor is thus convicted for the offences
      punishable under
Section 186
/
353
/
307
IPC and
Section 25
/
27
Arms
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 41 of 49
Act.
D.    The legal position with regard to the principles to be applied for
      ascertaining whether an offence of waging war or attempting to wage
      war or abetting waging war against the Government of India has been
      committed or not has been succinctly culled out in the decision
      reported as (
2014) 7 SCC 443 Mohd. Jamiludin Nasir Vs. State of
      West Bengal
wherein the following principles to be applied were laid
      down:-
"160. A close reading of the abovereferred to paragraphs is
       sufficient for anyone to understand the concept and to apply the
       same in a given case in order to find out as to how the sentence
       can be imposed in such cases. Having read the above well-laid
       down principles, we can cull out the following general
       principles to be applied:
160.1. The most important is the intention and purpose
       behind the defiance or raging against the Government.
           160.2. Though the modus operandi of preparing for the
       offensive act against the Government may be quite akin to the
       preparation in a regular war, it is often said that the number of
       force, the manner in which they are arrayed, the arm and/or
       equipment are immaterial.
160.3. Even a limited number of persons who carry powerful
       explosives and missiles without regard to their own safety can
       cause more devastating damage than a large group of persons
       armed with ordinary weapons or firearms.
160.4. There need not be the pomp or pageantry usually
       associated with war such as the offenders forming themselves in
       battle line and arraying in a war-like manner.
           160.5. The court must be cautious in adopting an approach
       which has the effect of bringing within the fold of Section 121
       all acts of lawlessness and violent acts resulting in destruction
       of public property, etc.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 42 of 49
160.6. The moment it is found that the object sought to be
       attained is of a great public nature or has a political hue the
       offensive violent act targeted against the armed force and
       public officials should not be branded as acts of "waging war".
160.7. The expression "waging war" should not be stretched
       too far to hold that all acts of disrupting public order and peace
       irrespective of their magnitude and repercussions could be
       reckoned as acts of "waging war" against the Government.
          160.8. A balanced and realistic approach is called in
       construing the expression "waging war" irrespective of how it
       was viewed in the long long past.
160.9. An organised movement attended with violence and
       attacks against the public officials and armed forces while
       agitating for the repeal of an unpopular law or for preventing
       burdensome taxes were viewed as acts of treason in the form of
       "waging war".
160.10. Neither the number engaged nor the force employed
       nor the species of weapon with which they may be armed is
       really material to prove the offence of waging war.
160.11. The single most important factor should be to think
       that in a case that is being considered of waging or attempting
       to wage war against the Government of India, what is the target
       of attack chosen by the conspirators and the immediate
       objective sought to be achieved thereby.
160.12. The planned operations if executed what is the
       extent of disaster spelt out to the whole nation. Whether a war
       like situation lingering for days or weeks would have prevailed
       and such offensive acts of unimaginable description and
       devastation would have posed a challenge to the Government
       and the democratic institutions for the protection of which the
       Government of the day stands.
160.13. Was it a mere desperate act of a small group of
       persons who were sure to meet with death is to ignore the
       obvious realities and to stultify the wider connotation of the
       expression of war chosen by the drafters of
IPC
.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                               Page 43 of 49
160.14. The undoubted objective and the determination of
       the offenders was to impinge on the sovereign authority of the
       nation and its Government."
In this decision the Supreme Court was dealing with a case
     involving completed action and thus the magnitude of the offence, the
     place where the attack was conducted and the purpose was known. In
     the present case, the acts of Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed,
     Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor were preparatory to the
     commission of the offence of waging war and abetting the same, by
     entering into a criminal conspiracy and concealing with the intent to
     facilitate waging of war. The respondents were in possession of 3kgs
     of PETN, 6 hand grenades, 4 electronic detonators and 1 timer. From
     the fact that arms, ammunitions and explosive substance which were
     capable of mass destruction were handed over to Shahid Gafoor, who
     was the Pakistani national and had unauthorizedly entered the Indian
     Territory, it will be prudent and reasonable to draw an inference of
     criminal conspiracy to wage war against India. The prosecution has
     thus proved beyond reasonable doubt that Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz
     Ahmed Lone, Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor entered into a
     criminal conspiracy to wage war against the country and collected
     arms, ammunitions and explosives with the intention to wage war and
     concealed the design thereof. Thus they are found guilty and convicted
     of offences punishable under
Sections 120B
IPC read with
Sections
     121
/
121A
/
122
/
123
IPC.
E.   All the four respondents i.e. Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed Lone,
     Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor have also conspired knowingly
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                            Page 44 of 49
to facilitate the commission of a terrorist act and have carried out an act
     preparatory to the commission of a terrorist act wherein Bashir Ahmed,
     Fayaz Ahmed and Abdul Majeed collected and brought the explosive
     substance and handed over the same to Shahid Gafoor and are thus held
     guilty and convicted of offence punishable under
Section 18
of the
     Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967.
F.   Though in the present case there is no material evidence before this
     Court to show that the respondents are members of a terrorist
     organisation, however from the acts of the respondents, which have
     been proved beyond reasonable doubt, it is evidently proved that they
     can be termed as members of a terrorist group/gang. A Division Bench
     of this Court in the decision reported as 206 (
2014) DLT 578 (DB)
     Raees-Uz-Zama & Anr. Vs. State NCT of Delhi
considering a para-
     materia provision
Section 3(5)
of Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002
     (POTA) held that from the conduct, nature and quantum of recoveries
     made and the interaction of A2 and A3 therein with A1 without doubt
     makes them a member of terrorist gang involved in terrorist acts.
In the
     decision reported as 2013 (
1) GLT 880 Redaul Hussain Khan Vs. The
     National Investigation Agency
it was held:
"87. At this stage, the concept, behind the amendments, can
        also be gauged by understanding the meaning of terrorist gang.
Section 2 (1)
defines terrorist gang to mean any association,
        other than terrorist organization, whether systematic or
        otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act.
        What
Section 2 (1)
provides is that any organization, other than
        terrorist organization, which is connected with, or involved in,
        terrorist act, in a systematic manner or otherwise, would be
        regarded as terrorist gang.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 45 of 49
88. The intent behind introducing such a definition for terrorist
       gang, on a bare reading, is, perhaps, to stop those technical
       pleas, which may be raised with respect to previous formal
       declaration as is required under Section 3 of the UA (P) Act or
       under Section 35 of the UA (P) Act, be it the amendments made
       in the year 2004 or amendments made in the year 2008, for
       offences relating to an unlawful assembly or a terrorist
       organization. The terms like any association, other than
       terrorist organisation, in
Section 2 (1)
, convey a meaning that
       even though there exists an association of individuals and even
       though such an association is not a terrorist organization,
       mentioned in the Schedule to the UA (P) Act, such an
       association may nevertheless be treated as terrorist gang if the
       association is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act
       irrespective of the fact whether the association is systematic in
       its functioning or otherwise. When we speak of an
       'organization', the term conveys a unit of people, systematically
       structured and managed, to meet a need or to pursue collective
       goals on a continuing basis. Organizations have a management
       structure that determines relationship between functions and
       positions and an organization, therefore, includes roles,
       responsibilities and authorities assigned to carry out defined
       tasks. It is for this particular reason that the UA (P) Act, as
       amended in 2004 and retained in 2008, provides that the power
       to declare an organization as a terrorist organization is vested
       only in the Central Government and it can be done after
       conducting an exercise into the activities of an organization.
89. The term, systematic or otherwise, has been deliberately
       used in
Section 2 (1)
in order to ensure that even when the
       structure of an association is organized or systematic, it would
       not be permitted to take a plea that since the association is
       systematic, it is, in fact, an organization and since such an
       organization, having not been mentioned in the Schedule to the
       UA (P) Act, a membership of such an organization cannot
       amount to an offence punishable under Section 20 of the UA (P)
       Act, for, we have pointed out that systematic or otherwise, so
       long as an association is concerned with, or involved in,
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                              Page 46 of 49
terrorist act, it would be a terrorist gang within the meaning of
Section 2(1)
. A situation may arise, where evidence is found
       regarding a conspiracy, among several persons, to commit
       terrorist act and such a conspiracy is not entered into for an
       isolated event, but for a long period of time. In such
       circumstances, if such an association or a group of individuals
       is not a scheduled terrorist organization, it would become
       difficult to prosecute the members of such an association. No
       wonder, therefore, that the concept of terrorist gang has been
       introduced by
Section 2(1)
as a broad based definition so as to
       make membership of even a terrorist gang punishable under
Section 20
of the UA(P) Act.
90. Thus, the legislature appears to have deliberately diluted
       the form and type of association and has concentrated more on
       the ultimate object of the association, i.e., an association, which
       is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act. Section 20 of the
       UA (P) Act, as amended in the year 2004 and retained in the
       Act of 2008, provides punishment for being a member of such a
       terrorist gang.
91. It would not be out of place to mention here that the term
       'member', when used in the context of an individual, in a group,
       conveys several meaning like, comrade, confederate,
       constituent, co-operator, co-partner, team-mate, etc. When the
       term 'member' is used with reference to a criminal gang, it
       would mean that the individual forms part of a combination,
       alliance, network, conspiracy or understanding, amongst
       certain individuals, with an established hierarchy, which
       engages itself in a course or pattern of criminal activity.
92. On the basis of above discussions, it can be held that for
       holding a person a terrorist or to hold a person a member of
       terrorist gang, there is no requirement of any formal
       declaration either under
Section 3
or under
Section 35
of the
       UA(P) Act. A declaration, under
Section 3
or under
Section 35
of the UA(P) Act, as it stands today, is necessary
       only for terrorist organizations and unlawful associations."
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                                Page 47 of 49
Thus all the four respondents i.e. Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz
      Ahmed Lone, Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor having acted as
      members of a terrorist gang involving and facilitating in the
      commission of a terrorist activity are convicted for the offence
      punishable under
Section 20
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
      Act, 1967.
G.    From the evidence on record and the recovery of the currency notes it
      has been proved beyond reasonable that all the four respondents i.e.
      Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed Lone, Abdul Majeed Baba and
      Shahid Gafoor committed the conspiracy to raise funds as a terrorist
      gang to facilitate the commission of a terrorist activity and are thus
      convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 17
of the Unlawful
      Activities Prevention Act.
H.    From the evidence on record it has also been proved beyond
      reasonable doubt that all the four respondents i.e. Bashir Ahmed
      Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed Lone, Abdul Majeed Baba and Shahid Gafoor
      have been found in conscious possession of the explosive substances
      as defined under the
Explosive Substance Act
and are thus held guilty
      for the offences punishable under
Section 4
/
5
of the Explosive
      Substance Act.
39.   The respondents are thus required to be heard on the quantum of
sentence. The respondents Bashir Ahmed Ponnu, Fayaz Ahmed and Abdul
Majeed Baba will appear before this Court on December 12, 2014 on which
date Shahid Gafoor will also be produced by the Superintendent, Seva Sadan
Lampur before this Court.
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                             Page 48 of 49
40.   List the appeal on December 12, 2014.
(MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                   JUDGE


                                              (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                    JUDGE
DECEMBER 08, 2014
'ga'
Crl.A.No.1065/2014                                       Page 49 of 49
