Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 14 of 1947
Citation: citations: 1976 AIR 1111, 1976 SCR (3) 160, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1111, 1976 (1) SCC 822, 1976 LAB. I. C. 769, (1975) 1 S C C 822, 1976 3 SCR 160, 1976 2 LABLN 5, 1976 ICR 269, 49 FJR 78, 1976 (1) LABLJ 478, 38 FAC L R 197, 32 FACLR 197, 1976 UJ (SC) 215
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/63310/

[Cites
10
, Cited by
323
]
Supreme Court of India
State Bank Of India vs Shri N. Sundara Money on 16 January, 1976
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1111, 1976 SCR (3) 160, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 1111, 1976 (1) SCC 822, 1976 LAB. I. C. 769, (1975) 1 S C C 822, 1976 3 SCR 160, 1976 2 LABLN 5, 1976 ICR 269, 49 FJR 78, 1976 (1) LABLJ 478, 38 FAC L R 197, 32 FACLR 197, 1976 UJ (SC) 215
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
Y.V. Chandrachud
,
A.C. Gupta
PETITIONER:
STATE BANK OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHRI N. SUNDARA MONEY

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/01/1976

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.
GUPTA, A.C.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1111		  1976 SCR  (3) 160
 1976 SCC  (1) 822
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1977 SC  31	 (2,4)
 R	    1979 SC 170	 (17)
 F	    1980 SC1219	 (11,12,13)
 RF	    1981 SC 422	 (5)
 RF	    1981 SC1253	 (7,8)
 R	    1982 SC 854	 (5,6)
 D	    1983 SC 865	 (6)
 E	    1983 SC1320	 (7,8,9,11,12)
 R	    1984 SC 500	 (2)
 R	    1984 SC 684	 (50)
 RF	    1986 SC 132	 (7)
 RF	    1986 SC1680	 (4)
 E&D	    1990 SC1808	 (5)


ACT:
     Constitution of India-Art. 133(1)-Scheme of -Conditions
precedent for  the issue  of a certificate under in exercise
of power  under
Art.  136
of  the  Constitution	 on  such  a
certificate.
Industrial Disputes  Act
. 1947 (Act 14 of 1947)-
Section
25F
read  with
ss.  2(oo)
and
25(B) (2)
-Scope of the concept
of retrenchment under
s.2(oo)
.
     Statutory construction  of social	welfare legislation-
Guidelines.
     Words    and     phrases-Meaning	 of	the    words
"termination.....for   any   reason   whatsoever"   includes
automatic  extinguishment   of	service	  by  virtue   of  a
preemptive provision  to terminate  in the appointment order
itself.



HEADNOTE:
Section 25(F)(b)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
provides that  no workman  employed in	any industry who has
been in	 continuous service for not less than one year under
an employer  shall be  retrenched by  that employer until he
has been  paid at the time of the retrenchment, compensation
which shall  be equivalent to 15 days' average pay for every
completed year	of service or any  part thereof in excess of
six months
Section 2(oo)
of the Act defines 'retrenchment'
as meaning the termination by the employer of the service of
a workman  for any  reasons whatsoever,	 otherwise than as a
punishment inflicted  by way  of disciplinary action. In the
"Hospital Mazdoor  Sabha's" the	 Supreme Court held that the
statutory requirement  of the  payment of compensation under
s. 25(F)(b)
of the  Industrial	 Disputes  Act,	 1947  is  a
condition precedent  for the  retrenchment of  a workman and
any  retrenchment   without  payment  at  the  time  of	 the
retrenchment  makes   the  retrenchment	 order	invalid	 and
inoperative
     As	 the   automatic  extinguishment   of  his   service
consequent to  the preemptive  provision in  his appointment
order  as  to  the  temporariness  and	the  period  of	 his
employment was	covered by  the words "termination . for any
reasons whatsoever"  occurring in
s. 2(oo)
of the Act, in an
application under
Art.	 226
of  the  Constitution  by	 the
respondent claiming  that by virtue of his deemed continuous
service of  one year  within the meaning of
s. 25B(2)
of the
Industrial Disputes  Act, he  was entitled  to be reinstated
for non-compliance  of
s.  25F
of the Act. The High Court of
Madras allowing the writ made the rule nisi
 absolute. The writ appeal filed by the appellant respondent
also failed.  However, the  High Court granted a certificate
under
Art. 133(1)(c)
of the Constitution.
     Dismissing the  appeals and  negativing the contentions
of the appellant, the Court.
^
     HELD: (1) The grant of a Constitutional passport to the
Supreme Court	by  the High  Court is	not a matter of easy
insouciance  but   anxious  advertence	to  the	 dual  vital
requirements built into
Art. 133(1)
by specific amendment. A
substantial question  of law of general importance is a sine
quo non	 to certify  fitness for  hearing by the apex court.
Nay, more; the question, however, important and substantial,
must be	 of such pervasive import and deep significance that
in the	High Court's  judgment it  imperatively needs  to be
settled at  the national level by the highest bench. Failure
here stultifies	 the scheme  of the  Article and floods this
court with  cases  of  lesser  magnitude  with	illegitimate
entry.
						   [162 C-E]
     Union of  India v.	 Hafiz Mohmd.  Said, ILR  [1973]  II
Delhi 673, 676, approved.
     (2) While	exercising the	vital powers  under
Art. 136
the Supreme Court must have due regard to the constitutional
limitations of
Art. 133(1)
and  owe  allegiance  to  those
restraints save in exceptional cases. [163 A]
161
     (3) If  the workman swims into the harbour of
s. 25F
of
the Industrial	Disputes Act,  1947, he cannot be retrenched
without payment,  at the  lime of retrenchment, compensation
computed as prescribed therein read with s. 25B(2)
						     [164 D]
     State of  Bombay and others v. Hospital Mazdoor Sabha &
others [1960] (2) S.C.R. &66. applied.
     (4)  Statutory   construction,  when   courts  consider
welfare legislation  with an  economic justice	bias, cannot
turn on	 cold print,  glorified as grammatical construction,
but  on	 teleological  purpose	and  protective	 intendment.
Sections 25F
,
25B
and
2(oo)
, of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947  have a workers' mission and	the input of Part IV
of  the	  Constitution	also   underscores  this   benignant
approach. while canons of traditional sanctity cannot wholly
govern,	 courts	  cannot  go   hay  wire   in	interpreting
provisions, ignoring the text and context. Words of multiple
import have  to be  winnowed judicially	 to suit  the social
philosophy of the statute. Dictionaries are not dictators of
statutory construction	where the  benignant mood  of a	 law
and, more  emphatically, the  definition  clause  furnish  a
different denotation.
Section 2(00)
is the  master of	 the
situation and  the Court  cannot truncate its amplitude. The
words "for  any	 reason	 whatsoever"  in  s.  2(00)  of	 the
Industrial Disputes Act
are very wide and almost admit of no
exception.
				[163 G, 164 H, 165 B, 166 B]
     (5) A  breakdown of  s. 2(00)  unmistakably expands the
semantics of  retrenchment. "Termination  .. for  any reason
whatsoever" are	 the key  words.  Every	 termination  spells
retrenchment. A termination takes place where a term expires
either by  the active  step of the master or the running out
of the	stipulated term.  To protect  the weak	against	 the
strong this  policy of	comprehensive  definition  has	been
effectuated. Termination  embraces not	merely	the  act  of
termination by the employer, but the fact of termination how
soever produced.  Retrenchment is  no longer terra incognita
but area  covered by  an expansive  definition. It means 'to
end' conclude,	cease'. That  to write	into  the  order  of
appointment the	 date of  termination confers no moksha from
s. 25F(b)
is inferable	 from the  proviso to  s. 25F(1).  A
separate subsequent  termination of  the service  is not the
sole magnetic  pull of the provision. A preemptive provision
to terminate  is  struck  by  the  same	 vice  as  a	post
appointment termination.  Dexterity of diction cannot defeat
the articulated conscience of the provision. [165 B-C, D, E,
166 C]
     Observation:-Social   justice   has   two	 sides	 and
occasionally one  party or  he other  makes myopic  mistakes
resulting in further litigation. [166 G]
     [The Court reiterated its views held out in Trustees of
Port, Bombay's	case, namely, where the law is not free from
obscurity and  needs this  Court's pronouncement  and one of
the affected parties is weak, being a worker, the costs must
come out  of public  funds and suggested the constitution by
the State  of a	  "Suitors  Fund" which	 will take  care  of
hardships and  public interest	in  the	 area  of  necessary
litigation.]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION :  Civil Appeals Nos. 933
and 934 of 1975.
From the  judgment and  orders dated  the 24th and 25th
March, 1975  of the  Madras High  Court at  Madras  in	writ
appeal No. 231	of 1973 and writ petition No. 5062 of 1973.
F. S. Nariman, M/s. 1. N. Shroff and H. S. Parihar, for
the appellant.
M. K. Ramamurthi and J. Ramamurthi, for the respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KRISHNA 1 YEAR, J.-The appellant employer, undaunted by
a double  defeat at  both  tiers  in  the  High	 Court,	 has
appealed against  the ad verse judgments, by certificate, on
the only  ground that  there  was  no  retrenchment  of	 the
respondent-employee (within the meaning of
162
Of
s. 2(00)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Act XIV of
1947) hereinafter  called the  Act)  and,  consequently	 the
latter was ineligible to-the statutory compensation the non-
payment of  which, along  with the  termination of  service,
nullified the  termination itself.  The end  result was that
the Division  Bench of	the Court  ruled that the respondent
'was  entitled	to  retrenchment  compensation'	 which,	 not
having been  paid, 'the	 termination would  be invalid'. The
subtle r  legal issue,	substantial in its financial impact,
is whether  s. 25F  read with  s. 2(00),  vis a	 vis a short
employment, casts a lethal spell on the cessation of service
for non-compliance  with the  condition precedent set out in
the provision.
The Certificate
     The  certificate	issued	by   the  High	Court  under
Art.133(1)
is  bad on its face, according to counsel for the
respondent and	the appeal  consequently incompetent. We are
inclined  to  agree  that  the	grant  of  a  constitutional
passport to  the Supreme  Court by  the High  Court is not a
matter of  easy insouciance  but anxious  advertence to	 the
dual vital  requirements built	into
Art. 133(1)
by specific
amendment. Failure here stultifies the scheme of the Article
and floods  this Court	with cases  of lesser magnitude with
illegitimate entry. A substantial question of law of general
importance is  a sine qua non to certify fitness for hearing
by the	apex court.  Nay,  .  more;  the  question,  however
important and  substantial, must be of such pervasive import
and deep  significance that  in the High Court's judgment it
imperatively needs  to be  settled at  the national level by
the highest bench. The crux of the matter has been correctly
set out	 in a  decision(l) of  the Delhi High Court in words
which find our approval:
"A certificate can be granted only if the case involves
     a question of law:- .
(i)  which is	 not only substantial but is also of
	       general importance; and
(ii) the said	 question, in  our opinion, needs to
	       be decided by the Supreme Court. r _
     It has  to be  noted that	all the	 above	requirements
     should  be	  satisfied  before  a	certificate  can  be
     granted. It means that it is not sufficient if the case
     involves a	 substantial  question	of  law	 of  general
     importance but  in addition to it the High Court should
     be of  the opinion	 that  such  question  needs  to  be
     decided by the Supreme Court. Further, the word 'needs'
     suggests that  there has  to be  a necessity  for	a  "
decision by the Supreme Court on the question, and such
     a necessity  can be  said to  exist when, for instance,
     two views	are possible  regarding the question and the
     High  Court  takes	 one  of  the  said  views.  Such  a
     necessity can  also said to exist when a different view
     has been expressed by another High Court.
(
1) Union	of India  v. Hafiz Mohd. Said
: ILR [1973] II
Delhi 673, 676.
163
It is  but fair  to add  an implied  but important foot
note that   while  exercising the wider power under
Art. 136
this Court  must  have	due  regard  to	 the  constitutional
limitations on
Art. 133(1)
and  owe  allegiance  to  those
restraints save in exceptional cases.
This view o f the certificate would have put the lid on
this appeal but on hearing counsel we feel that the omission
of the	High Court  to assess  the case explicitly from this
angle does not disable us from B. granting special leave, if
applied for.  So much  so counsel have proceeded to argue on
the merits,  the penumbral area of industrial law covered by
the subject  matter being  one which cannot be left in legal
twilight.
The facts
     One of  the two employees involved in these appeals has
been re-absorbed  in service  and his  case is	therefore of
lesser import,	but the	 other is  still out in the cold and
his legal  fate falls for examination in the matrix of facts
which we  proceed to state. This respondent was appointed as
cashier, off and on, by the state Bank of India between July
31, 1973  and  August  29,  1973.  The	intermittent  breaks
notwithstanding, his  total number  of	days  of  employment
answered the  test of  'deemed' continuous service within s.
258(2) and  both sides	accept that  fact situation. But the
order of  appointment, which  bears in	its bosom  the 'good
bye'  to   the	employee   after  a   few  days,  calls	 for
construction in	 the light  of
s.2(oo)
and
s. 25F
and we may
as well read it here:
"(1) The appointment is purely a temporary one for
	       a period	 of 9  days but	 may  be  terminated
	       earlier,	  without   assigning	any   reason
	       therefor at the bank's discretion;
(2)  The employment,	unless	terminated  earlier,
	       will automatically cease at the expiry of the
	       period i.e., 1972."
This nine  days' employment,  tacked on	 to  what  has	gone
before, Fr has ripened to a continuous service for a year on
the antecedent	arithmetic of  240 days	 of broken  bits  of
service.
The legal issue
     The skiagram  of the  employment  order  must  now	 be.
studied to   ascertain	which of  the rival meanings counsel
have pressed  deserves preference.  Statutory  construction,
when courts  consider welfare  legislation with	 an economic
justice	 bias,	cannot	turn  on  cold	print  glorified  as
grammatical construction  but on  teleological	purpose	 and
protective intendment.	Here
s.	 25F
, 25B  and
2(oo)
have a
workers'  mission   and	 the   input  of   Part	 IV  of	 the
Constitution also underscores this benignant approach. While
canons of traditional sanctity can not wholly govern, courts
cannot go  haywire in  interpreting provisions, ignoring the
text and  context. With	 these guidelines before us, we seek
to decode  the implications of the order of appointment. But
before doing  so, an  analysis of the legal components of
s.
25F
will facilitate the diagnostic task.
164
The leading  case on  this facet of law is The Hospital
Mazdoor	 Sabha(1).  Gajendragadkar,  J.	 (as  he  then	was)
observed:
"
Section 25F(b)
provides that no workman employed
     in any  industry who has been in continuous service for
     not less  than one	 year under  an	 employer  shall  be
     retrenched by  that employer  until he has been paid at
     the time  of retrenchment	compensation which  shall be
     equivalent to  fifteen  days'  average  pay  for  every
     completed year of service or any part thereof in excess
     of six  months. Clauses  (a) c  and  (e)  of  the	said
     section prescribe	similar conditions  but " we are not
     concerned with them. On a plain reading of
s. 25F(b)
it
     is clear  that the	 requirement prescribed	 by it	is a
     condition precedent  for the  retrenchment of  the work
     man. The  section provides that no workman shall be .1,
     retrenched until  the condition  in question  has	been
     satisfied. It  is difficult  to accede  to the argument
     that when	the P  section imposes	in mandatory terms a
     condition	precedent,   non-compliance  with  the	said
     condition would  not render  the impugned	retrenchment
     invalid ....  failure to comply with the said provision
     renders the impugned orders invalid and inoperative."
Without further  ado, we  reach the  conclusion that if
the workman  swims into	 the harbour of
s. 25F
, he cannot be
retrenched without  payment, at	 the time  of  retrenchment,
compensation computed  as prescribed  therein read  with  s.
25B(2). But, argues the appellant all these obligations flow
only out  of  retrenchment,  not  termination  outside	that
species of  snapping employment. What, then, is retrenchment
? The  key to this vexed question is to be found in
s. 2(oo)
which reads thus:
"2(oo)    "retrenchment" means  the termination  by the
	       employer of  the service of a workman for any
	       reason  whatsoever,   otherwise	than   as  a
	       punishment inflicted  by way  of disciplinary
	       action, but does not include- -
(a)   voluntary retirement of the workman; or
(b)   retirement of  the workman	on  reaching
		    the	 age   of  supera-annuation  if	 the
		    contract  of   employment  between	 the
		    employer  and   the	 workman   concerned
		    contains a	stipulation in	that behalf;
		    or
(c)   termination of  the service of a workman
		    on the ground of continued ill-health;
for any	 reason whatsoever-very wide and almost admitting of
no exception.  Still, the employer urges that when the order
of appointment	carries an  automatic cessation	 of service,
tho period  of employment  works itself	 out  by  efflux  of
times, not by act of employer.
(1) [1960] 2 S.C.R. 866, 871-872.
165
Such cases  are outside	 the concept  of 'retrenchment'	 and
cannot entail  the  burdensome	conditions  of
s.  25F
.  Of
course, that  a nine-days'  employment, hedged	in  with  an
express condition  of temporariness and automatic cessation,
may look  like being  in a different street (if we may use a
colloquialism) from telling a man off by retrenching him. To
retrench  is  to  cut  down.  You  cannot  retrench  without
trenching or  cutting. But dictionaries are not dictators of
statutory construction	where the  benignant mood  of a	 law
and, more  emphatically, the  definition  clause  furnish  a
different denotation.
Section 2(oo)
is the  master of	 the
situation and the Court cannot truncate its amplitude.
A break-down  of  s.  2(oo)  unmistakably	expands	 the
semantics of  retrenchment. 'Termination...  for any  reason
whatsoever' are	 the key  words. Whatever  the reason, every
termination spells retrenchment. So the sole question is-has
the employee's	service been  terminated  ?  Verbal  apparel
apart, the  substance is decisive. A termination takes place
where a term expires either by the active step of the master
of the	running out  of the  stipulated term. To protect the
weak  against	the  strong  this  policy  of  comprehensive
definition has	been effectuated.  Termination embraces	 not
merely the  act of termination by the employer, but the fact
of termination	howsoever produced.  May be, the present may
be a hard case, but we can visualise abuses by employers, by
suitable verbal	 devices, circumventing	 the armour of
s.25F
and
s.2(oo)
.  Without speculating  on possibilities,  we may
agree that  'retrenchment' is  no longer terra incognita but
area covered  by an  expansive definition. It means 'to end,
conclude, cease'.
In the present case the employment ceased,
concluded,  ended   on	 the   expiration   of	 nine	days
automatically may  be, but  cessation all  the same. That to
write into  the order of appointment the date of termination
confers no  moksha  from  s.25F(b)  is	inferable  from	 the
proviso	 to   s.  25F(1).   True,  the	 section  speaks  of
retrenchment by	 the employer  and it is urged that some act
of volition  by the  employer to bring about the termination
is essential  to attract
s. 25F
and automatic extinguishment
of service  by effluxion  of time  cannot be  sufficient. An
English case
R. v. Secretary of State
(l) was relied on where
Lord Denning MR observed:
"I   think	that   the   word   'terminate'	  or
     'termination' is  by itself  ambiguous. It can refer to
     either of two things either to termination by notice or
     to termination  by effluxion  of time. It is often used
     in that dual sense in landlord and tenant and in master
     and servant cases. But there are several indications in
     this paragraph  to show  that it  refers here  only  to
     termination by notice.
Buckley L.C., concurred and said:
"In my  judgment the	words  are  not	 capable  of
     bearing that  meaning. As	counsel for the Secretary of
     State has	point- ed  out, the  verb 'terminate' can be
     used either transitively or
     1973] 2 All E.R. 103.
166
intransitively. A	contract may  be said  to  terminate
     when it  s comes  to an end by effluxion of time, or it
     may be  said to  be terminated when it is determined at
     notice or	otherwise by some act of one of the parties.
     Here in  my judgment the 7 word 'terminated' is used in
     this passage  in para  190 in the transitive sense, and
     it postulates  some act  by somebody  which is to bring
     the appointment  to an  end, and is not applicable to a
     case in  which the	 appointment comes  to end merely by
     effluxion of time."
Words of  multiple import  have to be winnowed judicially to
suit the  c social philosophy of the statute. So screened we
hold that the transitive and intransitive senses are covered
in the	current context.  Moreover, an	employer  terminates
employment not	merely by  passing an  order as	 the service
runs. He  can do so by writing a composite order, one giving
employment and	the other ending or limiting it. A separate,
subsequent determination  is not  the sole  magnetic pull of
the provision.	A  pre-emptive	provision  to  terminate  is
struck by the same vice as the post-appointment termination.
Dexterity  of	diction	 cannot	  defeat   the	 articulated
conscience of the provision.
What follows  ? Had  the State  Bank known	 the law and
acted on  it, half-a-month's  pay would	 have concluded	 the
story. But  that did  not happen.  And now,  some years have
passed and  the Bank  has to  pay, for	no service rendered.
Even so,  hard cases  cannot make bad law. Re-instatement is
the necessary  relief that  follows. At	 what point ? In the
particular  facts   and	 circumstances	of  this  case,	 the
respondent shall  be put back where he left off, but his new
salary will  be what  he would draw where he to be appointed
in the	same post  today de  novo. As  for benefits, if any,
flowing from  service he  will be  rank below  all permanent
employees in that cadre and will be deemed to be a temporary
hand  upto  now.  He  will  not	 be  allowed  to  claim	 any
advantages in  the matter  of seniority	 or  other  priority
inter se  among temporary  employees on	 the ground that his
retrenchment is	 being declared	 invalid by  this Court. Not
that we	 are laying down any general proposition of law, but
make this  direction in	 the special  circumstances  of	 the
case. As  for the  respondent's emoluments, he will  have to
pursue other remedies, if any.
We substantially  dismiss the appeal (C.A. 934 of 1975)
subject to  the slight	modification made  above. There	 was
some intervening  suggestion for  settlement of	 the dispute
but  it	  fell	through.   We  are  persuaded  to  make	 the
observation based  on that  circumstance that social justice
has two	 sides and,  occasionally, one	party or  the  other
makes r myopic mistakes resulting in further litigation.
Subject  to  the  above  observations,  the  appeal  is
dismissed. The	parties will  bear their  costs	 throughout,
although, in cases like this, where the law is not free from
obscurity and  needs this  Court's pronouncement  and one of
the affected parties is weak, being a worker, the costs must
come out  of public  funds as suggested in Trustees of Port,
Bombay(1). The	State, we  hope, will  constitute a suitors'
fund
(1) [1974] 4 S.C.C. 710.
167
which will take care of hardships and public interest in the
area of necessary litigation.
In C.A. 933 of 1975 the respondent has been re-employed
by the	appellant although  in his case also we declare, for
reasons already	 given and subject to the same term till his
absorption that	 the retrenchment  is invalid. The costs, in
this appeal, will be borne by each of the parties.
S.R.					  Appeal dismissed .
12-L390SCI/76
168
