Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 39 of 2009
Citation: AIR 1999 SC 2640
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/73469817/

[Cites
79
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Syed Mohammed Ibrahim S/O Syed Ismail vs State Of Karnataka By Magadi Road Ps on 12 December, 2012
Bench:
D.V.Shylendra Kumar
,
H.S.Kempanna
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BANGALORE

      DATED THIS THE 12TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2012

                          PRESENT

     THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE D V SHYLENDRA KUMAR

                             AND

         THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H S KEMPANNA

            Criminal Appeal No 1202 of 2008 [DB-C]
                             C/w
             Criminal Appeal No 39 of 2009 [DB-C]
                             And
                  Criminal RC No.5 of 2008


IN CRL.A. NO. 1202 OF 2008

BETWEEN:

1.   SYED MOHAMMED IBRAHIM
     S/O SYED ISMAIL
     AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
     R/O CHINNAPPA REDDY LAYOUT
     BELAGERE ROAD
     NEAR SHARADA VIDYA MANDIR
     VARTHUR, BANGALORE.

2.   SYED HASAN UZ ZAMA
     S/O LATE S A AZEEZ
     AGED ABOUT 57 YEARS
     JUNIOR WARRANT OFFICER
     R/O AIR FORCE HEAD QUARTERS
     R K PURAM, NEW DELHI
     R/O S.M.Q., 60/3, SAFED NAGAR,
     GURGAON, HARYANA.
                               2


3.     ABDUL RAHMAN SAIT @ SAJID
       S/O LATE ALI AHAMED SAIT
       AGED ABOUT 53 YEARS
       ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT BEML
       R/O.NO.209, 9TH MAIN ROAD
       VIJAYANAGAR
       BANGALORE.

4.     AMANATH HUSSAIN MULLA
       S/O LATE MAGDHUM HUSSAIN MULLA
       AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS
       SUPERVISOR IN BEML,
       R/O NO.49, 5TH CROSS,
       GUNDAPPA STREET
       REHMATHNAGAR,
       R.T. NAGAR, 1ST MAIN ROAD,
       BANGALORE.                     ...          APPELLANTS

                 [By Sri Hashmath Pasha, Adv.]

AND:

STATE OF KARNATAKA BY
MAGADI ROAD POLICE STATION
BANGALORE CITY
INVESTIGATED BY DEPUTY
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE
SPECIAL ENQUIRY SQUAD
C.O.D., BANGALORE
REP. BY STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR          ...       RESPONDENT

                     [By H N Nilogal, SPP]

     THIS CRL.A FILED U/S 374(2) OF CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT AND ORDER
OF CONVICTIONS DT.21.11.2008 AND SENTENCES DT.29.11.2008
PASSED IN S.C.NO.423/2001 ON THE FILE OF 34TH ADDL. CITY CIVIL
AND SESSION JUDGE AND P.O., SPL.COURT FOR THE TRIAL OF
CHURCH BOMB BLAST CASES, CENTRAL PRISON PREMISES,
BANGALORE AND ETC.,
                              3


IN CRL.A. NO. 39 OF 2009

BETWEEN:

1.   SHEIK HASHIM ALI
     S/O SYED KHASIM ALI
     AGED ABOUT 30 YEARS
     VIDEOGRAPHER
     R/O 10-4-469,
     DEENDAR ANJUMAN ASHRAM
     ASIF NAGAR, HYDERABAD
     A.P. STATE

2.   MOHAMMED FAROOQ ALI @ FAROOQ
     S/O MOHAMMED IFTHEKAR ALI
     AGED ABOUT 34 YEARS
     GENERAL STORES
     R/O FAROOQ KIRANI STORES
     ANJUMAN ASHRAM, ASIF NAGAR
     HYDERABAD, A.P. STATE

3.   MOHAMED SIDDIQUE
     S/O MOULANA MOHAMMED MAHABOOB
     AGED ABOUT 55 YEARS
     OWNER OF READYMADE GARMENT SHOP
     R/O PRASHANANAGAR
     CHIKKABALLAPUR,
     KOLAR DISTRICT

4.   ABDUL HABEEB
     S/O LATE MOULA ALI
     AGED ABOUT 52 YEARS
     APSRTC DRIVER
     R/O PASHA PETA, MUSLIM BAZAR
     THIRUVOR, KRISHNA DISTRICT
     A.P. STATE.

5.   SHAMSHUZAMA
     S/O SYED ABDUL AZEEZ
     AGED ABOUT 50 YEARS
     APSRTC CONDUCTOR
     R/O NUZVID, KRISHNA DISTRICT
     A.P. STATE.
                               4


6.     SHEIK FARDEEN VALI @ FAREED
       S/O SHEIK ABDUL SATTAR
       AGED ABOUT 37 YEARS
       CIVIL CONTRACTOR
       AND CLOTH SHOP OWNER
       R/O MUVVA, KRISHNA DISTRICT
       A.P. STATE

7.     SYED ABDUL KHADAR JILANI
       S/O LATE ABDUL AZEEZ
       AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
       T V MECHANIC
       R/O PASHA PETA, NUZVID
       KRISHNA DISTRICT, A.P.            ...       APPELLANTS


                 [By Sri Hashmath Pasha, Adv.]

AND:

STATE OF KARNATAKA BY
MAGADI ROAD POLICE STATION
BANGALORE CITY
INVESTIGATED BY DEPUTY
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
SPECIAL ENQUIRY SQUAD
C.O.D. BANGALORE
REP. BY STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR          ...       RESPONDENT


                     [By H N Nilogal, SPP]


      THIS CRL.A FILED UNDER SECTION 374(2) OF CODE OF
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT
AND ORDER OF CONVICTIONS DT.21.11.2008 AND SENTENCES
DT.29.11.2008 PASSED IN S.C.NO.423/2001 ON THE FILE OF 34TH
ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESSION JUDGE AND P.O., SPL.COURT FOR
THE TRIAL OF CHURCH BOMB BLAST CASES, CENTRAL PRISON
PREMISES, BANGALORE AND ETC.,
                                 5


IN CRL. RC NO. 5 OF 2008

BETWEEN:

THE REGISTRAR GENERAL
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
BANGALORE                                 ...     PETITIONER

                     [By Sri H N Nilogal, SPP
                      for Advocate General]

AND:

1.     SYED MOHAMMED IBRAHIM
       S/O SYED ISMAIL
       AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
       R/O CHINNAPPA REDDY LAYOUT
       BELAGERE ROAD
       NEAR SHARADA VIDYA MANDIR
       VARTHUR, BANGALORE.

2.     SYED HASAN UZ ZAMA
       S/O LATE S A AZEEZ
       AGED ABOUT 57 YEARS
       JUNIOR WARRANT OFFICER
       R/O AIR FORCE HEAD QUARTERS
       R K PURAM, NEW DELHI
       R/O S.M.Q., 60/3, SAFED NAGAR,
       GURGAON, HARYANA.

3.     ABDUL RAHMAN SAIT @ SAJID
       S/O LATE ALI AHAMED SAIT
       AGED ABOUT 53 YEARS
       ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT, BEML
       R/O.NO.209, 9TH B MAIN ROAD
       VIJAYANAGAR, BANGALORE.

4.     AMANATH HUSSAIN MULLA
       S/O LATE MAGDHUM HUSSAIN MULLA
       AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS
       SUPERVISOR IN BEML,
       R/O NO.49, 5TH CROSS,
       GUNDAPPA STREET
       REHMATHNAGAR,
                                     6


     R.T. NAGAR, 1ST MAIN ROAD,
     BANGALORE.                                ...    RESPONDENTS
                                            (ACCUSED NOS.1, 8, 9 & 17
                                                 IN SC NO.423 OF 2001)

      THIS CRIMINAL REFERRED CASE IS REGISTERED AS
REQUIRED UNDER SECTION 366 OF CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE FOR CONFIRMATION OF DEATH SENTENCE AWARDED
TO THE ABOVE RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED, BY THE XXXIV ADDL.
CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE & PRESIDING OFFICER, SPL. COURT,
CENTRAL PRISON PREMISES, BANGALORE BY JUDGMENT AND
ORDER OF CONVICTION AND SENTENCE DT. 21/29.11.2008 IN S.C.
NO. 423/01 AND ETC.

      THESE CRL.APPEALS & CRL.RC COMING ON FOR HEARING,
THIS DAY, COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:

                         JUDGMENT
Criminal Appeal Nos 1202 of 2008 and 39 of 2009 are

preferred by Accused Nos.1, 8, 9, 17 and Accused Nos.5, 6,

10, 13, 14, 16, 18 respectively, challenging the legality and

correctness     of   the     Judgment          and     Order     dated

21.11.2008/29.11.2008 passed in SC No.423/2001 by 34th

Additional City Civil & Sessions Judge & Presiding Officer,

Special Court for the trial of Church Bomb Blast Cases,

sitting   at   Central     Prison       Premises,    Bangalore   City,

convicting:
7
[a]   A1, A8, A9 & A17 for the offences under sections 121,

120-B r/w. 121-A, 124-A, 153-A of
IPC
and further Accused

No.1 for the offences punishable under
sections 304
Part II,

337, 427 of
Indian Penal Code
[for short
IPC
] and under Rule

5 of the Explosives Rules, 1983 [for short 'Explosive Rules'],

under
section 9-B
of the Explosives Act, 1884 [for short
Explosives Act
] and under
sections 3
and
5
of the Explosive

Substances Act, 1908 [for short '
Explosive Substances Act
']

and


[b]   Accused Nos. 5, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16 and 18 for the

offences under sections 120-B r/w. 121-A, 124-A, 153-A of
IPC
and sentencing:
[a]   A1, A8, A9, A17 to death for the offence
u/s.121
of

IPC, to undergo imprisonment for life for the offences u/ss.

120B r/w.121A of
IPC
and
u/s.124A
of IPC, to undergo R.I.

for three years for the offence
u/s.153A
of IPC and further
8
sentencing A1 to undergo R.I. for 10 years for the offence

u/s.304 Part II of
IPC
, R.I. for six months for the offence

u/s.337 of
IPC
, R.I. for two years for the offence
u/s.427
of

IPC, R.I. for two years for the offence under Rule 5 of the

Explosive Rules r/w.
Section 9B
of the Explosives Act and

imprisonment for life and R.I. for ten years for the offences

u/ss.3 and 5 of the
Explosive Substances Act
respectively

and


[b]   A5,   A6,   A10,   A13,   A14,   A16,   A18   to   undergo

imprisonment for life for the offences u/ss.120B, r/w.121A
IPC
and 124-A of
IPC
and R.I. for three years for the offence

u/s.153A of
IPC
.
2.    Criminal reference case No.5 of 2008 has been

registered on the basis of submission made to this court as

contemplated under
section 366
of Cr.PC by the learned

Sessions Judge to confirm the death sentences passed on

Accused Nos. 1, 8, 9 and 17.
9
IN CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs 1202 OF 2008 & 39 OF 2009:
3.   The brief facts of the case are :-
The appellants/accused along with A4 who died during

the pendency of trial were tried on the charges for the

offences punishable under Sections 121, 121-A, 124-A read

with section 120-B, 153-A r/w section 120-B, 304 r/w 120-

B, 337 r/w 120-B, 427 r/w 120-B of
IPC
and under rule 5 of

Explosives Rules read with
section 9-B
of the Explosives Act

r/w. 120-B of
IPC
and under
sections 3
,
5
of the Explosive

Substances Act r/w. 120-B of
IPC
.
4.   It is alleged that these appellants/accused along with

A2, A3 the two deceased and absconding accused Nos.7, 11,

12 and 15 in the case being the members of Deendar

Anjuman Organization, held secret meeting on 20.10.1999 at

Deendar Anjuman Ashram situated in Asifnagar, Hyderabad

and entered into a criminal conspiracy to spread Islam

religion throughout the world including India and to
10
commence Jihad and Nifaaq throughout India to create

disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred, ill-will between the

two major communities of India viz. Hindus and Christians

and to derail the Indian economy and to promote widespread

communal clash, committed many illegal acts within the

state   of Andhra   Pradesh and further continuing the

conspiracy entered by them at Deendar Anjuman Ashram

situated in Asifnagar, held secret meetings within the State

of Karnataka at various places and in particular in the

houses of A1 and A9 situated at Varthur and Vijayanagar in

Bangalore City in between the period from October 1999 to

9.7.2000 and in furtherance of that continued and renewed

conspiracy, the accused printed, published and circulated

the pamphlets, books, booklets containing literature to

excite disaffection towards the Government established by

law in India and also provoked to take up Jihad and Nifaaq

activities to derail Indian economy by sending secret

information with regard to vital Defence installations of the

Government, roads, bridges etc. to Pakistan through CD's
11
and floppies etc and thereby brought or attempted to bring

hatred or contempt or excited and further, in order to

Islamize whole of India through Jihad and Nifaaq activities,

mobilized funds amongst by illegal means like theft, robbery

and dacoity and also transmitted secret defence information

and collected information about the vital installations in

India to A7 residing at Mardhan in Pakistan and in order to

create communal disturbances, lawlessness, planted bombs

in Churches and other places, desecrated the places of

worship, caused injuries to innocent persons and to thus

wage war or attempted to wage war against the Govt. of

India   and   further   on   9.7.2000   at   about   9.30   p.m.

transported bombs in Maruthi Van bearing No.GA-01-U-
2786 illegally without valid licence or permit issued by the

Competent Authority to plant in religious places, which

accidently exploded in front of Minerva Mill Gate, Bangalore

resulting in death of A2, A3, injuries to PW1 and damage to

Maxi Cab belonging to PW8 and thereby have committed the

aforementioned offences.
12
5.   It is the case of the prosecution that all the accused

persons are the members of an unlawful association,

namely, Deendar Anjuman Ashram, having its head office at

Asifnagar,   Hyderabad,   State   of   Andhra   Pradesh   and

branches in various places in the States of Andhra Pradesh,

Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra and other States. One late Sri

Hazrath Moulana Syed Siddique Kibla @ Siddique Deendar

Channabasaveshwara, hereinafter referred to as "Hazrath

Siddique" for convenience, is the founder of Deendar

Anjuman Ashram situated at Asifnagar, Hyderabad and he

died on 4th April 1952. His body was buried in the Ashram at

Asifnagar, Hyderabad and a tomb was built there itself. Late

Hazrath Siddique left behind him his son viz., Zia-Ul-

Hassan, who later became Guru of Deendar Anjuman

Ashram. Later he migrated to Pakistan along with his family

members i.e., 7 sons and a daughter and started residing at

Mardan, Pakistan.
13
6.   The hidden aim and object of Deendar Anjuman

Ashram was to Islamise the whole world including India. To

propagate their object and hidden agenda, they printed,

published and circulated various books in many languages

including Kannada, English, Urdu, Arabi, Tamil, Telugu, to

attract young Muslims in achieving their object. The

organizers of the Deendar Anjuman Ashram used to hold

secret meetings every year after celebration of Urs in the

month of Rajab and motivate the young followers to take

training in Jihad, Nifaaq and Syria activities. Accordingly,

many accused persons went to Pakistan and took training in

preparing and operating arms and using ammunitions

including explosive materials, preparation and blasting of

bombs. A7 namely Sahebjada Zia-Ul-Hassan, with the

assistance of his sons i.e., A.11 viz., Syed Khalid Pasha,

A.12 viz., Syed Sabihul Hassan and A.15 viz., Syed Zahed-

Ul-Hassan, who are absconding. On 20.10.1999 held a main

conspiracy   meeting   at   Deendar    Anjuman     Ashram,

Hyderabad and at other various places to commit illegal acts
14
by illegal means, to create disharmony or feelings of enmity,

hatredness and ill will between two major communities i.e.,

Hindus and Christians, so as to spread communal clashes

in between those communities. In that conspiracy meeting,

they agreed to prepare and circulate pamphlets to the

Christian missionaries in the name of Hindus and vice versa

to create communal ill will in between the major religions of

India. Plans were also prepared to commit holy jihad to

achieve the above goal. Further, in that conspiracy meeting

they agreed to collect the information about the vital

installations of India including bridges, roads, military

bases, railways and like other important places to derail the

Indian economy. They also agreed to blast churches in

various places to create communal hatredness. To perform

this jihad activities they agreed to mobilize the funds by

indulging in theft, robbery, dacoity etc., i.e., Syria and to

send the mobilized amount to their Guru namely Zia-Ul-

Hassan residing at Mardan, Pakistan. The agenda of the

conspiracy   was    to   create   hatredness   towards   the
15
Government, established by Law in India and also cause

other Christian dominated western countries to condemn

India. In this direction, many main conspiracy meetings

were held at Deendar Anjuman Ashram and other places on

20.10.1999. Accordingly, many places of worship were

blasted by planting bombs in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
7.     It is further the case of prosecution that in furtherance

of the main conspiracy held at Hyderabad, the said

conspiracies were renewed in Karnataka also by holding

secret conspiracy meeting in the houses of A.1 viz., Syed

Mohd. Ibrahim at Varthur and A.9 namely Abdul Rehaman

Sait at Vijayanagar, Bangalore. All the accused persons got

printed various provocative pamphlets in the name of

Hindus addressed to the Christians and in the name of

Christians addressed to Hindus and circulated them in

various places to promote disharmony in between two major

communities. The accused persons collected information

with    regard   to   railways,   bridges,   important   roads,
16
Government establishments, defence secrets, atomic energy

plants and other vital installations and transmitted the said

information to A7 residing at Mardan, Pakistan through

internet, floppies, C.Ds., E-mail etc., only to derail Indian

economy, cause financial loss and in turn to destabilize the

Government established by law in India.
8.   In   furtherance   of   the   renewed   and   continued

conspiracies held in the houses A.1 and A.9 at Varthur and

Vijayanagar, Bangalore, A1, 2, 5 and 6, prepared bombs in

the house of A.5 namely Sheik Hasim Ali, at Hyderabad and

later sent to Bangalore through A.2 viz., Zakir. A.18 namely

Syed Abdul Khadar Jilani, who was specially trained in

preparing time bombs, prepared the bombs and later

transported it to various places. On 9.7.2000, in furtherance

of the continued conspiracy, with the active assistance of

other accused persons, A.1 along with deceased A2 and 3

transported huge explosive substances and bombs in the

Maruthi Van bearing registration No.GA 01 U 2786 and
17
planted some of them at St. Peter and Paul Church, situated

at J.J. Nagar, Bangalore. In the meantime, the members and

followers of Deendar Anjuman Ashram, had planted bombs

at St. Ann's Catholic Church, Wadi and St. John Lutheran

Church at Hubli, blasted them and created communal

disturbances, law and order problem in those areas. After

planting bomb in St. Peter and Paul Church, situated at J J

Nagar, Bangalore, with an intention to plant some other

bombs and explosive substances in some other places of

worship, A1, deceased A2 and 3, were transporting huge

explosive substances and bombs in the Maruthi van bearing

Reg.No. GA 01 U 2786 driven by A1 on Mysore deviation

road and on account of A1 driving that Maruthi van in a

rash and negligent manner, in front of Minerva mill gate,

situated within the limits of Magadi Road Police Station,

Bangalore, the bomb exploded and caused the death of A.2

and A.3 on the spot and grievous injuries to A1. The Maruthi

van in question was completely blown into pieces. It was

burnt and fully damaged apart from causing damage to
18
another maxi cab of one Ramanna PW.8 which was coming

from the opposite direction driven by PW.1 Sadique who also

sustained injuries in the same explosion.
9.   It is further the case of prosecution that on 9.7.2000 at

about 9.30 p.m. Police Inspector PW.58 of Magadi road

Police Station, Bangalore received a message from the police

control room to the effect that on Mysore deviation road a

moving vehicle has been caught fire, some persons have

sustained injuries and he should go over to that place

immediately. Accordingly within about 5 to 10 minutes,

PW.58 Police Inspector namely Shivappa Hadimani went to

that spot along with his staff. By that time senior Police

Officers were also present there. He saw a Maruthi van

bearing registration No.GA 01 U 2786 having exploded and

its remnant were spread on the road, three persons lying

with burnt injuries, another maxi cab also being damaged

and its owner viz., Ramanna PW.8 was present there. He

took PW.8 Ramanna to the Police Station, recorded his
19
complaint as per Ex.P6 and on the basis of the same

registered a case in Cr.No.290/2000 for the offence U/s.

304-A
IPC
and also under the provisions of the
Explosive Act
and sent FIR to the learned 3rd ACMM, Bangalore. Later he

came to know that the injured Zakir and Siddique have died

and another person by name Ibrahim was in an unconscious

condition. Next day, i.e., on 10.7.2000 he conducted the spot

mahazar, seized all the incriminating articles lying on the

spot in the presence of the panchas, recorded the statements

of witnesses, conducted inquest mahazar on the dead bodies

of Zakir and Siddique and sent a requisition for subjecting

the dead bodies for PM examination. On 10.7.2000 ACP,

Chikpet, Bangalore, PW.59 took up further investigation of

this case as per the direction of DCP, West and conducted

the   further   investigation.    On   15.7.2000   the   further

investigation of this case was handed over to COD,

Bangalore. Accordingly on 15.7.2000 Sri M.B. Appanna,

DSP, COD, Special Enquiry Squad PW.66 took up further

investigation from PW.59 ACP Bawa and proceeded with
20
investigation. During the course of investigation the I.Os.

searched the residential houses of all the above accused as

well as their work places and recovered huge incriminating

materials   like   books     containing   Deendar       Anjuman

organization   literature,   pamphlets,    passports,     letters

addressed to in between accused persons as well as to their

Guru namely Zia-Ul-Hassan, residing at Mardhan, Pakistan,

information collected with regard to vital installations

situated in Karnataka and other places, defence secrets,

diaries maintained by some of the accused, computers

including CPUs,     mobile   phones, scooter used in the

commission of the offence, currency notes of various

countries i.e., Pakistan, Phillipines, Saudi Arabia, India. The

I.Os. also collected the ledger extracts of the bank accounts

of some of the accused wherein the accused had made

financial transactions inter se between themselves and had

drawn certain amount in the ATMs situated in various

places in Pakistan. The I.Os. also collected the details of the

landline and mobile telephones of the accused, got retrieved
21
the information from the seized CPUs. through experts and

obtained   print   outs   and    confirmed   about   collecting

information regarding vital installations of India and also

about E-mailing the said information to Mardan, Pakistan.

They got all the seized incriminating articles found in the

place of blast examined by FSL experts and confirmed that

powerful explosive substances were used in preparing the

bombs. They also arrested the accused persons on various

dates produced them before the jurisdictional Magistrate,

took them to police custody, interrogated them, recorded

their voluntary statements and in pursuance of the same

seized many incriminating articles at their instance from

their respective residential houses as well as from their work

places. Further, the investigation also revealed that all the

accused got renewed their conspiracy in the house of A.1 at

Varthur, as well as in the house of A.9 at Vijayanagar,

Bangalore and they performed the acts of jihad, nifaaq and

collected required fund through syria. The I.Os. further got

translated the seized Urdu language documents into English
22
and Kannada. In view of this accidental explosion of bombs,

the entire secret conspiracy meetings held by all the accused

and the illegal activities carried on by the accused came to

light. Thus, all the accused in furtherance of their renewed

and continued conspiracy committed many grave offences,

printed and circulated various books, pamphlets containing

promotion of disharmony in between two major communities

and also caused law and order problems in various religious

places. Further, these accused persons without any valid

license issued by the competent authorities, possessed,

prepared bombs, transported them and got them exploded

deliberately to cause loss of life and property. A1 knowing

that the huge quantity of explosive substance which he was

transporting in the Maruthi van if by accidentally or

otherwise explode, it will cause death of persons, drove that

maruthi van on the Mysore deviation road and caused the

death of A2, 3, injuries to maxicab driver Sadiq PW.1,

grievous injuries to himself and damage to the maxi cab of

PW.8 Ramanna to the extent of more than Rs.250/-.      A1 in
23
furtherance of the renewed and continued conspiracy made

along with other accused in the case without any valid

license or permit issued by any competent authority to

manufacture, possess and transport the bombs and other

explosive materials, transported them in the above said

Maruthi van along with deceased A2 and 3 and caused it to

explode in front of Minerva mill gate which resulted in the

death of A.2, A.3, injuries to PW.1 Sadiq and damage to the

maxi cab of PW.8. Thus A1 transported the bombs and

explosive substances with unlawful object.
10.   Thereafter, the I.O. obtained the necessary sanction

order from the Police Commissioner, Bangalore to prosecute

all the accused for the offences under Rule 5 of the Rules

read with
section 9-B
of Explosive Act and also under
Sec.5
of the Explosive Substances Act. They also obtained sanction

from the Government of Karnataka to prosecute the accused

persons for the offences under Secs.124-A, 153-A read with
Sec.120-B
IPC as required under
Sec.196
Cr.P.C. The I.Os.
24
also made efforts to secure the absconding A7, 11, 12, 15 by

obtaining arrest warrants against those accused persons

and also got issued red corner notice to Interpol to secure

them. But in spite of their best efforts their presence could

not be secured since they were residing at Mardan, Pakistan.

Therefore, as the investigation had been completed PW.66

DSP, Special Enquiry Squad, COD, Bangalore on 11.10.2000

submitted the final report against 18 accused persons in the

Court of 3rd ACMM, Bangalore City, showing A.7, 11, 12 and

15 as absconding though A2, A3 had died in the blast that

had taken place on 9.7.2000.
11.   The learned Magistrate thereafter committed the case

of these accused to the Court of Sessions, which on receipt

of the records, secured presence of the accused and

thereafter initially framed charges for the offences under

sections 124-A, 153-A, 304, 337, 427 read with
section 120-

B
of IPC and under rule 5 of the Rules read with
section 9B
of the Explosives Act, read with
section 120-B
of IPC and
25
also under
section 3
of the Explosive Substances Act, read

with
section 120-B
of IPC against the accused. Thereafter,

during the trial, additional charges came to be framed for

the offences under
sections 121
,
121-A
of IPC to which the

accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
12.   The prosecution in support of its case, in all examined

PWs.1 to PW.67, got marked Ex.P1 to P298 and MOs.1 to
212. The accused during the course of examination of the

prosecution witnesses got marked Ex.D1.
13.   After the additional charges came to be framed, the

prosecution did not lead any further evidence. On the other

hand, the accused got recalled seven of the prosecution

witnesses namely PWs.28, 46, 50, 56, 57, 60, 66 and cross

examined them.
14.   After closure of the prosecution evidence, the accused

were examined under
section 313
of Cr.PC. They denied all

the incriminating circumstances that were put to them,
26
found   in    the    evidence    of   the   prosecution   witnesses.

Thereafter, they were called upon to enter on their defence

and to lead any evidence that they may have in support of

their case. The accused submitted that they have no defence

evidence to lead. Total denial of the prosecution case is the

defence of the accused.
15.   The learned trial Judge thereafter on hearing the

learned Public Prosecutor for the State and learned counsel

for the accused and on considering the evidence and

documents on record and also after examining various

Judgments relied upon by the State and also counsel for the

accused, came to the conclusion that the prosecution has

established the charges leveled against the accused and

accordingly     by     his      Judgment      and    Order      dated

21.11.2008/29.11.2008           convicted    and    sentenced     the

accused as aforesaid.
27
16.   The accused being aggrieved by the Judgment and

order of conviction and sentence, have preferred these two

appeals.
17.   The sum and substance of sentences imposed on the

Accused persons is that the appellants in criminal appeal

No.1202 of 2008 are subjected to death sentence along with

other lesser sentence and appellants in Criminal Appeal

No.39 of 2008, are sentenced for life along with a lesser

sentence to run concurrently.
18.   It is in respect of imposition of death sentence on the

appellants in Criminal Appeal Nos.1202 of 2008, Crl. RC

No.5 of 2008 under
section 366
of Cr.PC by the learned trial

Judge for confirmation of the death sentence.
19.   Appearing on behalf of the appellants, Sri. Hashmath

Pasha,     learned   counsel   has   addressed   arguments   in

common in both the appeals as two appeals arise out of the

very Judgment and only appeals are preferred in two sets,
28
one appeal by persons who have been imposed death

sentence and other appeal by the persons who have been

imposed sentence of imprisonment for life and lesser

sentence and it is urged that the Judgment and conviction is

not sustainable in law; that the learned judge of the trial

court has not appreciated the evidence on record in a proper

perspective; that the prosecution had never made good its

version with any degree of acceptable and dependable

evidence; that the evidence placed before the court by the

prosecution was not worthy of acceptance and had suffered

from various legal infirmities; that the very assumption that

there existed criminal conspiracy was fallacious; that the

prosecution failed to make good criminal conspiracy; that

there was no fresh criminal conspiracy; that the facts and

circumstances, based on which the accused persons are

charge sheeted and put on trial were the very facts that had

come to be urged and based on which on an earlier occasion,

the accused persons except for A10 had been prosecuted in

SC No.95 of 2001 on the file of the Additional Metropolitan
29
Sessions Judge for trial of Jubilee Hills Bomb Blast case -

cum - Additional Family Court, Hyderabad; that all the

accused persons except A10 had also been charged of the

offence committing criminal conspiracy on the very set of

facts punishable under section 120B of IPC in that court

and in fact, SC No.95 of 2001 came to be concluded as per

Judgment dated 22.11.2004 and the accused persons

therein amongst whom figured all accused in the present

case, except A10 and who have all been arrayed as accused

in SC No.423/2005 had already been convicted of this

offence and therefore trying the convicted accused for the

very offence and on the very set of facts is not only violative

of Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India but is a clear

infraction of provisions of section 300 of Cr.PC.
20.   Submission of Sri. Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel

for the appellants on this aspect is that the conspiracy if at

all is one conspiracy and there are no different conspiracies

and a conspiracy once it is implemented or aborted, comes
30
to an end and therefore in respect of same set of facts and

on the same evidence, the question of prosecuting the

appellants - accused and convicting them for the offence

under
section 120-B
of IPC is not sustainable in law and

therefore conspiracy theory is totally an untenable and

unsustainable    version   of     the   prosecution   and   once

conspiracy theory fails, other consequences also cannot

follow etc., is the submission.
21.   Mr. Pasha has submitted that the Judgment in SC

No.95 of 2001 before the Court at Hyderabad having been

brought on record by the prosecution themselves during the

stage of the charge, it is a Judgment contents of which may

have to be necessarily looked into and at any rate enable the

appellants to make a reference to that judgment and on

such premise urge legal contentions as above.
22.   In support of the submissions, Mr. Hashmath Pasha,

learned counsel for the appellants has placed reliance on the

following decisions:
31
[a]   'DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS v. DOOT
      AND OTHERS' reported in 1973 HL (E) 807; and

[b]
'STATE OF TAMILNADU' v. NALINI AND OTHERS'
reported in AIR 1999 SC 2640
23.   It is also submitted by Sri. Hashmath Pasha that the

facts as brought out by the prosecution in SC No.95 of 2001

before the Court at Hyderabad being the same facts and the

evidence also substantially being the same evidence as is

referred to and relied upon by the prosecution for proving

their case in SC No.423/2005 before the Bangalore Court

though the appellants had not been charged with some of

the offences such as offences punishable under
sections

121
,
121-A
of IPC, the facts being the same and evidence

relied upon by the prosecution being the same, the

argument equally holds good in respect of conviction of the

appellants   who   have   been   convicted   of   the   offence

punishable under these two provisions respectively.
24.
In support, reliance is placed on the Judgment of the

Supreme Court in the case of
'KOLLA VEERA RAGHAV RAO
32
v. GORANTLA VENKATESWARA RAO & ANOTHER
in AIR

2011 SC 641.
25.    This apart, it is also submitted that the evidence let in

by the prosecution in the Judgment under appeal does not

in    any   cogent   manner    substantiate   the   version   of

prosecution against the appellants and it is submitted that

even the prosecution case is not that the appellants -

convicted accused had caused any disruptive activity by

resorting to any acts of terrorism or such disruptive activity

as the blast that had occurred in the van which was being

driven by A1 and the blast in the van was only an accidental

blast and it was not at any place of worship or intended to

cause any loss of life or property or injury and therefore also

the conspiracy theory and based on such conspiracy theory,

the charge of committing offences punishable under the

other provisions cannot be sustained.
26.    It is the specific submission of Sri. Pasha that it can

never be made good that in respect of an accidental blast,
33
the ingredients of the provisions of
section 121
of IPC can be

present or found.     In fact, without conceding Mr. Pasha,

learned counsel submits that in a case of accidental blast, at

the best, what one can infer of the possibilities are that it

can be a case for conviction under
section 304A
and
337
of

IPC and in view of the possession of explosive substances, a

case of possible offence under
section 5
of the Explosive

Substances Act, 1908 and section 9[B] of
Explosives Act
, can

be made out but nothing else.
27.   It is therefore submitted that with A2 and 3 who had

perished in the accidental blast and none of the other

accused appellants having any link or any evidence to link

them up to even the explosive substances found in the van

and   which    had    exploded      accidentally,   the   offences

punishable under the provisions
referred to above
can never

be attributed; that the conviction is not sustainable and

therefore it is required to be set aside.
34
28.   Mr. Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants also

submits that the prosecution has heavily relied upon the

evidence of PW.46 - Abdul Gafoor for the purpose of not only

making good the conspiracy theory, but apart from the

quality of the evidence let in by the prosecution through this

witness, as already noticed, the evidence having already

been examined by the court at Hyderabad in S.C. No.

95/2001 earlier in respect of the accused appellants except

for A10, cannot be pressed into service for conviction once

more on the same evidence and on same set of facts.
29.   With regard to additional charges framed for conviction

punishable under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC is

concerned, Mr. Pasha has very strongly urged that the

charge i.e., the additional charge for trying the appellants in

respect of these offences is hit for want of sanction as the

prosecution had not obtained sanction contemplated under
section 196
of Cr.PC before launching the prosecution

against the appellants for the offences punishable under
35
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC.      It is submitted that the

prosecution though might have obtained sanction earlier for

the offences punishable under
sections 124-A
and
153-A
of

IPC, such sanction cannot be pressed into service for the

purpose of holding that there was sanction for framing

additional charges punishable under
sections 121
and
121-

A
of IPC as the basic requirement under
section 196
of

Cr.PC for offence punishable under Chapter-VI of
Cr.PC
had

not been fulfilled as such sanction should be obtained in

respect of each individual offence punishable under
sections

121
and
121-A
of IPC as it constitutes different offences and

it is not in dispute that sanction had not been obtained from

the competent authority with reference to these statutory

provisions for prosecuting the appellants.
30.   Our attention is drawn to Ex.P181 to submit that

sanction order does not specifically speak of permission for

prosecuting the offence under section 121 or 121-A of
IPC
.
In support of submission relating to the trial being vitiated
36
for want of sanction, Mr. Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel

for the appellants has placed reliance on the Judgment of

the   Privy   Council    in   the   case   of
'GOKULCHAND

DWARKADAS MORARKA v. THE KING
' reported in AIR

1948 PRIVY COUNCIL 82.
31.   Reliance is also placed on the Judgment of the

Supreme Court in the case of
'THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN

v. TARACHAND JAIN
' reported in 1973 SCC [CRL] 774 and

Mr. Pasha, learned counsel points out that though it was

open to the prosecution to have made good the lacuna of

want of sanction, particularly, as in this case, additional

charges have been framed in respect of the offences

punishable under
sections 121
and
121A
of IPC, towards the

fag end of the prosecution closing its case and evidence, and

the prosecution having not placed any additional material

before the court to show that the facts constituting the

additional material for sanction of the prosecution was either

already   before   the   sanctioning   authority   or   it   was
37
subsequently placed before the authority insofar as the

additional charges in respect of the offences punishable

under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC are concerned being

without a valid sanction, trial gets vitiated in respect of these

charges and conviction does not sustain.
32.   This is specifically made a ground with reference to the

evidence on record as submission of Sri. Pasha, learned

counsel for the appellants is that the additional charges

have been pressed into service and in fact framed by the

learned Sessions Judge only with reference to Ex.P260

which was admittedly not a material that had been placed

before the sanctioning authority nor any statement or

information being given by PW.46 having been placed before

the sanctioning authority and such vital material according

to the prosecution, having not been placed before the

sanctioning authority, there is no sanction in respect of the

offences punishable under
section 121
and
121-A
of IPC.
38
33.   With reference to Ex.P260 which is according to the

prosecution the extra judicial confession by one of the

accused     -    A8,   submission      is   that   the   manner      and

circumstances under which it has been brought into

existence by the prosecution and has been produced or

brought out by the prosecution during the trial stage, there

is considerable doubt and suspicion about its genuineness

and at any rate about acceptability of the same.
34.   It is pointed out that even though according to the

prosecution the letter written by A.8, while he was in judicial

custody at Central Prison, Bangalore, which is addressed to

the III Additional CMM, Bangalore, and the narration is so

very lengthy, the description of the events and dates and it is

highly unbelievable that A.8 would have written the entire

narration       on   his   own.   He   pointed     out   that   in   his

examination, the accused has specifically indicated that he

has been pressurized/induced by the jail officials and the

Investigating Officer.
39
35.   It is also pointed out that Ex.P.260 being not in

accordance with the Provision of
Section 164
of Cr.P.C.

assuming that it could have been taken as a confessional

statement of an accused, it cannot be relied upon. Apart

from the legality of the manner, in which, it is sought to be

relied upon, since it is sought to be stated in the confession

statement, it is also pointed out that the contents of the

same indicate, it is not a confession of A-8 out of remorse

and regret, but one which had been tendered for bargaining

the pardon, which is obvious on reading the concluding part

of the narration of Ex.P.260, which reads as under:
40. Sir, I am last 31 and ½ years of my
      service, I am one of the hard worker and
      disciplined soldier, but all these things have done
      in half knowledge and blind belief in gurus, sir,
      what I have done was not for any minority or for
      name. Now I came to know (I am a example) the
      person who have half knowledge and blind belief
      is how much danger. Sir, my service documents
      shows my behaviour, as documents are very clean
      and annual confidential report shows, I am
      always a hard worker and obedient to my seniors.
I was topping in section, in my annual confidential
      report.
40
41. Humble Sir, I am requesting, begging
      you sir, please give me a chance to prove me that,
      m proud son of my mother land and good soldier.
      Sir, I am requesting your Honour, please pardon
      me for my family at least to give me a chance to
      rectify my deeds and promise you I will not
      indulge in any anti National activities, my lord,
      please pardon me.
36.   It is also submitted that Ex.P.260 does not qualify as a

confessional statement within the expression and for the

purpose of
Section 10
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 [for

short, the
Evidence Act
] and therefore, cannot be given the

status of the confessional statement within the scope of
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. and also being hit by the provision of

Section 24 in the sense that it was not either voluntarily or

freely made by A.8, it has no evidentiary value for securing

conviction either against A.8 or as against the other co-

accused persons, as it is not the material which qualifies for

its acceptability under
Section 30
of the Evidence Act.
37.   Mr.Pasha with reference to the evidence of PWs.65 and

66 particularly, the witnesses examined only for marking the
41
documents, the said two witnesses having not spoken about

the contents in the statement and the contents of P260

having not been proved, particularly, by not examining the

person to whom the letter was addressed to, namely the

Magistrate, the contents cannot be looked into to conclude

that, it is in the nature of a confessional statement by 8th

accused person.
38.   Mr.Pasha    has   placed   reliance   on   the   following

judgment to make good this point namely, in the case of
NARBABE DEVI GUPTA VS. BIRENDRA KUMAR JAISWAL

& ANOTHER
[AIR 2004 SC 175] submits that just because

the document is marked, does not in any way amount to

proving the contents.
Further reliance is also placed on the

decision of privy council in the case of
NAZIR AHMED VS.

KING EMPEROR
[AIR 1936 PC 253], in the case of

IBRAHIM VS. EMPEROR [AIR 1937 LAHOR 208] and also

the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of STATE OF

UTTAR    PRADESH VS.       SINGARA      SINGH     &    OTHERS
42
reported IN AIR 1964 SC 358, to submit that if the

procedure as contemplated under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. has

not been adhered to or followed, it cannot be given the

status of confessional statement within the scope of this

provision.
39.   Mr.Pasha submitted that Ex.P.260 does not qualify for

its   acceptability   under   any   other   enabling   statutory

provision of the code of criminal procedure or the
Evidence

Act
and therefore, it cannot be said that the prosecution has

proved this document, which is the case as against the

convicted appellants.
40.   Even with reference to the contents of Ex.P.260,

submission of Mr.Pasha is that the contents of Ex.P.260 at

best can be used by the prosecution for the purpose of its

theory of conspiracy and not any further in the sense, for

commission of any acts in furtherance of the conspiracy and

that the person is not aware of the subsequent developments

etc., It is the submission of Mr.Pasha that the very
43
document having been marked as Exs.P.246 to P.250 in

S.C.No.95/2001 before the Sessions Court at Hyderabad, it

cannot be again relied upon and used as evidence either for

proving the offence
Section 120-B
IPC for the present case or

in respect of other offences.
41.   With reference to the evidentiary value of deposition of

PW.46, first and primary objection raised by Mr.Pasha is

that the deposition of this witness clearly indicates that he

had a role and actually participated in all the meetings of the

members of Deendar Anjuman Organisation and that he has

revealed the information and the decision that took place in

those meetings whether held at Hyderabad or at other places

and if at all was very much part of the conspiracy and stood

in the position of an accomplice in the conspiracy.
42.   Submission is based on the premise that the witness,

who is cited as a witness, in fact should have been arraigned

as an accused person and if he is an accused, the question

of his testimony being made use of either against any of the
44
appellant, convicted persons or other persons, cannot arise.

It is submitted that if PW.46 was in the position as an

accused, he could not have either testified against himself or

against other accused persons and the prosecution, just

because he has not been arraigned as an accused in spite of

material being available, the evidence of this witness cannot

be put on par with the evidence of any other witness, who

has testified in support of the prosecution case.
43.   It is submitted that if PW.46 should have been

arraigned as an accused, then unless the prosecution had

obtained the permission of the Court for pardoning the

accused within the scope of the provisions of Sections 306

and 307 of Cr.P.C., there was no way for such a person

giving evidence before the Court and the prosecution having

not resorted to this course of action, but on the other hand,

deliberately having opted not to arraign him as an accused,

but at a later stage of trial, through an application filed

under section 311 of the Cr.PC to examine him as witnesses
45
in support of the prosecution case, is virtually an over

reaching act for bypassing the statutory requirement in

terms of provision of Sections 306 and 307 of Cr.P.C.
44.   It is also his submission that it also amounts to the

Investigating Officers virtually exercising the power of the

Court or usurping the power of the Court under
Sections

306
and
307
of Cr.P.C., which is not permitted in law and

therefore, no reliance could be placed on the evidence of this

witness.
In support of his submission, Mr.Pasha placed

reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case

of
P.SIRAJUDDIN VS. THE STATE OF MADRAS
reported in

AIR 1971 SC 520, wherein the Supreme Court observed as

under:
"26. In our view the granting of amnesty to two
      persons who are sure to be examined as witnesses
      for the prosecution was highly irregular and
      unfortunate. It was rightly pointed out by the High
      Court.
Neither the
Criminal Procedure Code
nor the
Prevention of Corruption Act
recognizes the
      immunity from prosecution given under these
46
assurances and that the grant of pardon was not in
      the discretion of police authorities."
and also the judgment of HARSHAD S. MEHTA VS. STATE

OF MAHARASTRA reported in 2001 SCC (CRI) 1447,

particularly as discussed in para 13 of this judgment.
45.   It is submitted that the prosecution has deliberately

avoided the status of an accused to this witness and he has

been styled as a witness in violation of
Sections 306
and
307
of Cr.P.C. Submits that his (PW.46) evidence should not be

accepted as a valid piece of acceptable oral evidence. In this

regard, Mr.Pasha also pointed out that so called statement

made by PW.46 under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. before the

Magistrate, Hubli, was in connection with Sessions Case

Nos.580 & 579/2003 in the case of State of Karnataka by

Keshavapura Police, Hubli Vs. Syed Muneeruddin Mulla &

Others, being not brought on record, in the manner

permitted in law, in the present case, the deposition of

PW.46 does not elicit acceptability. It is also the submission
47
of Mr.Pasha that PW.46 in fact had been arrested by the

Hubli Police and was in police custody for more than two

months and it was during such period, the statement had

been recorded under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C., but it is also not

brought on record in this case by the prosecution.
46.   It is the submission of Mr.Pasha that except for PW.46,

no other independent witness has supported the prosecution

theory of conspiracy and the evidence of PW.46 being so

suspicious and not trustworthy and being hit by the

statutory provision, the conspiracy theory is not made good

by the prosecution and it is not acceptable as cogent

evidence. Therefore, also it is submitted that apart from the

legal infirmity, the conspiracy is not made good by the

prosecution on acceptable cogent evidence.
47.   Mr.Pasha has also made submission regarding the

quality of the evidence, which the prosecution has let in

through PW.28 - P.N. Mukunda, a witness who has
48
identified A-1, and who has deposed that he had seen A-1

and two others as the occupants of the Maruthi Van in

which the explosion took place on Magadi Road; that he had

seen the van and the three persons in the vicinity of church

in Jagajeevanram Nagar, where in also a bomb blast took

place rudely disrupting the festivities going on in the church

on that day and even with regard to the evidence brought on

record through PW.46 that the entire evidence does not

reveal the existence of any conspiracy amongst the accused

persons in respect of the incident with reference to which,

the prosecution has launched S.C.No.423/2001.
48.   He further submits that the evidence does not contain

any reference to the incident that has taken place at Magadi

Road, Bangalore in front of Minerva Mill Gate, in a Maruthi

Van in which an explosive exploded and in which, A.1 was

travelling.
49.   Mr. Pasha also pointed out that with reference to the

evidence of PW.28, by name Mukunda, a worker in a
49
provision store near St. Peter and Paul Church at J.J.Nagar

and in his deposition, he has stated that he had seen A.1

and A.3 moving in the Maruthi Van, in which, the blast took

place at Magadi Road and that he having seen them with

Van being parked near the Church, two persons were seen,

one carrying a bag going inside the Church and returning

and also informing the other one that job is accomplished

and then the van was driven away, is a piece of evidence,

which is to say the least most fantastic, as even according to

the prosecution, it was a festival day and thousands of

people had gathered, he had been to the provision store to

attend his work and it is not indicated as to how he could

have watched all these accused persons.       He also pointed

out with reference to the testification of A.1 by this witness

that for the purpose of identification, A.1 had been brought

on   a   wheel   chair   and   there   was   no   identification

independently as the accused was the only person, who was

in a wheel chair, who was an injured person and therefore, it

was a give away.
50
50.   Submission of Mr.Pasha is that, the version is neither

believable nor identification is properly proved and therefore,

the evidence of PW.28 cannot be accepted. It is also further

pointed out that at any rate this evidence does not advance

the case of the prosecution insofar as the blast at a different

place is concerned and the blast being accidental in nature,

cannot link up as an intended act of support to any offensive

act with which the accused are charged.
51.   Mr. Pasha, learned counsel for the appellant has

contended that, even while the prosecution has placed heavy

reliance on the evidence of PWs.28 and 46 to make good

their case before the Court and also Ex.P-260, the other oral

and documentary evidence including the mahazars are

either not relevant or not fully proved, because the mahazar

witnesses have turned hostile and also because the evidence

is not fully proved as of acceptable quality.
51
52.   Mr. Pasha, points out that the prosecution has

searched the residence of A.1 and had seized articles found

in terms of Ex.P-7 mahazar drawn on 10.7.2000 at the

residence of A.1. It is pointed out that though the mahazar

is supported by the testimony of Investigation Officer, PW.59

and panch witness, PW.12 and attributable recoveries of

MOs 4 to 69 submits with reference to the contents of MOs

11 to 69 is that there is no incriminating materials in the

seizure either to incriminate A.1 of the theory of conspiracy

or for the offences punishable under Sections 121, 121A,

124A, 153A r/w 120B of
IPC
.
53.   As already pointed out except the possible possession

of explosive material by A-1, other accused persons cannot

be linked to any other recovery even with reference to the

material Ex.P-7 mahazar.
54.   With reference to the mahazar drawn at the place of

occurrence of the blast that has taken place in respect of

Maruthi Van bearing No.GA-01-V-2786 at about 9.30 p.m.
52
on 9.7.2000, at Magadi Road, in front of Minerva Mill Gate,

it is pointed out that when the blast has taken place on the

previous day between 9 to 9.30 p.m. mahazar was drawn on

the next day between 3 to 5 p.m. and what is more

important to point out is that this mahazar has been drawn

after the drawing of the mahazar Ex.P7 at the house of A1 in

the morning.
55.   Submission is that recoveries made with reference to

the mahazar drawn in the place of blast cannot be accepted

on its face value and particularly the recovery of burnt

pamphlets containing the slogans as per MOs 2 and 3 -

warning Christian missionaries to stop conversion or quit

India, which material cannot be believed for the reason that

even according to the prosecution, the blast was so severe

and due to explosion of bomb, the possibility of combustible

substance like the pamphlets MOs 2 and 3 surviving is

highly doubtful and therefore, the recovery of such material

cannot be accepted on its face value, but it is suspicious.
53
56.   It is also submitted that even from the evidence of

PW.58, the First Investigating Officer who has admittedly

visited the scene of occurrence on the very night on receipt

of the message through the control room and who has also

made arrangement to put some watch and ward, later on, at

the   scene   of   occurrence    having   not   noticed   such

incriminating materials at that time, but the same having

been recovered much later is also a suspicious circumstance

to accept the recovery of MOs 2 and 3 as a genuine recovery,

to be proved against the accused appellant.
57.   Mr. Pasha, with reference to the evidence of PW.11 -

H.R.Reddy, Police Sub-Inspector, who had informed about

the occurrence through the control room on his noticing the

incident, while he was on his way to his residence from his

work place and he having not spoken anything about the

existence of such pamphlets as MOs. 2 and 3 also, submits

this also raises doubt about the genuineness of the recovery

of this material from the spot under Ex.P-1.          He also
54
submitted that other police officials as PWs 4 and 5 also had

visited the spot and they also having not noticed the

existence of such material or having deposed about the same

and more so, PW.3 being a mechanic, who is a panch

witness for Ex.P-1 and who has visited the spot on the day of

the incident also having not noticed the existence or

availability of MOs 2 and 3, all these circumstances create

doubt and suspicion about the recovery.
58.   Even the fact that PW.2 had in fact identified A.1, who

had visited the spot on the previous day of the occurrence

having not noticed and having not mentioned anything

about the existence of MOs 2 and 3 and in these

circumstances, it creates considerable doubt about the

recovery, is the submission of the counsel for appellant.
59.   With regard to the mahazar drawn at the work place of

A.9 and A.17 i.e., the factory premises of the BEML,

Bangalore and mahazar Exs.P-13 and 14 drawn within the

factory premises of BEML and the recoveries made therein,
55
Mr. Pasha has submitted that these mahazars are not fully

in consonance with the requirements of the law and the

recoveries are also not without any doubt or suspicion.
60.   With reference to Ex.P-13, under which recovery of

material object Exs.P-110 to 146 had been made at the

instance of A.17 as per the mahazar drawn on 29.7.2000

submission of Mr.Pasha is that this recovery does not in any

way point an accusing finger or reveal incriminating material

against A.17 for making out offences with which the accused

has been charged.    Except for MO.142 which is again the

pamphlets is in the nature of MOs 2 and 3 all other material

put against accused, Mr.Pasha submits is literature relating

to the Deendar Anjuman Organisation and its objects and

principles and further submits that mere possession of the

said literate does not in any way amounts to commission of

any offence more so of the nature of offences with which

A.17 has been charged.
56
61.   With reference to Ex.P-14 mahazar drawn on 3.8.2000

at the workplace of A.9 and said to be at the instance of A.9,

the recovery of MOs 148 to 153 particularly, the floppies

said to have been recovered from the drawer in the control of

A.9, what is pointed out by Mr.Pasha is even as per the

evidence of PW.19 G.Vishwanath, who was the General

Manager of BEML, Bangalore and who is a panch witness for

Exs.P-13 and P-14 and who has identified A.9 and A.17 as

employees of BEML and seizure of MOs 110 to 147 at the

instance of A.17 and MOs 148 to 153 which were at the

instance of A.9, he had also deposed that the drawer of A.9

and cupboard of A.17 had been sealed by security officer of

the factory, On learning about the involvement of the

employees of their factory as on 23.7.2000 when A.9 was

arrested by the police and the same had become known to

the employer through newspaper and about the arrest of

A.17 on 27.7.2000 which also the employer has learnt and

therefore, the security officer has sealed the drawer and

cupboard of A.9 and A.17 respectively, but the mahazar
57
drawn as per Ex.P-13 and P-14 does not necessarily indicate

the seal put by the security official had been opened by the

security official before recoveries were made and therefore,

the submission is that if the seal was not in tact and

developments have taken place in between the date of

mahazar and the date of seal being put by the security

official of the factory, the recoveries become doubtful and

suspicious. He submitted that the material recovered being

such that they can be placed by any one and the contents of

the mahazar expressly having not indicated the position, it

cannot be said that the seal had not been broken earlier.

One other circumstance pointed out by Mr.Pasha is about

the genuineness of the mahazar and the recoveries by the

Investigating Officer. PW.66 who had accompanied A.9 and

A.17 on the dates of the mahazar and when it is the practice

and rule that all visitors to the factory and particulars

noticed at the factory gate/entrance by the security, such an

entry is not found in respect of PW.66 and is therefore yet

another circumstance to doubt the recovery in the presence
58
of PW.66 along with accused at the place where the mahazar

has been drawn recoveries become doubtful in the absence

of    corresponding   entry   made   in   the   security   book

maintained in the factory up to date. This position also

having been revealed in the evidence of PW.19 is a

circumstance which creates doubt about genuineness of the

mahazar and recoveries and therefore, not much credence

can be attributed to the recoveries through these mahazars.
62.    It is contended with reference to the mahazar dated

23.7.2000 drawn at the residence of A9 and the recoveries

under this mahazar viz. MOs 169 to 185, that the recoveries

does not necessarily constitute incriminating material to

demonstrate the commission of offences which are urged

with by A9; that the material objects do not necessarily link

up to one another; that the pocket diary of A9 containing

telephone number and photo of A1 and also e-mail ID of A8

mentioned in the dairy by themselves does not make out a

case of the commission of the offence with which the
59
accused has been charged; though the panch witness PW57

Jaganath has supported the recoveries.      The recoveries by

themselves do not constitute any incriminating material.

The prosecution cannot be said to have been made good

their case through the recoveries made in the residence of

A9.      Even with reference to the contents of Ex.P177

particularly the prosecution having placed reliance on the

contents in this mahazar to indicate that A9 had pointed out

to the panchas the place where himself and other accused

persons sat for discussion to chalk out the future course of

action and the discussion about testing the bombs etc. are

all in the nature of confessional statement, but not a

confession statement made by the accused to any person

much less within the scope of Section 164, but in the form of

narration by three persons and incorporated into the

mahazar.     It is therefore, submitted that such contents

which are not proved have no evidentiary value and at any

rate the so called discussion relating to the future course of

action    amounting   to   conspiracy   against   the   persons
60
including A9 cannot be accepted as it is more in the nature

of hear-say evidence and the contents have not been

subjected to scrutiny of cross examination of any person

testifying to the same i.e. contents of the mahazar and

therefore, submits that what cannot be achieved directly

cannot be permitted to be achieved indirectly and much

reliance cannot be placed, on such version in the mahazar.
63.   Even with reference to Ex.265 which is said to be in

the handwriting of A-16 and which according to the

prosecution is in a coded language containing material

relating to the acts of sabotage intended by the accused

persons and relating to distribution of work planned by the

accused persons and to be carried out by different persons

for whom such responsibilities are entrusted it is submitted

by Mr Pasha that neither it is a document which is proved

nor it is shown to be in the hand writing of A16.        It is

submitted that mere recovery of such a chit of paper by itself

cannot amount to and even assuming that it is opined by
61
the hand writing expert that Ex.265 is in the hand writing of

A16, that will not in any way constitute material to

incriminate A9.
64.   More particularly, Mr.Pasha submitted that assuming

for argument sake there is some material, such material

does not constitute either primary evidence or basic material

for securing conviction and contends that it is a well

accepted legal principle, that it is in the nature of weak

evidence which by itself cannot achieve the object of

securing conviction, against accused.
65.   Even with regard to the mahazar drawn at the office of

the COD and said to be for the purpose of retrieving the

contents of floppies said to have been recovered under

Ex.P14-mahazar and to take out hard copies of the

information containing in the floppies, submission is that

the stand of the prosecution that the information retrieved is

of confidential nature that it had been clandestinely

obtained through A8 and passed on to A7 is not made good;
62
that it is also not proved by         the prosecution that the

information contained in the floppies are information in the

nature of secret and confidential information not otherwise

available to the general public and therefore, the services of

A8   in     Air   force   personnel   had   been   employed   is

not tenable as the information relating to existence and the

number of defence establishment is an information even

otherwise available and more importantly it is pointed out no

one has been examined to indicate that the information

contained therein is a very confidential information which is

not otherwise available to the general public and therefore,

the accused persons have been availing the services of A8

and transmitting information to A7 in Pakistan. Submission

is, the information is neither confidential nor has any one

testified to that effect and even transmission to A7 in

Pakistan is also not made good by placing any cogent

material.
63
66.   Even with regard to the retrievals the contents said to

have been in the floppies and as retrieved to the print outs

which is got done through Venkatesh, Computer Expert,

submission is, that this computer expert is not examined to

make good that the hard copies are the retrievals from the

floppies which had been earlier seized from the drawer of A9

and the material so retrieved cannot be accepted as evidence

for the reasons that it is not within the scope of
Section 65A
of the Evidence Act. For not complying with the requirement

under
Section 65B
of the Evidence Act, the retrieved

contents having not been proved in accordance with the

requirement of law, no reliance can be placed on it.       In

support of his submission Mr.Pasha has placed reliance on

the following decision in the case of R V MINORS vs R V

HARPER [(1989) 2 ALL. ER 208] holding that unless the

computer from which the print out is taken out is certified to

be as an electronic instrument, which is functioning with

accuracy and certified to be so by an expert. Admissibility of

documentary record said to be retrieved from such an
64
electronic device cannot be accepted or admitted more so in

the absence of supporting oral evidence of the person, the

expert testifying about the accuracy of the information

retrieved and the proper functioning of the electronic device

from which it is retrieved.
67.   Reliance is also placed on a Single Bench decision of

Kerala High Court in the case of
M PERUMAL vs M/S. STAR

TOURS AND TRAVELS (INDIA) LTD..
reported in 2010

CRL.LJ 3732. It is particularly pointed out by the learned

Judge of the Kerala High Court that the evidence relied upon

by the respondent
in that case
having not been made good

by fulfilling the conditions stipulated u/s.65-B(2) nor a

certificate as required under
Section 65B(4)
of the Indian

Evidence Act, 1872 [for short,
Evidence Act
].     No reliance

can be placed on the document which was exhibited
in that

case
in support of the claim of the respondent.
68.   Mr Pasha submits this requirement having not been

fulfilled the contents of the retrieval from the floppies
65
does not constitute material of evidentiary value for the

purpose of proving the prosecution case.
69.   Insofar as A10 is concerned, submission of Sri.Pasha,

learned counsel for the appellant, is that though his home

was searched and Ex.P9 Mahazar was drawn at his house,

and recoveries as per MO's 87 to 94 is made, except for

MO87 which is again a pamphlet containing the same slogan

of Christian Missionaries to stop conversion or quit India, all

other material objects are in the nature of books or literature

regarding the Deendar movement as also the general

literature relating to religion and such other subjects. What

is pointed out is that the recovery does not reveal any

incriminating   material   against   A10   either   for   having

participated in any conspiracy or for taking part in any act

which constituted evidence for which he has been charged.

On the basis of such general material recovered during

search at the house of A10, no conviction can be secured by

the prosecution is the submission.
66
70.   Even Ex.P262 voluntary statement of A10 and similar

voluntary statements of other accused do not constitute

acceptable evidence and the statements having not resulted

in the recovery or revelation of a fresh fact, within the

meaning of
Section 27
of the Evidence Act, the contents

cannot be accepted for evidentiary value. The decision of

privy council in the case of
KOTTAYA vs EMPEROR
reported in AIR 1947 PC 67 and the principle laid down

therein is strongly relied upon and this principle having

been consistently followed in full is point out. Mr Pasha has

submitted that marking of Ex.P262 is of no avail for proving

anything against A10 and therefore, contended that there is

absolutely no incriminating circumstance or material made

good by the prosecution as against A10.
71.   Mr.Pasha also submitted that even mahazar Ex.P273,

drawn at the residence of A8 which is in Gurgoan, Haryana

resulting in the recovery of MO's 188-202, and the argument

is that no incriminating material having been recovered nor
67
made good and even with regard to a sum of Rs.50,000/-

cash that had been seized, the investigating officer being

satisfied with the legitimacy of its origin to the wife of A8 as

it represented the sale proceeds of agricultural land which

had been disposed of by A8.
72.   It is also pointed out that MOs 196 - 197 which are the

photos of Chand Siddique and 198- Zia Ul Hassan- A7 and

MO199- invitation card for the URS being conducted at

Hyderabad; that these MOs by themselves do not constitute

any incriminating material as against A8 except perhaps to

show that he is also a follower and patron of Deendar

movement.
73.   Even with regard to Ex.P260 Mr Pasha has submitted

that the prosecution has placed reliance on this document

as a confessional statement of A8 submission is, though this

was mentioned to A8 for the purpose of recording statement

u/s.313
Cr.P.C
, nevertheless the contents of Ex.P260 having

not been explained or put to the accused persons and its
68
effect also not having been properly explained to the accused

persons, it is submitted that it is not the manner of

recording 313 statement as the circumstance which are

revealed for accepting this document has never been

explained to the accused nor the material which constituted

incriminating material against      A8   was   explained    and

therefore, the acceptability of the contents of Ex.260 is again

hit as not adhering to requirements of 313
Cr.P.C
.         It is

submitted by Mr.Pasha that insofar other accused, who have

been found guilty other than A8 are concerned; that the

contents of Ex.P260 having not been made known to other

persons it is a case of clear violation of provisions of Section

313 as there is no presumption as against other accused

other than A8 about the contents of the same.              Even

assuming for the argument sake A8 did know the contents of

the same, Mr.Pasha has also placed reliance on the

authority of the ruling in INSPECTOR OF CUSTOMS,

AKSHINOOR, J & K vs YASH PAL [2009 CR.L.J. 2251],
69
wherein in Para 22 it is stated as under; while discussing

the object and scope of section 313 of Cr.PC.
"At the same time it should be borne in mind that
      the provision is not intended to nail him to any
      position, but to comply with the most salutary
      principle of natural justice enshrined in the
      maxim audi alteram partem. The word "may" in
      clause (a) of sub-section (1) in Section 313 of the
      Code indicates, without any doubt, that even if
      the court does not put any question under that
      clause the accused cannot raise any grievance
      for it. But if the court fails to put the needed
      question under clause (b) of the sub section it
      would result in a handicap to the accused and
      he can legitimately claim that no evidence,
      without affording him the opportunity to explain,
      can be used against him. It is now well settled
      that a circumstance about which the accused
      was not asked to explain cannot be used against
      him."
74.   With   regard     to       recovery    made     under   ExP12    is

concerned, viz., seizure of one computer comprised of CPU,

monitor, modem, keyboard and mouse, what is submitted by

Sri Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants, is

that the so-called password for sending e-mails from this

computer     and   in        a    new       account   viz.,   email   id:
hsdchandrashekar and password moonforehead is again
70
because of the statement attributed to A-17 as per the

contents of the mahazar and in the nature of a confession,

admitting that that was the very computer which was being

used for sending emails to Pakistan using the email id:
hsdchandrashekar and      password    moonforehead    and   a

recording of this nature is not a confession through the

contents of the mahazar and cannot constitute as admissible

evidence against the accused persons.
75.   Even with regard to the seizure of scooter said to be

belonging to A-1 and which was parked besides the house of

A-17, submission is that from the boot of the scooter,

recovery of Xerox copies of registration particulars of Maruti

van which was involved in the blast in Magadi road at

Bangalore is not an acceptable recovery, as the mahazar

drawn earlier at the very house of the accused person on 15-

7-2000 has not revealed anything about the scooter being

present near the house of A-17 and so also the location or

placing of a computer under a cot in the house of A-17.     It
71
is submitted that recoveries under the mahazars and the

contents therein are highly suspicious and do not constitute

acceptable material and even otherwise the contents of the

mahazar which is in the nature of a confession recorded

[ExP271] by the investigating officer - PW66 - in the

presence of panchas cannot constitute material evidence or

incriminating material to find guilt against the accused in

respect of the offences with which they are charged.

ExP271, which is marked as a sequence in the nature of

voluntary statement recorded by the investigating officer is

not proved in the manner required under
Section 27
of the

Evidence Act through discovery of any new fact, as a sequel

to the information leading to drawing of mahazars and the

recoveries.
76.   Sri Hashmath Pasha also submitted that rest of the

mahazars drawn by the investigating officer in the presence

of panchas pursuant to the information given by either A-9

or A-10 and at any other place are of no consequence, as no
72
incriminating material as either being recovered or seized

which constitute an offence against the accused persons and

therefore the searches and the consequential mahazars

drawn were of no consequence. It is also submitted that in

fact such places having already been searched by the

Hyderabad police in connection with SC 95 of 2001 tried

before a Hyderabad court, a second or third search on the

same premises yielding anything or not yielding anything is

of no significance or consequence.
77.   It is therefore, submitted by Mr.Pasha that the

prosecution has not at all made good its version of the

accused persons being guilty of the charges of the offence

with which they are charged, either as they are acceptable

factual material or as acceptable material as envisaged in

law and on the other hand, material placed by the

prosecution before the trial Court being vitiated due to

infraction of many statutory provisions as noticed above the

convictions cannot be sustained; that it requires to be set
73
aside and at any rate in a matter of this nature, the benefit

of doubt always enures to the accused and not in favour of

the prosecution and even if the material placed accepting

some part of it is constituting some material, being not in

the nature of a foolproof material and therefore, the

prosecution having not proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt the accused should be given benefit of doubt by this

court and accordingly, the judgment and order be set aside

and the accused persons should be acquitted of the charges

of committing offences with which they are charged.
78.   Without prejudice to the above contentions, Sri Pasha

has also put forth an alternative submission to submit that

the material on record accepting it at its face value, at the

best, can constitute an offence as against A-1 alone, who

was found driving the Maruti van in which explosive

substances were carried and the explosive substances

having accidently blown up because of rash and negligent

driving and due to vibration and impact on the explosive
74
substances during such driving, the circumstances may, at

the best, reveal commission of offence punishable under
Section 304A
,
337
,
427
IPC and under
Section 5
of Explosive

Substances Act, 1908 and
Section 9B(1)(b)
of the Explosives

Act, 1884.      It is submitted that assuming that for

arguments' sake, without conceding that the prosecution

has made good the commission of offence punishable under

these provisions by A-1, the maximum punishment that can

be imposed on him is 10 years RI under
Section 5
of the

Explosive Substances Act as it existed at the relevant point

of time, though the section has been amended with effect

from 1-2-2002 to provide for a maximum punishment up of

imprisonment for life, that being not applicable to the case

on hand, as the incident alleged being of the year 2000, A-1,

on the basis of being found in possession and transportation

of an explosive substance and also causing death of A-2 and

3 by careless and negligent driving can, at the best, be

punished by imposing a maximum sentence of 10 years RI

and with the A-1 having already been in prison for much
75
more than this period from the date of his arrest and in such

circumstance, having regard to this and the present physical

condition of A-1, Sri Pasha submits that the punishment

imposed or impossable under these provisions, particularly

under
Section 5
of the Explosive Substances Act, may be for

the period of imprisonment already underwent by A-1, as A-

1 has been in prison after his arrest for more than 12 years

as of now, he may be given set off for the period of

imprisonment he underwent be sufficient as against such

imposition of punishment and accordingly he may be

released.
79.     Countering such submission made by the learned

counsel for the appellants, Sri H N Nilogal, learned SPP has

very strongly urged that the prosecution has made good its

story    with   as   good   evidence   as   is   possible   in   the

circumstance; that even it is judicially noticed that the

conspiracies are hatched in secrecy and that such kind of

conspiracies can never be proved through direct evidence to
76
make good the offence; that the material placed by the

prosecution in the form of evidence, oral and documentary,

was good enough to secure conviction of the accused

persons for the offences with which they have been charged;

that the fact that they are all members of a religious sect

namely Deendar Anjuman Organization; that they have a

strong belief and faith in the movement of their organization;

that periodic meetings held by the followers of this

organization not only at Hyderabad but also at other places

viz.,   Batkurki and Bangalore, are all circumstances made

good    by   the   prosecution    and   the   accused   persons'

involvement in not only the meetings but also connecting

them to the follow up action and incidents that have come

into light being made good by the prosecution, it cannot be

said that the prosecution has failed to prove its case before

the court.    It is, therefore, urged that the judgment under

appeal is to be sustained.
77
80.   With reference to the nature of the organization and to

understand and appreciate the same, Sri Nilogal has taken

us through the prosecution case as presented before the trial

court and has also drawn our attention to the literature in

the form of book that were exhibited, which throw light on

the nature of the organization and its activities and its goals.

For such purpose, Sri Nilogal has made reference to book

End of an Era authored by Sri K M Munshi and while it is

pointed out that the organization was founded by Hazarath

Moulana Syed Siddiqui, it is specifically mentioned in this

book that he was neither a saint as claimed by the followers

of the organization nor the organization was preaching and

spreading good things and harmony, as is sought to be

projected, but it was found to be a very intolerant

organization, particularly towards Hindu community; that it

was only to Islamize not only the entire population in India

but also the population throughout the world by persuation

or by force; that it propagated hatred towards other

communities including Hindus and Christians; that it is very
78
manifest from its activities from the very beginning of the

movement founded by Hazarath Moulana Syed Siddiqui;

that it also sought to bring about internal differences,

particularly through the Book Lingayat, authored by the

founder of the organization; that it was meant to project

members of Lingayat community as only members belonging

to Mohammadan community and a consistent and concerted

effort was being made to convert all members of Lingayat

community and to make them as their sect and taking them

into the fold of Islam; that such references are found in this

book; though the book authored by late K M Munshi is with

reference to rule of Nizams of Hyderabad and the book also

indicates the rule of Nizams; it also makes mention of the

Deendar Anjuman movement founded by Hazarat Siddiqui;

that it had indulged in acts of violence against the people

belonging   to   other   communities,       particularly   people

belonging to Hindu community.           It is pointed out that all

these aspects have been taken note by the learned judge of

the trial court in his judgment also.
79
81.    It is submitted that the members of the organization

had entered into a conspiracy at Hyderabad for furtherance

of    the   activities   of   the   organization,   particularly   for

converting all Hindus to Islam by persuasion and if not

possible by force; that for such purpose, if need be wage holy

war jihad; and collected resources through Nifaaq and Syria;

that the meetings were held at Hyderabad; that participation

of the members of the organization including the accused

except A-10 who were congregating at the annual urs being

conducted at Asifnagar, Hyderabad to commemorate the

death anniversary of the founder of the organization was the

focal point for such congregation; that in one such

congregations held in October, 1989, wherein A-7 had

participated along with others, a programme for indulging in

acts of violence and sabotage was chalked out and the

members of the organization who can take active part and

the follow up actions were asked to meet again and to take

follow up action; that while the conspiracy at Hyderabad was
80
in fact subject matter of charge in a sessions case before a

Hyderabad court, the follow up action for acts of disruptions,

sabotage and other acts of waging war against the country

was taken in the meeting of the accused persons and others

held at Batkurki and a subsequent meeting at Bangalore

and in this background submission of Sri Nilogal is that the

conspiracy for commission of offence at Bangalore and other

places in Karnataka state was as a result of fresh and new

conspiracy, a conspiracy apart and in addition to the

conspiracy at Hyderabad and it is on such premise,

submission is made by the learned SPP that the provisions

of
Section 300
CrPC and
Article 20(2)
of the Constitution of

India are not attracted for trying the accused persons in the

SC No 423 of 2001 before the Bangalore court in respect of

the incident of bomb blast in Maruti van driven by the A-1

that took place on 09.07.2000 in front of the factory gate of

Minerva mills on Magadi road, Bangalore.
81
82.   Mr.Nilogal, learned SPP has drawn our attention to

page Nos. 68, 111 of the judgment of the Trial Court wherein

there is a detailed discussion about the activities of the

Deendar   Anjuman    Organization   that   it   is   a   militant

organization since inception.   Learned SPP submitted that

the Hazrath Maulana had set the object of conversion of all

Hindus to Islam using force and other methods.           In this

regard has drawn our attention to the book 'End of an era'

by Sri K M Munshi.
83.   Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP submitted that some of the

accused persons had been prosecuted before the Hyderabad

Court in S.C.No.95/2001 only in respect of incidents that

had taken place in Hyderabad State and not with reference

to the bomb blast that had taken place in front of Minerva

Mill Gate at Magadi Road.        Therefore, the case of the

accused persons in connection with the incident that took

place due to the bomb blast by Maruthi Van driven by A1

cannot be said to be affected either by the provisions of
82
Section 300
Cr.P.C or
Article 20 (2)
of the Constitution of

India. His submission is that there was a fresh conspiracy

in respect of the acts in the State of Karnataka and though

the main object was to carry on acts of sabotage and

subversive activities with waging war against the State,

bombing in churches, loot and plunder, railway wagons and

ultimately the object of Islamisation of the entire country

and throw out the established government. However, each

time there was a fresh act, which was the result of a fresh

conspiracy and in furtherance of the original goal and object

of the organization and each time a new incident takes place

there is a conspiracy behind; that it is only to be established.
84.   It is also pointed that accused persons had not been

tried for the offences punishable under Sections 121 of 121A

of the
IPC
before Hyderabad Court and therefore, it cannot

be said that the provisions of
Section 300
Cr.P.C comes in

the way of the prosecution case before the Bangalore Court

in S.C.No.423/2001.
83
85.   Learned SPP submits that new facts had come into

existence in the sense that there was a fresh conspiracy held

at Bangalore at the residences of A1 & A9 and those who

had participated and agreed for carrying out the Act

pursuant to fresh conspiracy are liable and that is the

reason as to why the prosecution case is not affected by the

principles of double jeopardy. He submits that in the cases

relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the

appellant all those were cases where in on the same set of

facts a fresh prosecution was held to be not permitted and

as was noticed in the facts of the particular case.
86.   Mr.Nilogal, learned SPP has also submitted that the

prosecution case is also not in any way hit by want of

sanction in respect of the additional charge particularly for

trying the accused persons for the offences punishable

under Sections 121 & 121A of the Code. He submitted that

before the sanction obtained as per Ex.P181, prosecution

had placed full material on facts before the sanctioning
84
authority and the sanction had been accorded. That the

prosecution having not led any additional evidence and only

additional charges have been framed and as permitted under

Section 216(5) of the Code, the prosecution case does not

suffer for want of fresh sanction.            He submitted that the

facts and evidence being the same and only additional

charges being framed, prosecution case is not affected.

Sanction,      which   had    been      obtained   at   the   time   of

prosecuting the accused for the offences punishable under
Sections 124A
and
153A
of the Indian Penal Code is good

enough for prosecuting the accused persons under Sections

121 and 121A of the Code also.
In this regard Mr.Nilogal,

learned SPP has placed reliance on the judgment of the Privy

council   in    the    case   of   GOKULCHAND           DWARKADAS

MORARKA reported in AIR 1948 PC 82, the judgment of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in Parliament Bomb blast case, in

the case of
STATE (NCT OF DELHI) vs NAVJOT SANDHU
reported in 2005 SCC (Cri) 1715 & in the case of
FOOD

INSPECTOR, EARNAKULAM                    vs     P S SREENIVASA
85
SHENOY
reported in AIR 2000 SC 2577 & in the case of

LOURIE E JACOBS vs UNION OF INDIA reported in AIR

1958 ALLAHABAD 481.
87.   Mr.Nilogal has also drawn our attention to
Sections

464
&
465
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and submits

that sufficient opportunity having been given to the accused

persons after the framing of the charge and accused persons

having been enabled to recall the prosecution witnesses and

to cross-examine them further, there is no prejudice or

failure of justice to the accused persons and therefore, there

is no error in framing of additional charge, so also the

conviction passed on the additional charge. Further reliance

is placed on the following decisions, in the case of
KRISHNA

KUMAR vs STATE
reported in AIR 1955 PUNJAB 151, in

the case of
MOSEB KAKA CHOWDHRY AND ANOTHER VS.

STATE OF WEST BENGAL
reported in 1956 SC 536 (S)

and in the case of
GOKULCHAND DWARKADAS MORARKA
[supra].
86
88.   On the strength of the ratio of this decision he

submitted that the prosecution case is not in any way

vitiated.
89.   It is pointed out that    though        the         facts     and

information   relating   to    Ex.P260   was        not    before   the

sanctioning    authority,      nevertheless     the       confessional

statement of A8 that had been recorded by the investigating

officer on 8-8-2000 [Ex.P274] was very much before the

sanctioning authority at the time sanction was granted as on

10-10-2000.    Therefore, Mr. Nilogal submits that all facts

and information enabling framing of additional charges for

offences punishable under
Sections 121
&
121A
IPC was

before the sanctioning authority and it is on perusal of such

material the sanction has been granted. Separate sanction

in respect of additional charge was not necessary for that

reason.     Mr.Nilogal also submitted that the Note put-up

by the concerned official to sanctioning authority do indicate

that such material has been placed and considered by the
87
sanctioning authority, which is part of the original sanction

records of the authority.
90.   Mr.Nilogal   contended,     the argument advanced on

behalf of the appellant that evidence of PW-46 Abdul Gaffur

cannot be looked into for the reason that the said witness

was in the position of an accomplice even for the charges of

conspiracy as he has participated in the very meeting where

the other   accused persons said to have been participated

and without arraying him as accused, the prosecution has

examined him as a witness and therefore it is nothing short

of bypassing the provisions of
Sections 306
&
307
Cr.P.C, is

not a sound argument. Mr Nilogal submits that in the first

instance, PW-46 was not accused person        and therefore

provisions of
Sections 306
&
307
Cr.P.C are not attracted.
In this regard, Mr.Nilogal has sought to justify the reliance

placed by Sri Pasha on the judgment of the Supreme Court

in
P.SIRAJUDDIN vs STATE OF MADRAS
[AIR 1971 SC

520] by submitting     that in the case before the Supreme
88
Court, when a police officer has given immunity and

protection to a witness, which is beneficial in favour of

prosecution, which was also in writing and therefore the

ratio of that case is not applicable to the facts of the present

case.
On the other hand, reliance is placed on the

judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
L CHORARIA

vs   STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
[AIR 1968 SC 938] and

submitted that there is no embargo for examining a person

as witness without arraying him as an accused. Even with

reference to the material on record, it is submitted by

Mr.Nilogal that the very evidence of PW-46 indicates that he

was not a party to the agreement to the conspiracy as he

opted out of the agreement for indulging in acts of sabotage

and other offences in pursuance to the conspiracy meeting

held at Batkurki.      On the other hand, submission of

Mr.Nilogal is that the witness had been exhaustively cross-

examined by the defence Lawyers and the answers elicited

supports the prosecution case and also amounts to eliciting

an admission as against accused persons and supportive of
89
prosecution case. Submission is that, as PW-46 opted out

from making any commitment to the acts, bombing in

churches, looting railway wagons and financial institutions

and the mere fact that he has been cited as a witness in the

case as theory of conspiracy in no way diminishes the

present case as he has spoken about fresh conspiracy

pursuant to the meeting held at Batkurki.             It is also

submitted that PW-46 was never arrested and was not in

policy custody and therefore his evidence is free and

voluntary.
91.   Countering the submissions made on behalf of the

appellants by Sri Pasha about the illegality and acceptability

of Ex.P-260 as confession statement written by A-8 while in

jail, it is pointed-out that firstly, he was not in police custody

and was in judicial custody and that the police or

investigating officer had no free access to the accused person

unless permission had been obtained from the Court. It is

therefore submitted that in the first instance, the confession
90
statement even as recited in the very beginning cannot be

said to be either at the behest of the police officer or the

investigating officer and it is a voluntary statement of an

offender who made the statement out of remorse and

recorded, it being not tainted by either inducement or threat

or coercion and without access to the police, it should be

taken as voluntary confession made by A-8. In this regard,

submission of Mr.Nilogal is that Ex.P260 constitutes a

confessional statement and is not in any way affected by the

provisions of Section 24.    On the other hand, being not

tainted by any of the situations referred to in Section 24, as

noticed above, his confession statement made is to be

accepted.
92.   It is submitted that it is no doubt true that on the

letter addressed to a Magistrate, the prosecution is not

placing reliance   but as the confession statement under

Section 164 has not gone through the procedure, it is only

an extra judicial confession. On authority, it is submitted
91
that even the evidence in the nature of extra judicial

confession can be accepted without any corroboration and

cites the decision of Rajasthan High Court in the case of
LAXMAN      vs    STATE OF RAJASTHAN
[(1977) 2 CRIMES

125].
Also relies on paras 4, 5 and 6 of the judgment of the

Supreme Court in the case of
DEVENDER PAL vs STATE

NCT OF DELHI & ANOTHER
[2002(2) CRIMES 133]. On

the   authority   of   these   judgments,   he   submits   that

confession statement has to be accepted when the statement

of the accused was voluntary.
Reference is also made to
Section 30
of the Evidence Act in this regard and reliance is

placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
SITA RAM      vs STATE OF UP
[AIR 1966 SC 1906], and

points-out that a confessional letter written by the accused

person admitting that he had committed murder of his wife,

though addressed to the Sub-Inspector of Police, the

Supreme Court opined that it was not tainted by the

provisions of
Section 25
of Evidence Act as there was no

material to indicate that police had any influence in the
92
matter.   Therefore, Mr Nilogal submits that in the present

case also, police having no access to A-8, when Ex.P-260

was written in the jail at a time when there was no visit or

access by the police to the accused person and therefore the

learned Judge of the trial Court is justified in accepting

Ex.P-260 as confessional statement of the accused.
93.   Reliance is also placed on the judgment of the

Supreme Court in Parliament bomb blast case
NAVJOT

SANDHU
[Supra] wherein the Supreme Court had occasion

to discuss the effect of a confession vis-à-vis
Section 24
of

the Evidence Act at para 29 at Page 1773.         It is also

submitted that A-8 had in fact admitted writing of letter

Ex.P-260 during his statement recorded under
Section 313
Cr.P.C but only wanted to retract from the same by stating

that it had been written under pressure, which amounted to

admission about the letter written but retraction came very

late and only at the time of recording statement under
Section 313
Cr.P.C, which has been rightly rejected and
93
confession was acted upon by the trial Court.        Mr.Nilogal

also submitted that the contents of Ex.P-260 being not put

to A-8 while recording the statement under
Section 313
Cr.P.C by the learned Judge of the trial Court, is not tenable

as accused person was represented by a counsel. It is also

submitted that the same argument holds good in respect of

other accused persons also, as they were also represented by

counsel. On the other hand, all accused had been given a

copy of the voluntary statement that had been given by A-8

before the police as per Ex.P-274 as part of the charge sheet

documents which contained the very information as is found

in exhibit P260 and therefore no prejudice is caused to the

accused persons even if they had not been furnished exhibit

P260 as part of the relied upon documents along with the

charge sheet; that the learned judge of the trial Court not

explaining full details of the contents of Ex.P-260 either to A-

8 or other accused persons while recording their statement

under
section 313
Cr.PC. has in no way caused prejudice to

the accused persons including A-8; that accused were not
94
only represented by counsel but were very well aware of the

facts and circumstances as revealed in Ex.P-260 and the

only difference being, Ex.P-274 was a voluntary statement of

A-8, whereas Ex.P-260 was a confessional statement of A-8

in the form of letter written by the very accused while he was

in judicial custody.
Reliance is placed on the judgment of

the   Supreme    Court    in   the   case   of
MOSEB   KAKA

CHOWDHRY
[supra] to support this submission.
94.   Mr.Nilogal also submits that for attracting Section 30,

and for making use of a confession of an accused person

being used against co-accused, there is no requirement in

law that the confession should be only one recorded under

Section 164, in the sense, it should be a judicial confession;

that even an extra judicial confession is not excluded from

the scope of applicability of
Section 30
of the Act.
95.   Mr.Nilogal also points-out to the contents of exhibit

P260, wherein information relating to persons who had

undergone training in Pakistan for carrying-out acts of
95
sabotage against state machinery as supportive material for

the offences charged under
Sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC.
96.   Mr Nilogal has taken us through the evidence adduced

on behalf of the prosecution and drawn our special attention

to the mahazars drawn at the place of blast which had

occurred in the Maruthi van at Minerva Mill Gate at Magadi

Road in 2000 and recovery of material objects at that place,

in particular, recovery of semi burnt pamphlets MOs 2 and 3

and   the   inscription   of   slogan   "Warning   to   Christian

Missionary - Stop conversion" on it, and recovery of similar

pamphlets at the residence of A-1 and the Computer-M.O.11

seized at the residence of A-1 under Ex.P.7 and print outs

from the information stored in the computer also revealing

the very contents of MOs.2 and 3 and similar details being

recovered at the residence of A-10 under Ex.P.9-mahazar

drawn on 23.7.2000 and recovery of six number of

pamphlets of like nature as per M.O.87, all indicate not only

the existence conspiracy for committing acts of sabotage but
96
also for creating rift amongst communities. The recoveries

having been made in terms of the panchanama in the

presence of the panch witnesses and the examination of

PW.58 by the Investigating Officer during initial stage

constitutes clear evidence of the activities that were planned

and carried out by the accused persons.
97.   With regard to the other material recovered at the blast

place, Mr.Nilogal submitted that such a blast of powerful

explosives as testified by the witnesses and A-1 being found

in possession of such powerful explosives also goes to show

that accused persons were committing acts of sabotage and

disruptive activities.
98.   Mr.Nilogal, with reference to cross-examination of

PW.58-Investigating      Officer    in   the   first   phase   of   the

investigation, submits that a suggestion put to this witness

by the defence counsel to the effect that the pamphlets

recovered at the blast place had been fed into the computer

seized at the residence of A-1 and therefore it was made to
97
appear as though computer contained the same while has

been denied by the witness amounts to an admission on the

part of the accused persons about the recovery of the

pamphlets at the blast place.
99.   The factum of blast with powerful explosives and the

recovery therein is the proof of the accused persons

indulging in the offences for which they were charged.

Mr.Nilogal has taken us through the details of Ex.P.7-

mahazar and other recoveries at the house of A-1 and

submits that the recoveries made therein particularly

relating to the Deendar Anjuman movement throws light

about the involvement of the accused persons in the

activities of the organisation.      Mr.Nilogal also taken us

through the evidence of PW.58-first Investigating Officer,

PW.59-second Investigating Officer and Mr.M.B.Appanna-

PW.66-third Investigating Officer and various mahazars

drawn by these Investigating Officers and recoveries therein

and also the testimony of the panch witnesses supporting
98
the recoveries pursuant to the mahazars and submits that

these recoveries are fully supportive of the prosecution case

about the conspiracy amongst the accused persons for

carrying out the acts which are in the nature of offence

under the various provisions with which they were charged

and therefore, prosecution has made good its case.
100. With     reference    to     the      evidence   of    PW.28-

Sri.P.N.Mukunda and his statement Under
Section 161
of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, having already been

recorded by PW.56-Investigating Officer as on 18.6.2000, he

pointed out that this witness had seen the presence of A-1

near the act of sabotage, namely bomb blast taken place

inside a Church in J.J.Nagar and the testimony of PW.28

having not been in any way impeached, it constitutes

substantive   evidence    about      the    involvement    of   A-1,

particularly in an act in the nature of carrying out offence

not only for creating rift amongst the communities but also

an affront to the authorities of the State.
99
101. With reference to recoveries effected pursuant to the

mahazar drawn at the instance of A-9 under Ex.P.177, the

mahazar drawn at BEML Factory, the workplace of A-9

under Ex.P.14 and the recovery of floppies from the desk-

drawer of A-9 and the mahazar drawn as a follow-up action

at the office by the Investigating Officer on 29.8.2000 under

Ex.P.26 when the print outs of the contents of the floppies

were taken out in the presence of PW.7-Lakshminarayana

and the contents therein are all incriminative and so also the

mahazar drawn at the residence of A-17 under Ex.P.8 and

recovery of M.Os.70 to 86 and so also another mahazar

drawn at his residence on 28.7.2000 in his presence and at

his instance under Ex.P.12 and seizure of material objects

M.Os.95 to 105 and further incriminating materials having

been recovered and also the mahazar drawn at the

workplace of A-17, BEML Factory, under Ex.P-13 on

29.7.2000 and recovery of M.Os.110 to 146 reveal more

incriminating materials and the contents of M.O.142-the
100
intimidatory letter with the slogan 'Christian Missionaries,

stop conversions or QUIT INDIA', all clearly reveal the

notorious activities undertaken by the accused persons and

are supportive of the prosecution case of not only the

conspiracy amongst the accused but also their further plan

of   action   for   implementation   and   the   manner   of

implementation towards the blast subsequently that has

taken place at various places. Therefore, submits that the

prosecution has made good the case with such convincing

and cogent evidence.     The contents of Exs.P.161 to 166

reveal that A-9 and A-10 having lead the Police to the

various places where the conspiracy had been hatched

pursuant to the meeting held at various places of Hyderabad

are all supportive material to prove the conduct of the

accused and their involvement being very much relevant for

the purpose of
Section 8
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,

that information constitutes valuable piece of evidence and

submitted that such information has to be accepted as

evidence provable against the accused persons in terms of
101
Section 8
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and has placed

reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
NAVJOT SANDHU
[supra] and submits that there is

acceptable proven evidence against the accused persons to

make good the charges of the prosecution.
102. Mr.Nilogal has also placed reliance on the contents of

Ex.P.177, mahazar drawn at the residence of A-9 when A-9

pointed out the places where himself and other accused had

congregated and discussed about the action plan to carry

out the objects of the organization and as per the directions

of A-7-Zia-Ul-Hassan who was operating from Mardan,

Pakistan.
103. Mr.Nilogal   has   submitted    that   under   Ex.P.177

mahazar drawn at the residence of A-9, the recovery of a

hand written plan of action as per Ex.P.265 has been proved

to be in the hand writing of A-16 by examining PW.67-

Handwriting Expert who had compared the writing in

Ex.P.265 with the admitted writings of A-16 with the help of
102
scientific instruments and this also constitute the material

not only against A-16 but the contents clearly indicate the

name of persons who were to carry out the plan of action

which were offences and the involvement of such persons in

the conspiracy and the follow-up action.
104. Mr.Nilogal has also drawn our attention to the seizure

mahazar drawn at the residence of A-9 under Ex.P.177 and

the recovery of M.O.185-one small pocket book containing

the telephone numbers, photo of Ibrahim and also E-mail ID

HSD Chandrashekar and password Moon Forehead which

according to the prosecution is the E-mail ID of A-7 as

indicated in Ex.P.260.    Therefore, he submits that the

involvement of A-9 and other accused in the acts of sabotage

is amply made out.
105. Sri.Nilogal, Special SPP, submits that the above

recoveries from the residence and work place of A9 and A17

go to show the existence of a conspiracy against the accused

persons and the manner of its implementation; that
103
conspiracies are all hatched in secrecy and executed without

trying to attract attention and is a matter to be inferred from

the circumstances; that the circumstances as has been

inferred from the recoveries and the information revealed

from the recoveries in the background of possession of

powerful explosives by A1 in the Maruthi Van which came to

be exploded is a clear indication about the existence of a

conspiracy and placed reliance on the following decisions in

support of the same :-
1)    E.K.CHANDRASENAN           -   VS   -   STATE    OF

           KERALA (1995 CRL.L.J 1445) and based on the

           ratio he submits that it is not necessary that all

           accused persons should have participated in a

           particular meeting, conspiracy can be proved by

           circumstantial evidence.
2)    The other decision relied is in the case of KEHAR

           SINGH AND OTHERS -Vs- THE STATE (DELHI

           ADMN.) - AIR 1988 SC 1883 wherein specific
104
reliance is placed on paras 268 to 272 as

follows:-
268. Before considering the other matters
against Balbir Singh, it will be useful to
consider the concept of criminal conspiracy
under Secs. 120-A and 120-B of
IPC
. These
provisions have brought the Law of
Conspiracy in India in line with the English
law by making the overt-act unessential
when the conspiracy is to commit any
punishable offence. The English Law on this
matter is well-settled. The following passage
from Russell on Crime (12 Ed. Vol. I, 202)
may be usefully noted:
"The gist of the offence of conspiracy then
lies, not in doing the act, or effecting the
purpose for which the conspiracy is formed,
nor in attempting to do them, nor in inciting
others to do them, but in the forming of the
scheme or agreement between the parties.
Agreement is essential. Mere knowledge, or
even discussion, of the plan is not, per se,
enough. "
269. Glanville Williams in the "Criminal
Law" (Second Ed. 382) explains the
proposition with an illustration :
"The question arose in an Iowa case, but it
was discussed in terms of conspiracy rather
than of accessoryship. D, who had a
grievance against P, told E that if he would
whip P someone would pay his fine. E
replied that he did not want anyone to pay
his fine, that he had a grievance of his own
105
against P and that he would whip him at the
first opportunity. E whipped P. D was
acquitted of conspiracy because there was
no agreement for "concert of action". no
agreement to "co-operate".
270. Coleridge, J., while summing up the
case to Jury in Regina v. Murphy, (1837)
173 ER 502 (508) pertinently states:
"I am bound to tell you, that although the
common design is the root of the charge, it is
not necessary to prove that these two
parties came together and actually agreed in
terms to have this common design and to
pursue it by common means, and so to carry
it into execution. This is not necessary,
because in many cases of the most clearly
established conspiracies there are no means
or proving any such thing, and neither law
nor common sense requires that it should be
proved. If you find that these two persons
pursued by their acts the same object, often
by the same means, one performing one part
of an act, so as to complete it, with a view to
the attainment of the object which they were
pursuing, you will be at liberty to draw the
conclusion that they have been engaged in a
conspiracy to effect that object. The question
you have to ask yourselves is, "Had they
this common design, and did they pursue it
by these common means-the design being
unlawful?"
271. It will be thus seen that the most
important ingredient of the offence of
conspiracy is the agreement between two or
more persons to do an illegal act. The illegal
106
act may or may not be done in pursuance of
agreement, but the very agreement is an
offence and is punishable. Reference to
Secs-120-A and 120-B
IPC
would make
these aspects clear beyond doubt. Entering
into an agreement by two or more persons to
do an illegal act or legal act by illegal means
is the very quintessence of the offence of
conspiracy.
272. Generally, a conspiracy is hatched in
secrecy and it may be difficult to adduce
direct evidence of the same. The prosecution
will often rely on evidence of acts of various
parties to infer that they were done in
reference to their common intention. The
prosecution will also more often rely upon
circumstantial evidence. The conspiracy can
be undoubtedly proved by such evidence
direct or circumstantial. But the Court must
enquire whether the two persons are
independently pursuing the same end or
they have come together to the pursuit of the
unlawful object. The former does not render
them conspirators, but the latter does. It is
however, essential that the offence of
conspiracy required some kind of physical
manifestation of agreement. The express
agreement, however, need not be proved.
Nor actual meeting of two persons is
necessary. Nor it is necessary to Prove the
actual words of communication. The
evidence as to transmission of thoughts
sharing the unlawful design may be
sufficient. Gerald Orchard of University of
Canterbury, New Zealand (Criminal Law
Review I974, 297 at 299) explains the
limited nature of this proposition:
107
"Although it is not in doubt that the offence
           requires some physical manifestation of
           agreement, it is important to note the limited
           nature of this proposition. The law does not
           require that the act of agreement take any
           particular form and the fact of agreement
           may be communicated by words or conduct.
Thus, it has been said that it is unnecessary
           to prove that the parties "actually came
           together and agreed in terms" to pursue the
           unlawful object; there need never have been
           an express verbal agreement, it being
           sufficient   that   there    was     "a   tacit
           understanding between conspirators as to
           what should be done."
106. It is submitted that main object of the followers of the

movement is to enable A7 Zia Ul Hassan now residing in

Pakistan to come to India with 272 patans and to enable the

same, fresh meetings were held in Karnataka subsequent to

the meetings held in Hyderabad and the communication of

those amongst such persons is supported by letter written to

Zia Ul Hassan which is in Urdu revealing preparation of the

action plan which definitely constitutes material to support

the case of the prosecution about fresh conspiracies,

following the initial main conspiracy hatched up at the
108
meeting held in Asif Nagar, Hyderabad and district from that

conspiracy.
107. It is therefore, submitted that there is existence of

independent and separate conspiracy subsequent to the

conspiracy charted out at Hyderabad meetings and that

there is no need for adducing any direct evidence to prove

conspiracy.
In support of this proposition he has also

placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in

Rajiv Gandhi Assassination case
STATE OF TAMIL NADU

vs NALINI
[AIR 1999 SC 2640] and also the judgment of

the Supreme Court in the case of
NAVJOT SANDHU
[supra].
108. Sri.Nilogal has also submitted that the requirements to

constitute an offence
u/s.121
and
121-A
of IPC, as indicated

in Parliament Bomb Blast case, wherein at paragraphs 272,

273, 274 it is stated as follows :
"272.
Section 121
and 121A occur in the Chapter
      'Offences against the State'. The public peace is
      disturbed and the normal channels of the
      Government are disrupted by such offences which
      are aimed at subverting the authority of the
109
Government or paralyzing the constitutional
machinery. The expression 'war' preceded by the
verb 'wages' admits of many shades of meaning
and defies a definition with exactitude though it
appeared to be an unambiguous phraseology to
the Indian Law Commissioners who examined the
draft   Penal   Code    in   1847.    The   Law
Commissioners observed:
"We conceive the term 'wages war against the
Government' naturally to import a person arraying
himself in defiance of the Government in like
manner and by like means as a foreign enemy
would do, and it seems to us, we presume it did to
the authors of the Code that any definition of the
term so unambiguous would be superfluous."
273. The expression 'Government of India' was
substituted for the expression 'Queen' by the
Adaptation of Laws Order of 1950.
Section 121
now reads:-
"121. Whoever wages war against the
     Government of India or attempts to
     wage such war, or abets the waging of
     such war, shall be punished with death
     or imprisonment for life and shall also
     be liable to fine".
274. The      conspiracy   to    commit    offences
punishable      under
Section    121
attracts
punishment under Section 121A and the
maximum sentence could be imprisonment for life.
The other limb of Section 121A is the conspiracy to
overawe by means of criminal force or the show of
criminal force, the Central Government or any
State Government. The Explanation to Section
121-A clarifies that it is not necessary that any
act or illegal omission should take place pursuant
110
to the conspiracy, in order to constitute the said
      offence."
are clearly made in the present case that it is indicated

therein that the concept of 'war' as understood in
Section

121
and
121A
of    IPC   is   totally   different   from   the

conventional        war          between          two        states,

that even an act of a rebellion group of two persons which

challenges the authority of the state and poses a threat to

the peace of tranquility of the society by affronting the

established governance also amounts to waging war within

the scope of this provision of law.
109. The offence committed in the nature of causing

explosions using power explosive material in places of

worship and that tendency to repeat the same shows a

continued intention to carry on the offensive acts against the

interest of the State; that such tendencies posed threat to

the peace and tranquility and security of the country and

therefore, in the case of persons found guilty, the offence of

waging war against the country is made out and the
111
imposition of the extreme sentence as provided
u/s.121
IPC

is justified and therefore, prays for confirmation of the death

sentence by accepting the reference.
110. Sri.Nilogal also submitted that not adhering to the

procedure contemplated
u/s.65B
of the Evidence Act for

proving the print outs taken out from floppies which had

been seized from the drawer of A9 at his office premises was

not contemplated when the floppies were retrieved on

29.8.2000 vide Ex.P16, and the amended provisions of

S.65A and 65B has come into effect from 17.10.2000 by Act

No.21/2000 and therefore, it was not possible to go through

the procedure as enunciated
u/s.65B
of the Evidence Act.
111. However, on this aspect Mr.Pasha has submitted that

if the prosecution wants to seek admission of the print outs

taken from floppies and being evidence        in the nature of

secondary evidence, unless the procedure contemplated

u/s.63 is strictly complied with; that it should firstly qualify

as an admissible evidence in the nature of secondary
112
evidence   u/s.63    and   regarding       applicability   of   the

amendment and therefore requirement of proof insofar as

the retrieval from electronic record is concerned, as per

Section 65B as otherwise it becomes inadmissible, submits

that even assuming that the provisions of Section 65B were

not in place as on the date of retrieval the absence of Section

65B, amendment of proof, was as contemplated
u/s.65
of

the Evidence Act and neither having been complied, the

contents of the print outs said to have retrieved from the

floppies cannot be accepted as of evidentiary value to prove

the prosecution case. It is also submitted that Section 65B

being a procedural provision and made applicable to any

pending proceedings is even otherwise applicable to the print

outs retrieved from the seized floppies.
112. In the wake of the submissions made and contentions

raised by learned counsel for the appellants and learned

SPP, the following points arise for our determination in this

appeal:
113
i)     Whether the trial of the accused persons for
       the offences with which they are charged is
       vitiated, in view of prohibition contained
       under
Section 300
CrPC and also safeguard
       provided under
Article 20(2)
of the
       Constitution of India in the background of
       the prosecution case and the trial against
       the accused persons except A-10 before the
       designated special court at Hyderabad in
       SC No 95 of 2001, as contended by learned
       counsel for the appellants and in view of
       the accused persons except A-10 having
       been tried for the very offences and on the
       very same set of facts?
ii)    Whether the prosecution case for pressing
       the charges under
Sections 121
and
121A
of IPC, which were framed by way of
       additional charges by the trial court on 12-
12-2007 and the resultant conviction is hit
       by want of proper sanction under
Section
       196
CrPC for lack of jurisdiction in the court
       for taking cognizance of these offences in
       the absence of an explicit sanction order by
       the state government in respect of the
       offences revealed in the additional charge?
iii)   Whether, on the evidence placed before the
       trial court, the prosecution has made good
       the charges leveled against the accused
       persons?
iv)    Whether the conviction and sentence by
       learned judge of the trial court is
       sustainable or calls for interference by this
       court?
114
v)    Whether the reference made by the learned
            judge of the trial court for affirmation under
Section 366
CrPC merits acceptance?
Re: Point (i):
113. The first and foremost legal hurdle posed by Sri

Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants, for the

trial of the accused persons before the court is that it is hit

by the principle of double jeopardy; that the provisions of
Section 300
CrPC is very clear in this aspect and Section

300 is clearly attracted for the reason that except for the

charge under
Section 121
and
Section 121A
IPC, which has

been framed by way of additional charges in the present

case, the accused persons, except A-10, had all been

charged with the rest of the offences before a sessions court

in Hyderabad in SC No 95 of 2001 and tried before that

court and in fact except for A-10, who was not an accused in

that case, all other accused persons in that case were found

guilty of the offence of committing conspiracy under
Section

120B
IPC and had been sentenced to undergo RI for six

months and therefore trying such accused persons yet again
115
before the court and on the same set of facts is clearly in

violation of
Section 300
CrPC and in view of the safeguard

provided under
Article 20[2]
of the Constitution.
114. With reference to the charges framed in SC No 95 of

2001,   Sri   Hashmath   Pasha,   learned   counsel     for   the

appellants, has drawn our attention to the judgment of the

Hyderabad court, a copy of which is placed on record along

with the appeal memo, and submitted that even the

prosecution itself had placed on record a copy of this

judgment before the trial court by way of opposition to the

application that had been filed on behalf of the accused

persons for discharge under
Section 227
CrPC, which,

though, was dismissed by the trial court and was not varied

by this court in a further revision petition, nevertheless, in

fact, remains with the prosecution documents itself and that

the facts leading to the trial of the Hyderabad case and

present case are one and the same, and therefore the

provisions of
Section 300
CrPC are clearly attracted.
In this
116
regard, appellants' case being supported by the decision of

the Supreme Court in the case of
NALINI & OTHERS
[supra] and also the judgment of the Supreme Court in the

case of
KOLLA VEERA RAGHAV RAO
[supra] wherein the

Supreme Court has recognized the legal principle embedded

in
Section 300
CrPC and it is also noticed that the protection

given under
Section 300
CrPC is much wider and greater

than what is accorded to a person under
Article 20[2]
of the

Constitution of India.
115. While, there cannot be any dispute about the legal

proposition and the provisions of
Section 300
CrPC, it again

depends upon the fact situation as prevails in a given case

and as to whether the prosecution in the earlier case against

the very accused persons was also based on the same facts.
In this regard, Sri Pasha submits that      in so far as the

charge of criminal conspiracy is concerned, it is one

conspiracy and comes to an end with the accomplishment of

the conspiracy or abandonment of the same and at any rate
117
with the arrest of the accused persons, the conspiracy

aspect comes to an end and therefore the charge of

conspiracy in the present case is clearly hit by the provisions

of
Section 300
CrPC.        Reliance is placed in this regard on

the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
LEO ROY

vs   SUPERINTENDENT, DISTRICT JAIL
[AIR 1958 SC

119], indicating that criminal conspiracy is an independent

offence   and   therefore    there   cannot   be   a   continuing

conspiracy after the person is tried for that conspiracy, is

again, in our considered opinion, dependent on the facts and

circumstances, as existence of conspiracy for an agreed act

which is an offence is one aspect, but having a goal that is

any goal, which, according to the prosecution case, is to

achieve the goal of the founder of the deendar anjuman

movement viz., Islamization of the entire population of the

country, is a goal that is sought to be achieved by different

acts, as submitted by Sri Nilogal, learned SPP and if such is

the situation, the facts constituting each conspiracy, in the

sense, each renewed meeting for achieving the goal by
118
further acts, can definitely constitute a fresh conspiracy

independent    of   the   original   conspiracy,   which,   even

assuming for arguments' sake, has been either implemented

or aborted and the persons had been prosecuted for the

same, is an independent offence.
116. We find that such is the possibility in theory, as the

word 'conspiracy' in itself is not an end, but what is the

conspiracy part, i.e. what is agreed to act or offensive act

which is sought to be carried out pursuant to the

conspiracy, is what is material for deciding this question.
117. Though Sri Pasha has placed reliance on the decision

reported in 1973 HL (E) 807 in the case of DOOT &

OTHERS [supra] we find while this decision can be an

authority for the proposition that the conspiracy continues

to exist till it is executed or abandoned by chance of

necessity, the decision is more an authority for the

proposition in the wake of the continued conspiracy till its

execution, it remains in existence and therefore the accused
119
persons in that case who were beyond the jurisdiction of the

English courts, the moment they entered the British territory

English courts got the jurisdiction to prosecute them and

the proposition in no way advances the case of the

appellants in the present situation.         Rejection of the

argument that there should be a fresh agreement in that

case by the House of Lords was in a different context.
118. The question as to whether the provision of
Section

300
CrPC is attracted being linked to the existence of a

similar or identical facts, while it is found that narration of

the facts does originate in the present case also and with the

founding of the organization by Moulana Siddiqui and the

activities of its followers and the nature of activities of its

members, the manner of the activities etc., prosecution

theory in the present case is that the conspiracy is continued

by the accused followers by fresh meetings held at places in

Karnataka for carrying out the further acts of sabotage and

also act of waging war against the Government of India and
120
disruption at places of worship, disturbing public peace and

tranquility as indicated in various sections with which the

accused persons had been charged.      Existence of such facts

leading to an agreement amongst the accused persons for

carrying out the acts constituting offences and fresh offences

can definitely give rise to an inference that a fresh

conspiracy has been hatched and if so it becomes an

independent offence yet again punishable under
Section

120B
IPC. It is, therefore, that we would proceed to further

examine the evidence of the prosecution as let in before the

trial court, if reveals the existence of such fresh facts either

through meetings or otherwise indicative of the conspiracy

or common intention of the accused persons to commit fresh

acts of violence or sabotage or terrorism or waging war

against the state or to disturb public peace and tranquility,

causing rift amongst the communities etc., then the

provisions of
Section 300
CrPC being not attracted, as the

prosecution is not on the same set of facts.
121
119. While it is true that on the facts as had been placed

and relied upon by the prosecution in the case before the

Hyderabad court and there is no question of trying the

accused persons on the same set of facts, mere fact that the

earlier goal is persisted, but if it is shown that further acts

have been committed in pursuance of a fresh conspiracy

hatched at the meetings held at Batkurki or in the houses of

A1 and A9, then, in our considered opinion, will not amount

to prosecuting the accused persons for the same set of facts.
120. However, as contended by Sri Pasha, learned counsel

for the appellants, if the prosecution is unable to make good

any further or fresh facts disclosing a conspiracy yet again

for committing further offensive acts, then it is a case where

the prosecution case fails for proving the offence of

conspiracy and the fact that the accused persons except A-

10, were found guilty will not in any way advance the case of

the prosecution in the present case.
Re: Point (ii):
122
121. The second legal contention which is raised and which

affects the trial before the sessions court is in respect of the

additional   charges   for   the   offences   punishable   under
Sections 121
and
121A
IPC with which the accused persons

were charged and as to whether the court could not have

taken cognizance of the additional charges for the said

offences as framed under the additional charges, for want of

sanction in respect of the offences as disclosed in the

additional charge.
122. In this regard, learned counsel for the appellants as

well as the learned SPP have placed reliance on a

considerable number of authorities, which we have referred

to above.    From a perusal of these authorities, it is clear

that the sanction under
Section 196
CrPC is based on the

information and facts as placed by the prosecution before

the sanctioning authority.     Requirement of law is that the

sanctioning authority should be aware of the circumstances

and should expressly accord sanction for the court to take
123
cognizance in the wake of the nature of the offences which

are under Chapter VI of
IPC
, which are offences against the

state.
123. Specific case on behalf of the appellants is that
Sections 121
and
121A
IPC being in Chapter VI, prior

sanction was mandatory before the court could take

cognizance of these offences.   The provisions of sub-
section

5
of
Section 216
CrPC, reading as under:
216. Court may alter charge :-
xxx

     (5)   If the offence stated in the altered or added
     charge is one for the prosecution of which
     previous sanction is necessary, the case shall not
     be proceeded with until such sanction is
     obtained, unless sanction has been already
     obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as
     those on which the altered or added charge is
     founded.
while does enable the case being proceeded against the

accused persons when a previous sanction was there against

them in respect of the same facts, based on which the

additional or altered charges are framed, we find that there
124
is a subtle distinction between the granting of sanction

under
Section 196
CrPC, which is as judicially noticed,

almost mandatory and want of sanction does affect a trial,

the enabling provisions of sub-section (5) of
Section 216
CrPC is in a slightly different context.
124. Additional charges under Section 216(5) are framed on

the same set of facts and material and a fresh sanction is

not a sine qua non, as sanction is obtained and granted by

the government based on the facts and information placed

before the sanctioning authority.    Therefore, the question is

as to whether the facts and circumstances from which the

sanctioning authority could have inferred that the offences

can also be one punishable under
Section 121
were in fact

made available before the sanction was granted.
125. It is in this regard, Sri Nilogal, learned SPP has

submitted that the only fact situation which was not before

the sanctioning authority at the time of sanction was about

the existence of ExP260, which, in fact, was sought to be
125
made part of the record only at the advanced stage of the

trial and in the year 2007, while the sanction had been

granted on 10-10-2000 itself and the information from the

evidence of PW46, which was also not a fact before the

sanctioning authority, as PW46 was not a charge sheet

witness,   but   to   get   over   this   obvious    shortcoming,

submission is that the statement of A-8 as recorded by

investigating officer - PW66 - was very much part of the

record and it contains the very information as is revealed in

ExP260.    It is, therefore, the argument that with the same

set of facts, no fresh sanction is necessary when the

additional charges were framed.
126. Reliance is placed by Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP on the

decision   of
NAVJOT      SANDHU
[supra],   particularly,

paragraph 16 of the judgment to submit that Supreme Court

having reviewed the letter relating to grant of sanction under
Section 196
of Cr.P.C. and having opined that grant of a

sanction order cannot be given or elevated to the status of
126
judicial review; that it is more in the nature of the

administrative order and therefore, it need not necessarily

answer the test of judicial scrutiny in terms of general

standards and element of positive       sanction is inevitable.

We find that the distinction made indicates that the trial

court was satisfied that all material facts, in fact had been

placed before the sanctioning authority and even sanction

order recited the details of the same and therefore, it is

because one or two aspects had not been mentioned though

in itself indicates that there is no application of mind and

therefore,   in   the   present   circumstance   applying   this

standard statement to all the prosecution witness should be

accepted.
127. On the question of additional charges for punishment

under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC being vitiated for want

of fresh sanction, while our examination as above indicate

that the material such as Ex.P260 and the evidence of

PW.46 is the earlier statement by this witness before the
127
Police had not been placed before the sanctioning authority

at the time of sanction as per order dated 10.10.2000 as per

Ex.P181 nor was it possible. The question does not end by

merely noticing this position as independent of this material

whether the available material had indicated the fact

situation based on which charges under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC could have been framed. This examination

arises in view of the provisions of section 216[5] of
Cr.PC
and in the wake of the earlier sanction granted by the

Government in respect of the offences as against the

accused persons sought to be made out in the charge sheet

proposed to be filed and for which sanction had been sought

for by the prosecution in respect of offences punishable

under the provisions of
sections 124-A
and
153-A
of IPC.

Insofar as the sanction in respect of the prosecution of

accused under these provisions of law is concerned, is as

covered by Ex.P181 sanction order dated 10.10.2010 by the

prosecution to make good there was sanction and further

sought to be established before the court through oral
128
testimony of PW.60 - Narayanaswamy, Under Secretary of

the Government Department when evidence was given before

the court and that is not in dispute. The further question is

as to whether in terms of section 216[5] of
Cr.PC
, this can be

said to be good enough for pressing additional charges for

the purpose of sanction order to prosecute the accused for

offences punishable under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC

which came to be framed much later on 12.12.2007. We find

from the sanction order that record had been placed by the

prosecution seeking for sanction only in the background of

the sanction being required under
section 196
of Cr.PC in

respect of the offences suggested in the proposal, namely,
sections 124A
and
153-A
of IPC. Sections 124A and 153A

are also provisions occurring in chapter-VI of
IPC
wherein

the   offences   against   the    State   are   all   grouped   and

punishment indicated.
Sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC are

also offences against the State and they figure in the very

beginning of the Chapter.
129
128. We find from the recital of the sanction order that the

accused persons belonging to Muslim community that they

with the object to create communal disharmony and for

carrying on the Holy War 'Jihad' in India, are taking steps

and making preparations; that A1, A2 and A3, for such

purpose were transporting explosives in a Maruti Van

bearing registration No.GA 01 U 2786 from Magadi Road

going towards Majestic when there was an explosion in the

van and the A1, A2 & A3 were transporting explosives in the

van for the purpose of carrying out disruptive activities by

terrorizing people and therefore sanction was sought for

prosecuting eighteen persons whose names had been

enclosed along with and in respect of this proposal, sanction

was indicated and such sanction had been granted on

10.10.2000. The testimony is also that the entire record was

placed and we find the record included the mahazars

Ex.P177 drawn at the residence of A9. Ex.P14 mahazar

dated 3.8.2000 drawn at the office of premises of A9 wherein

amongst the recoveries were included floppies - MOs 148 to
130
150.   Further, Ex.P16 to P25 are the retrieves from the

floppies which was at the office of A9 and the printouts from

some of the seized floppies were obtained at the office of

PW.66. We notice that the information contained in these

printouts does constitute material for inferring the accused

persons were involved in the activity of waging or attempting

to wage war against India.    This is an inference which is

possible as the material reveals gathering of wide and large

information about the Defence installations and contents of

letter through English translation of which it is found that

there was suggestion made by A1 and A9 that there is need

to establish a rocket launching station within the radius of 7

kilometers in Bangalore for carrying out the acts of

destruction    of   Defence     installations    and    other

establishments. In the wake of such material being placed

before the sanctioning authority and the recital that the

accused persons were preparing to wage holy war against

Government of India inside the country, in our considered

opinion, it possibly constitutes factual information and
131
material for possible charge under
sections 121
and
121-A
of

IPC.
129. However, Sri. Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel for the

appellants - accused persons has submitted that the

sanction order is to be proved in a proper manner; that it is

not proved in a proper manner and moreover it does not on

the face of it reveal that due consideration has been given by

the sanctioning authority before passing any sanction order.

Submission is that the sanction order dated 10.10.2000 is

not made good whether for prosecuting the accused persons

under
sections 121
and
121-A
of IPC as per additional

charge or even as per the original charge for the offences

punishable   under
section   124-A
of   IPC.    However,

submission of Sri. Nilogal, learned State Public Prosecutor is

that the entire record was there and sanction order per se

recites that it has been produced and in the context of

requirement under
section 124-A
of IPC, sanction has been

granted by the Government and moreover the sanction order
132
itself being in the nature of an administrative order need not

be akin to judicial or quasi judicial order spelling out

reasons for passing the order etc., but prima facie inference

can be drawn that authority was aware of the facts and

circumstances and in the light of the same, it has granted

sanction and that is good enough and in this regard has

placed reliance on the Judgment of the Supreme Court in

the case of
NAVJOT SANDHU
[supra] and other cases.
130. There is no doubt or dispute that sanction order is an

administrative order. Though Mr. Pasha, learned counsel for

the appellants has contended that unless sanction order per

se recites that the sanction authority had examined the

matter before it and had shown awareness to the matter and

it should be necessarily made good by leading extraneous

evidence   as   is   held   in   the   cases   of
GOKULCHAND

DWARKADAS MORARKA and TARACHAND JAIN
[supra].
131. While this legal position cannot be disputed, we find

that the preamble to the sanction order and the sanction
133
order read together and as noticed above on the face of it

reveals that the matter placed before the sanctioning

authority is for the purpose of prosecuting the accused

persons under various provisions including
section 124A
of

IPC for which sanction of the Government is required as it is

evidence figuring in chapter-VI of
IPC
.
132. The recital also indicates the kind of disruptive

activities and the waging of holy war in India by the accused

persons as part of the movement of organization for which

they are members and as members belonging to Muslim

community.     The prosecution case itself was that this

organization has been a militant organization ever since and

that is the narration as above. In this background and with

the presumption that acts done in the normal course of

business can be accepted and with PW.60 having spoken

about the sanction order having been granted in the normal

course with reference to Ex.P181 sanction order dated

10.10.2000, we are of the opinion that sitting in Judgment
134
over the sanction order applying objective tests and on the

premise that it is required to meet the test on the judicial

scrutiny or judicial or quasi judicial order in our considered

opinion is not required or necessary.
133.
Insofar as the Judgment of the Supreme Court in the

case of
'KEDARNATH v. STATE OF BIHAR
' reported in AIR

1962 SC 955 is concerned, the Supreme Court did give

meaning and scope of section 124-A, we notice that

examination was not in the context of looking into the

validity of sanction order or existence of sanction order but

as to whether
sections 124-A
and
505
of IPC had been

rendered unconstitutional as violative of
Article 19-1[
A] of

the Constitution of India which was a larger examination.
134. The judicial examination on the scope of validity of

statutory provision, operation of which had resulted in a

conviction by a court and in an appeal the convicted persons

had questioned the constitutional validity of the very

provision under which they had been convicted is totally
135
different and can never be compared to a sanction order

required    to   be   granted   by    the   Government   on   its

administrative side to fulfill the requirements of section 196

of Cr.PC.
135. The sanction order being more in the nature of an

administrative order is now quite well settled and can be

examined only on the touchstone of the requirements to

satisfy the passing of an order which is on the subjective

satisfaction of the administrative authority. Viewed from this

background and looking into the sanction order and on a

perusal of the same, we are of the opinion that the recitals in

the proposal and the sanction order per se reveal that the

accused persons were indulging in acts of waging holy war

and though Mr. Pasha contend that this is not the same as

waging war but is only a religious activity, nevertheless, we

are not going in for further aspects of this examination at

this stage as we find prima facie and on the face of the

record, sanction has been granted in respect of the activity
136
of waging holy war against India and that in our considered

opinion is good enough to include charge under sections 121

and 121-A of IPC and comes within the scope of the saving

provision of section 216[5] of Cr.PC. It is for this reason, we

hold that the prosecution case for pressing charges by way

of framing additional charges under sections 121 and 121-A

of IPC does not get vitiated only for want of sanction under

section 196 of Cr.PC being a situation coming within the

scope of section 216[5] of Cr.PC.
Re: Point (iii) & (iv):
136. That will take to us to the next aspect i.e., the

examination of the material that had been adduced by the

trial court and as to what charges had been made good

based on such evidence.
137. In support of the prosecution case, the prosecution

had examined as many as 67 witnesses viz., PWs.1 to 67,

got marked documentary evidence Exs.P.1 to P.298 and had
137
produced material objects MOs.1 to 212.       So far as the

defence is concerned except for marking a portion of Ex.P.2

as Ex.D.1 no other documentary evidence was adduced and

on the other hand, the defence was content with cross

examining prosecution witness.
138. The   prosecution   has examined as many as 67

witnesses in all. All the witnesses who have supported the

prosecution case and the key witness even according to the

prosecution are only those, who are directly involved in the

incident of blast and the follow-up action and the witnesses,

who have supported the mahazars drawn at the spot or

scene of occurrence, seizure of documents and objects and

mahazars drawn when recoveries were made pursuant to

and the incriminating material sought to be seized by the

prosecution at the instance of the accused persons.     This

essentially comprises of the primary documentary evidence

on behalf of the prosecution.       It is in the wake of

examination of such evidence the learned Trial Judge has
138
examined the prosecution case in the background of the

accused persons being members of the Deendar Anjuman

Institution that they all belong to Muslim community and

pursuing the objects and beliefs of the followers of Deendar

Anjuman organization and as to the manner in which the

evidence supports the charges pressed against the accused

persons.   Even to make good the aims and objects the

evidence of PW.46 is relied upon and the learned Trial Judge

has examined the same. The prosecution has placed heavy

reliance on the mahazar drawn, as per Ex.P.1 the mahazar

dated 10.7.2000 drawn by PW.58 - the initial investigating

officer between 3.00 pm and 5.00 pm in the presence of

panchas and material objects 1 to 8.     We find this is a

mahazar drawn at the spot where the blast took place on

9.7.2000 at 9.30 p.m. The prosecution has recovered some

incriminating material MOs. 2 and 3 the pamphlets, which

were half burnt at the edges and contained the slogan

"WARNING       -    CHRISTIAN      MISSIONARIES       STOP

CONVERSIONS OR QUIT INDIA"
139
139. PW.3 - R. Gopal, who had come to the spot on hearing

the blast while had seen the occurrence, is a panch witness

to Ex.P.1 and has stated that he found that the blast was

not a cylinder blast and has specifically stated that it is due

to a bomb blast.
140. PW.8 - S. Ramanna Owner of a maxicab, which also

got damaged in the blast that took place in the Maruti Van

driven by A1 in which A.2 and A.3 were travelling and who

had lodged first information Ex.P.6, and has acted as panch

witnesses for Ex.P.1
141. A2   died     on the   way to the    hospital and     was

pronounced brought dead. A3 died on the spot. One Dr. S B

Patil conducted autopsy over the two bodies and issued the

post mortem reports Ex.P167 and P168. PW.55 - Medical

Officer who has been examined has identified the signature

of Dr.S.B.Patil who had conducted the autopsy on the body

of the dead persons and had given the post mortem report
140
ExsP.167 and P.168 opining that shock, multiplier injuries

were suffered by the persons in the bomb blast. The report is

stated that the persons died in the bomb blast.
142. PW.58 - the initial Investigating Officer - Shivappa Y

Hadimani, who had held inquest over the dead bodies of A.2

and A.3 and drawn up the inquest mahazars as per Exs.P.31

and P.178 respectively, in the presence of panchas has

stated that the injuries sustained by the two deceased were

due to explosive substance.
143. The death of A.2 and A.3 due to the explosion by the

bomb is not much in dispute and in fact it is in this

explosion, the death of these two persons and damage to the

maruti van which have caused the investigation by the

prosecution.
144. As follow up of the blast, mahazar was drawn on the

next morning at the residence of A.1 as per Ex.P.7 by the

Investigating Officer PW.59 and in the presence of panch
141
witness PW.12. Amongst the articles seized in this mahazar

are MO.11 was CPU, MO.11(a) was Monitor, MO.11(b) was

Key board and Mouse, MO.12 was Computer Printer, MO.13

was Khaki colour pant and shirt, MO.16 was file containing

26 pages, MO.17 was diary containing telephone numbers,

MO.18 and considerable amount of literature not only

relating to Deendar Anjuman movement and organization,

but also religious thoughts of other religion were also seized

during this Mahazar.
145. The book, titled Lingayath published by Deendar

Anjuman organization, is amongst the material object seized

and this book found along with other books during search.
146. Seized articles have been testified by PW.59 - the

investigating officer and supported by PW.12 panch witness.
147. Significance of the prosecution case for seizure is that

MO.11 the computer was opened on 12.7.2000 at the office

of PW.59 by PW.7 - Police Constable       in the presence of
142
PW.12 and it was found that when the same was opened,

screen displayed the content of the pamplets MOs.2 and 3,

which had been seized under Ex.P.1 at the spot and was

part of the data ambit in the hard disk of the computer.
148. The other mahazar drawn at the spot is under

Ex.P.179 on 10.07.2000 whereunder, the maxi cab bearing

reg. No.KA-04-8296 belonging to PW.8 which had been

damaged due to the blast was seized. The seizure was upon

the complaint lodged by PW.8, as consequent to the blast,

maxi cab is badly damaged.
149. The Investigating Officer has drawn the next mahazar

Ex.P8 at the residence of A.17, which has come to light from

the letters and other materials seized at the residence of A.1

on 10.7.2000 under Ex.P.7.
150. The mahazar was drawn on 15.7.2000 by PW.66 the

third Investigating Officer - M.B.Appanna, who had taken
143
over the investigation on and after 15.7.2000 being DSP in

COD and as per the orders of Superior officers.
151. When Ex.P.8 the mahazar was drawn, A.17 was not in

the house and it was drawn in the presence of panch

witness PW.13 and the material object MOs.70 to 86 were

seized from the house of A.17 situated at No.49, Gundappa

Layout, 5th Cross, R.T.Nagar, Bangalore City.
152. The seizure materials included MO.70 - Passport of

Amanath Hussain Mulla, MO.72 - Invitation sent to Pope

Paul from Deendar Anjuman, Pakistan, MO.78 - list of

Muslim    institutions   of   Bangalore   City    and   their

correspondence, copies of newspaper of voice of peace, Xerox

copy of the passport of Shaikh Dawood Abdul Lathief etc.
153. A.17 was arrested on 27.7.2000 and after his arrest

and on his interrogation and after recording the statement

as per Ex.P.271, has drawn another mahazar at the instance

of A.17 in his house on 28.7.2000 as per Ex.P.12 and in the

presence of PW.18 and further seized MOs.95 to 109.
144
154. In the mahazar drawn on 28.7.2000 at the house of

A.17, amongst the recoveries of MOs.95 to 109, MOs.104 to

106 are the documents including the registration certificate

of the maruthi van in which explosion had taken place on

9.7.2000 which was found in the dickey box of the scooter

bearing registration No.KA-04-E-8825 and which had been

parked near the house of A.17.
155. MOs.96 to 99 constituted the computer set comprising

MO.96 - CPU, MO.97 - Digicam company monitor, MO.98-

Chikoni Electronics company key board, MO.99- Compact

company mouse. As per the mahazar, computer set was

found underneath the cot in the house A.17 and contents of

the seizure mahazar was drawn in the presence of A.17 and

the panch is to the effect that A.17 had produced the

computer set kept below the cot in his house and stated

that, that was the computer from which he had sent mail

messages   to   Pakistan   by    using   the   email   account

"hsdchandrashekar (moonforehead).
145
156. Insofar as mahazar Ex.P.12, which is drawn at the

house of A.17 on 28.7.2000, the argument of Mr.Pasha,

learned counsel for the appellants is that this computer set

had not been noticed by PW.66 when he had searched the

house of A.17 earlier on 15.7.2000 and had drawn Ex.P.8

mahazar and so also the scooter and the recovery from the

scooter MOs.95 to 109, but not noticing the computer set

which is stated to be just below the cot is doubtful seizure,

though it is stated to be at the instance of A.17.
157. Insofar as A.17 is concerned,      another mahazar was

drawn at his workplace under Ex.P.13 drawn on 29.7.2000

at the BEML factory, wherein A.17 was working as Machine

Operator and in the presence of panch PW.19 - G.

Vishwanath, Assistant General Manager of the factory at

that time and the mahazar being drawn in the presence of

A.17 by PW.66 -the investigating officer and in the presence

of A.17 seized MOs.120, 147, which are produced by A.17

from his cupboard pursuant to his voluntary statement.
146
158. Amongst the recoveries are Xerox copy of the photo of

Late Channabasavshwara Siddique and photo of Zia Ul

Hassan, five copies of the book Lingayat, and as listed at

Sl.No.34 the items recovered under the mahazar, five visiting

cards of S.M.Ibrahim in Barkath and company, auditors and

tax practitioners, identity card of A.17 - Imulla Staff No.R

721 02231, machine shop, BEML, Bangalore, the cover with

the above description and inside the cover was found four

copies of last warning to Christian missionaries, map of

India, flag and pamplets on which the instruction of namaz

in Urdu and below that Peeju - Bul - Mujaiduddin has been

written and many other correspondence and Urdu diaries

and journals giving information    about Deendar Anjuman

movement and organization etc.,
159. With regard to recoveries made pursuant to the

mahazars, contention on behalf of the appellants by Sri.

Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel is that PW.19 in his

deposition had stated that the Chief Security Officer of
147
BEML on coming to know about the arrest of A9 and A17

had sealed the cupboard of A17 and also table drawer of A9

and though it is in his evidence that seal put by the Chief

Security Officer of BEML was intact on 29.07.2000 and

Ex.P13 mahazar was drawn and this obviously throws doubt

about the genuineness of the recoveries etc., particularly, as

the recitals in Ex.P13 does not recite the factum of the seal

being intact.
160. It is also pointed out by Sri. Hashmath Pasha, learned

counsel for the appellants that A17 had been arrested by the

Investigating Officer on 27.07.2000 and on the very day on

he being interrogated, his voluntary statement as per

Ex.P271 had been recorded, but the mahazar at his

residence was drawn on 28.07.2000 and mahazar at the

work place even the next day on 29.07.2000 and the

recoveries being not made immediately following recording of

his   voluntary   statement,     throws   doubt   about   the

genuineness of the recoveries.
148
161. One another contention urged in the context of Ex.P13

by Sri. Hashmath Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants

is that even as per evidence of PW.19, whenever a visitor

enters the factory premises of BEML, an entry is made at the

gate about the person, particulars and the purpose of the

entry etc.,; that no such entry being found nor having been

made good by the prosecution on the day when PW.66 has

drawn mahazars inside the factory premises of BEML is a

circumstance to doubt the very presence of PW.6 within the

factory premises on the day and the mahazars and

consequent recoveries etc.
162. Ex.P177 is a mahazar drawn on 23.07.2000 by PW.66
- Investigating Officer at the residence of A9 and in the

presence of panch witness PW.57 and by which time it is

indicated that MOs 168 to 185 were recovered pursuant to

voluntary statement of A9 as per Ex.P264 recorded on that

day. Amongst the recoveries in MOs.168 to 185, are pocket

diary which contained the address of A7 and phone number
149
and that he was contacting A7 and his son often over this

telephone number. It is also indicated that in the diary was

placed one passport size photo of S M Ibrahim as told by A9

and also in the diary was found a folded paper containing

name of A9 along with names of A2 & A3 and other names

and A9 is further said to have stated that A4 [since expired]

had given these names for instructing as to which person

has to place bombs in which place and seizure mahazars

recites that they were all seized.    The mahazar further

recites that A9 had shown to the Investigating Officer and

the panch witness a cot on the side of the wall where he had

sat along with A2 & A3 to discuss as to in which of the

Churches bombs have to be placed and that the bombs to be

exploded had been stored in an almirah near the door for

about a month and that on 9.7.2000, A1, A2 & A3 had

brought two bombs and that A9 had given one bomb which

was with him to them and that A1, A2 & A3 had sat on the

very cot and had checked three bombs.
150
163. In this regard, Sri. Nilogal, learned SPP has placed

reliance to accept the contents of the mahazar wherein is

recorded the statement/information said to have been given

by A9 about the discussion that had taken place amongst

A1, A2 and A3 and involving himself and exchange of

handing over of bombs as admissible evidence within the

scope of
section 8
of the Evidence Act.
164. The next mahazar Ex.P14 is one that is drawn on

3.8.2000 at the work place of A9 i.e., inside BEML factory

premises in the presence of PW.19 - the then Assistant

General Manager and effecting seizure of MOs. 148 to 153.

Amongst the seizures effected, significance is in respect of

the seizure of ten floppies in MO Nos.148 & 149 each

containing ten floppies and MO No.150 a big packet

containing two small packets containing 18 and 19 floppies

respectively.   It is stated in the mahazar that these items

produced by A9 from his table drawer.
151
165. Significance of these floppies is that floppies under MO

NOs.148 and 149 had been taken to the office of the COD

Head quarters and print outs of the contents of the floppies

had been retrieved on 29.08.2000 as per Ex.P26 drawn by

PW.66 and in the presence of panch witness PW.21 and the

print outs being marked as Ex.P16 to P25 said to be print

outs from the floppies MO Nos.148 and 149 that had been

seized at the instance of A9 from his table drawer.
166. It is the version of the prosecution that the print outs

revealed a wealth of information. The mahazar recites that

Sri. Venkatesh - computer expert had inserted the floppies

one after the other into a print machine and had taken out

the prints published from each of the floppy and had shown

the prints to the panchas and it had been signed by the

Panchas and said Venkatesh on each print out and details of

the print outs from these floppies revealed about Defence

installations, Oil Refineries of ONGC, details of Defence

Establishment in Bangalore City, particularly, ISRO and
152
Satellite Centre at Hassan, the access to National Remote

Sensing Centre, aerial survey and mapping of National

Remote Sensing Centre, about Hassan INSAT Master Control

Facility, about training centre at IIRS Dehradun, about

image processing software, names and telephone numbers of

the officers in these organizations, information about

nuclear fuel complex as per print out and floppy-PH, about

Army-54,   INF   Division,   Seabird,      Hyderabad,   Defence

Laboratories and telephone numbers about LPG Bottling

plants, Southern Region, blue print of Kirana Manufacturer

at Bangalore, blue print of Jacquar etc.
167. While submission on behalf of the prosecution by Mr.

Nilogal, learned SPP, with reference to such material is that

these are all very vital information about the Defence

establishments and strategic establishments supporting

defence activities and also Oil & Gas Manufacturing Plant

and very possession of such information points to the

purpose for which information has been gathered. The copy
153
of the translation of the letter at pages 6 to 9 of the print out

from the floppy had indicated communication sent by A8, A9

and A4 to A7 giving information about the Defence

installations and also about strong base of RSS being

present at Bangalore and strategy to attack these Defence

establishments and need for setting up a missile launching

station within the radius of 7 kms., from Bangalore city

which all indicate acts of sabotage and waging of war being

planned and at any rate, conspiracy being made in this

regard.
168. On the other hand, submission of Sri. Hashmath

Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants - accused persons

with reference to recoveries effected at the work place of A9

and A17 is that firstly the mahazar not indicating the

opening of the seal which admittedly had been put by the

Security Officer of BEML on learning about the arrest of A9

and A17 and secondly the considerable interval between the

recoveries made following statement of A9, as A9 had been

arrested on 23.07.2000 and recovery at the work spot was
154
on 3.8.2000 after interval of 12 days and that too after a

search had been conducted at the residence of A9 on the

very day of his arrest and at his behest, whereas the

recovery at the work place is only after about 11-12 days

thereafter    which     definitely     creates    doubts      about    the

genuineness of the recoveries. The argument addressed is

also in respect of recoveries at the work spot of A17, namely,

absence of entry at the gate about the entry of PW.66 -

Investigating Officer and the seal, is urged in respect of the

recoveries at the work place of A9 also. Insofar as the

contents     of   the   print   outs     are     concerned,      the   non

examination of the computer expert Venkatesh who had

taken out the prints is pointed out to be yet another

circumstance to doubt the genuineness of the print outs and

the   floppies     recovered     and      non       fulfilling    of   the

requirement of accepting the printouts in the nature of

secondary evidence by not producing the originals of the

floppies and not adhering to the procedure under
section

65
[b] of the
Evidence Act
are all pointed out to constitute
155
infirmities in the quality of the evidence and cannot be

admitted as evidence as against the accused persons and it

is therefore submitted that recovery and the material and

information pursuant to the mahazars under Ex.P177 and

P14 drawn at the work place of A9 and A17 and the

mahazars depicting printouts taken at the office of PW.66

cannot be admitted as evidence against them and at any rate

does not constitute acceptable legal evidence based on the

legal position that emerges from the authorities relied upon

and
referred to above
, by Sri Hazmath Pasha.
169. One mahazar that has been drawn and referred to and

relied upon by learned trial Judge is at the residence of A10

under Ex.P9 on 23.07.2000 drawn by PW.49 - Police

Inspector who had been deputed to search house of A10 by

PW.66 and in the presence of PW.14 and PW.15 and the

recovery of MOs.84 to 94 pursuant to the voluntary

statement of A10 and Ex.P262.         Significant recoveries

amongst other things is said to be on behalf of the
156
prosecution,   the   recovery    of   English     pamphlets   with

inscription of warning to Christian Missionaries which

according to the prosecution case reveals conspiracy to wage

war was made which was in common amongst A1, A10 and

A17 from whose residences had been recovered the very

pamphlets.
170. Mahazar Ex.P273       drawn on 8.8.2000 drawn up by

PW.66 at the residence of A-8 which is in the official

quarters of Air force at Gurgaon, Delhi and in the presence

of his wife and seizure of MOs 188 to 202 and negatives of

photographs as per Ex.P284(a) to Ex.P298(a). A-8 had been

arrested from his quarters on the morning of the very day

and   his    house   had   been       searched.    No   particular

incriminating material has been seized from the residence of

A-8 except for material showing his involvement with

Deendar Anjuman Organization and he being a follower.
171. The other mahazars which are relied upon on the side

of the prosecution are Ex.P161 to P166 which were drawn at
157
the instance of A9 & A10 within the limits of Hyderabad city

who according to these mahazars have pointed out the

places where members of the Organization had met for

working out plan of action about the activities that they have

to try out to achieve the object of their organization, but no

recoveries have been made at these places.
172. We shall now examine the evidentiary value of the

documentary evidence in the form of these mahazars. The

earliest mahazar drawn after the blast that took place in the

Maruthi Van in Magadi road is the mahazar drawn at the

house of A1 on 10.7.2000 under Ex.P7.          Accepting the

contents of the mahazar at its face value, the material

recovered at that time would at the best indicate that A1 is a

member of Deendar Anjuman organization.         He may be a

very ardent follower and has been keeping in contact with

other members of the organization. Ex.P7 by itself does not

contain any positive incriminating material either against A1

or against other accused persons. The next mahazar drawn
158
under Ex.P1 is at the spot.      Contents of this exhibit does

show that A1 was in possession of the blast material planted

at the van which he was driving from which can assume for

certainty as even the accused has stated that he was driving

the vehicle and was trying to impart lessons in driving to A3

and therefore, was found in company with regard to the

presence of A3 accused himself has stated that he had been

picked up at the request etc. Be that as it may contents of

this mahazar definitely reveals that the Maruthi Van bearing

registration number KA-02-8296 was in his possession and

was carrying blast material and at that time A2 and A3 who

died pursuant to the blast were in the van and in fact A1

himself has also got seriously injured in the blast.          The

mahazar, its contents etc. apart from the other oral evidence

does   reveal   incriminating    material   of   possession    of

explosives with which A1 can be associated. The recovery of

pamphlet containing the         slogan warning to Christian

missionaries to stop conversion or quit India is a material

that can link A1 who whatever message he wanted to infer
159
from the contents of the pamphlet and also recovery of the

computer that had been found in his house and seized

under Ex.P7-mahazar also containing in its hard disk, soft

copy of the contents of the pamphlets MOs 2 and 3.

Prosecution case is that pamphlets seized as MOs 2 and 3

are in the nature of materials sought to be planted by the

accused persons at the place where bombs were sought to

be exploded and in churches and in the present case the

blast having not taken place at any place of worship, but

even as stated by the prosecution itself that it may be due to

friction when the vehicle was being driven at high speed and

because of the road hump, the vehicle had a severe jolt, MOs

2 and 3 at the most constitute material which was intended

for an act of sabotage or even possibly causing disruption

and disharmony to create communal rift between the two

communities    in     the   form   of   members      of    Christian

community     being     warned     or   otherwise,        the   other

consequences would be such bomb blast etc. and the marks

'om' on this to create an impression that it was done by
160
members of hindu community so that members of Christian

community become hostile towards the members of the

hindu community and as such if achieved would have been

the cause for prosecuting the accused persons for the

offences   u/ss.   124A   and   153A   cannot   have   much

significance as a piece of evidence in a situation of

accidental blast, but could have constituted material if had

been used for the purpose for which it was created as

suggested by the prosecution.
173. The contents of Ex.P179-spot mahazar revealing the

damage caused to the Maxi Cab owned by the complainant-

PW8 in supportive of the bomb blast have taken place but

that by itself cannot and does not take the prosecution case,

any further, particularly regarding the presence of accused

persons except A1 who was present in the Maruthi Van

when the blast took place, the mahazar drawn at the house

of A17 on 15.7.2000 and the recoveries made therein also

discloses the involvement and membership of A17 in the
161
Deendar Anjuman institution and its movements. Nothing

incriminating regarding A17 with reference to the offences

charged with are found or recovered pursuant to this

mahazar.
174. The mahazar drawn at the residence of A10 under

Ex.P9 on 23.7.2000 at the best can be said to constitute

material for recovery of the pamphlets containing slogan

MO87 and recovering six English pamphlets which are the

inscription of warning against Christian missionaries and

the other material literature particularly not only about the

Deendar movement, but other religious activities does show

that A10 is also a member and follower of the movement,

which by itself does not reveal the commission of any

offences, but nevertheless constitute material for drawing

possible inference if found as a fact that along with the other

accused if they have a common plan or agreement to carry

any offence in furtherance of such agreement.
175. The mahazar Ex.P177 drawn on 23.7.2000 at the

house of A9 yet again while it has revealed from the
162
recoveries that A9 is also a member of the Deendar

movement and was a active participant etc., here again no

specific incriminating material is seized or recovered at the

instance of A9 which can said to be a new fact discovered

pursuant to an information given by the accused person

within the scope of
Section 27
of the Evidence Act.

Submission of Nilogal Special SPP is that the mahazar also

contains the statement made by A9 who had pointed out to

the panchas the place where he along with the accused

persons A1 to A3 sat and discussed about the deployment of

bombs in the churches and the other accused checking the

bombs sitting in a corner near the wall are sought to be

accepted as reliable and as an admission on the part of A9

based on the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme court in
NAVJOT SANDHU
[supra] pointing out that it could be

relevant with regard to the conduct of the accused
u/s.8
of

the Act, is, in our considered opinion not as indicated in the

above said case particularly as the statement incorporated in

the mahazar attributed to A9 is not thereafter supported by
163
examining any person with regard to the same nor does it

constitute   discovery   of   a   new   fact   pursuant   to   the

information given by the accused as the accused had not

stated anything about the bombs having been brought to his

house by A2 and A3 and A9 said to be in possession of the

bomb given to them was not part of the information given to

the investigating agency which has led to the discovery of

the fact but being in the nature of admission made before

the police officer and as already pointed out by Mr.Pasha

cannot be proved against the accused and on the other hand

as per
Sections 25
and
26
of the Evidence Act it is not

permitted to be proved against the accused persons.
176. We also notice that in the Parliament bomb blast case,

the information given to the police persons was by a person

who was caught red handed during the operation and it was

only for the purpose of conduct of the accused, reliance was

placed about the information given regarding the place or

purchase of material used in the commission of offence of
164
the deceased terrorist and in fact in this case the Supreme

Court found that on facts while that information also could

not be used within the scope of
Section 27
in that case
it

was sought to be saved only with the help of
Section 8
of the

Evidence Act and to the extent regarding the conduct of the

accused.
177. Moreover, we are of the clear view that the narration in

a panchanama or a mahazar by itself is not proof, unless it

is further made good by any person who has knowledge of

the same, so testifying before the court and without the

same   the   contents   cannot   be   admitted   as   evidence.

Submission of Sri Pasha that criminal jurisprudence as

administered in this country and in terms of the procedure

under the
CrPC
ensures a degree of safeguard to the

accused persons; that anything which is said to be against

accused persons has to stand the test of challenge and when

a witness testifies in respect of any fact before a court as

against an accused person, the accused person has a right
165
to cross-examine the witness, which is a sine qua non and

part of principle of natural justice; that accepting the

narration as inserted in the panchanama drawn by police

officer without further proof of the narration or statement

incorporated in the panchanama will clearly amount to a

denial of opportunity and failure of justice as against the

accused persons.
178. It is, therefore, that we cannot place reliance on the

statement that is merely incorporated into a panchanama

which is a panchanama to drawn for depicting the state of

affairs   that   existed   at   the   time   of   drawing   of   the

mahazar and not to recapitulate a past event or to forecast a

future event.    In the instant case, it is a fortiori so being in

the nature of an admission made by the accused before a

police officer and as noticed earlier being hit by the

provisions of
Sections 25
and
26
of the Evidence Act.

Reliance placed by Sri Pasha on the decisions of the

Supreme Court in the case of
NARBADA DEVI GUPTA
166
[supra] and
MALAY KUMAR GANGULY               vs    SUKUMAR

MUKHERJEE
[2010   SCW     769]   in   the   context   of

acceptability of the contents of ExP260 and the ratio therein

equally applies to the present situation for accepting the so-

called statement attributed to A-9, stating and indicating the

place where he along with A-3 sat and discussed the plot for

carrying out the criminal activities of planting bombs in

churches etc.    It is, therefore, we find ExP177 does not

constitute a material more than for drawing an inference

that A-9 was an active member of the organization in

question and not for anything more.            We reject the

argument on behalf of the prosecution as submitted by Sri

Nilogal for accepting the statement attributable to A-9 as an

admissible evidence against A-9 on the basis of the ratio of

the decision of the Supreme Court in the parliament attack

case.
179. That takes us to the mahazars drawn at the workplace

of A-9 and 17, which, to some extent, have certain common
167
features. There is no doubt if the recoveries at the

workplaces of A9 and 17, if are proved against these accused

persons in a manner as permitted in law, it may constitute

incriminating materials as against A-9 and 17. Except for

cover containing four copies of the pamphlets mentioning

'last warning to Christian missionaries etc., may be on par

with the effect of recovery of a like material from the

residence of A-10 and it is, perhaps, the only incriminating

material, there is a challenge posed to this also. While Sri

Pasha pointed out that recovery itself is suspect for the

reason that the witness who has testified to ExP13 mahazar

i.e. PW19 and who was also a witness at the time of drawing

of the mahazar and later deposed as PW19, the evidence not

indicated that whether in the presence of the investigating

officer - PW66 the seal that had been put by the security

officer as stated by him in his deposition was got opened in

their presence and at any rate not so indicated in the

mahazar drawn on the date of the drawing of the same i.e.

on 29-7-2000, but the information to this effect being
168
forthcoming before the court for the first time when he

deposed before the court 5 to 6 years later, the contents of

ExP13 and the recoveries made pursuant to it becomes

suspect and non-entry at the gate of the factory, about

PW66 visiting the factory on that day is yet another infirmity

pointed out and this infirmity coupled with the fact that

recoveries at the instance of A-17 from his workplace was

made two days after his arrest, though the next day a

mahazar   was     drawn   at   his   house   pursuant   to   the

information said to have been given by him and certain

recoveries had been made.       These circumstances definitely

create a doubt about the acceptability of the evidentiary

value of ExP13.
180. Similar argument in respect of ExP14 mahazar drawn

on 3-8-2000 and the recoveries yielding MOs 148 to 153

from the desk drawer of A-9, suffers from the very same

infirmity as pointed out by Sri Pasha in the case of ExP13.

Non-mentioning of opening of the seal by the security officer

in ExP14, absence of entry about PW66 entering the factory
169
premises at the factory gate and the fact that the recovery

being almost 10 to 11 days after the arrest of A-9, are all

circumstances creating doubt and throwing suspicion about

the acceptability of the contents of the mahazar and the

recovery pursuant to it.   Even otherwise, we find that the

recoveries under ExP14 particularly in the form of floppies

MOs 149 and 148 by themselves are not complete to reveal

any incriminating material or data against the accused, as it

is the version of the prosecution that the floppies were taken

to the office of the CoD headquarters and printouts were

taken on 29-8-2000 through a computer expert namely

Venkatesh and in the presence of PW21 Lokesh and the

mahazar being drawn by PW66 investigating officer.       Here

again, there is a considerable time gap between the date of

seizure and retrieval of the floppies and taking out of

printouts as per ExP16 to 25 and the panchas or the

investigating officer not speaking about the safeguard which

was required to be observed when seized materials are

sought to be retrieved and used for other purpose, further
170
compounded by the non-examination of the computer expert

who, admittedly, is a person who had taken out prints using

his expert knowledge, are all yet again circumstances which

render suspect for accepting the contents of the printouts

and the information and fresh facts as disclosed from the

contents.   The contents, no doubt, being in the form of rich

information    about   the   defence     institutions,   strategic

manufacturing places, oil and gas producing factories, navy

or air force bases, information about the officials of army,

navy and air force and particularly if it is being sent to any

person in a foreign country can definitely constitute material

against persons possessing it and more importantly the

contents of Urdu letter said to have been sent by A-4 to A-7

in   Mardhan    in   Pakistan    not   only   passing    on   such

information but also egging upon the person to have a

missile launching station within a radius of 7 kms from

Bangalore for striking at strategic defence locations.        The

manner in which these facts are sought to be discovered and

the procedure followed leave much to be desired and creates
171
doubts about the genuineness of the recoveries and follow

up action.   At any rate, the recoveries and the information

sought to be made out from the recoveries not meeting the

legal requirements of seizure mahazars and making use of

the seized materials as material objects to constitute

evidence against the accused persons and with the settled

legal principle that the benefit of doubt always enures in

favour of the accused, we find it rather difficult to accept

the information or fact as revealed from recoveries pursuant

to ExP14 mahazar as acceptable evidence to support the

prosecution case.
181. This apart, the contents of the mahazar by themselves

also not in the nature of a primary material, unless proved

in the manner known to law and not being testified by

further follow up action, we find even accepting it at its face

value, the recoveries as per mahazars may not get elevated

to the status of proof or meeting the requirements of proof

beyond reasonable doubt.       The recovery mahazar ExP26
172
drawn up at the office of PW66 on 29-8-2000 in the CoD

headquarters also suffering from this infirmity, we find

incriminating materials in terms of ExP14 against A-9 is

lacking, if ExP14 itself should be taken as material read in

combination of ExP26 and 177.
182. One another argument of Sri Pasha, learned counsel

for the appellants, is that any evidence attributable to an

electronic equipment, in the sense an electronic record, can

be proved in the form of and in the manner envisaged under
Section 65B
of the Evidence Act, viz., the contents of the

electronic record in the form of printouts, can be proved as

documents by fulfilling the conditions mentioned in sub-

section (2) viz., that the computer was used regularly and

the person so operating the computer have lawful control

over the use of the computer; that such information has

been regularly fed to the computer in the ordinary course of

said activities; that the computer was functioning normally

during the period and that the accuracy record should not
173
be affected and that it should be acceptable as secondary

evidence, is countered by Sri Nilogal by pointing out that the

provisions of Sections 65A and 65B were not on the statute

book at the time when the printouts in question were taken,

we have even without reference to these provisions examined

the acceptability of the printouts by observing the normal

safeguards for producing a secondary evidence, as noticed

above, and having found that it is not one inspiring the

confidence for accepting it as in the form of secondary

evidence, the question does not arise for our examination,

but we are definitely not fully convinced about the manner of

taking out the prints from the floppies said to have been

recovered in terms of ExP14 mahazar and therefore not

much credence can be placed for supporting the prosecution

case on the contents of ExP16 to 25.
183. Exp273 is another mahazar drawn on 8-8-2000 at the

residence of A-8, which is inside the official quarters of air

force at Gurgaon, New Delhi.      The material seized there
174
under in the presence of wife of A-8 viz., MOs 186-202, at

the best, only revealing A-8 is also a follower of   Deendar

Anjuman organization and even as per the prosecution case

not yielding any incriminating documents as against A-8

may not have evidentiary value for proving the prosecution

case against A-8 or any corroboration with other materials

or evidence on record.
184. The result of drawing up of mahazars ExP161 to 166 at

the instance of A-9 and 10 and in the presence of panch

witness is only to record the statements attributable to these

accused to show the places where the A-9 and 10 had met

with other accused persons for holding meeting to carry out

the objects of the movement etc., and these statements

attributable to these accused again suffer from the very vise

which we have noticed in respect of the statement attributed

to A-9 under ExP177 - mahazar drawn at the residence of A-

9 on 23-7-2000.    We find the contents of the mahazar and

the information, if one can gather from, are not of any
175
acceptable evidentiary value supporting the prosecution

case.
185. That takes us to other evidence in the form of oral

evidence let in by the prosecution to support the prosecution

case and the prosecution has while placed heavy reliance on

the evidence of PW.28 and PW46, it has also placed reliance

on the document ExP260 and in fact is sought to contend

that it constitute substantial evidence for proving the

prosecution case.
186. The testimony of PW28, who is sought to be a witness

who had seen A-1 to 3 in the vicinity of a Church where a

bomb blast had taken place and A-1 and 2 having gone into

the said church namely St Peter and Paul Church, located

within the jurisdiction of Jagajeevan Nagar police station,

Bangalore. It is stated by this witness that he had seen A-1

and 2 going inside the said church holding a bag and

returning after some time and that they had told the other

person, who was sitting in a van, the very van in which a
176
blast took place at Magadi road, and telling that chalo, kam

hogaya.
187. We find the testimony of this witness not very relevant

for this case, particularly as the blast which took place in

the church at J J Nagar is the subject matter of SC No 696

of 2005 and in the present case it is not in dispute, even by

the prosecution, that the blast that took place in the Maruti

van at Magadi road on the night of 9-7-2000 was an

accidental blast.
188. Sri Nilogal, learned SPP has contended that the

evidence of PW28 is very material to demonstrate that A-1 to

3 had by their joint action planted a bomb inside the church

at J J Nagar and were proceeding with bomb for further

plantings in other churches, and that could not be achieved

because of the accidental blast, but nevertheless, their past

conduct has to be looked into and on the other hand Sri

Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants, submitting that

mere intention in itself is not one constituting an evidence
177
amounting to preparation of further commission of offence

and that having been aborted even at the stage of

preparation and not even an attempt being made for the

commission of any offence for which no penal provision is

provided for in the
IPC
, except for a situation covered by
Sections 122
,
399
and
402
IPC and there being no charge

against the accused under any of these sections, evidence of

PW28, even accepting it at its face value and even assuming

for arguments' sake but without conceding, can be accepted,

it does not result in the accused being found guilty of any of

the offences with which they were charged.        It is of no

consequence and therefore accepting this submission, we do

not want to go into the evidence of PW28 any further.     We

find this argument of Mr. Pasha to be sound on the legal

premise.
189. In so far as the testimony of PW46 is concerned, it is

relied upon by the prosecution to make good the case of

conspiracy punishable under
Section 120B
IPC. In so far as
178
the charge under
Section 120B
IPC is concerned, legal

hurdle of double jeopardy under
Section 300
CrPC was

pressed into service and we have found as above that the

charge being bad in law and on the same fact, attracting

Section 300 would depend on the fact situation, as pressed

into service by the prosecution for making good the charge

under
Section 120B
IPC.
190. Further the evidence of PW46 is concerned, while

substantial   part   of     his   evidence   only   indicates   the

background of the movement of the organization and the

meetings held at Hyderabad and Nuzvid and this set of facts

having been sought to be the facts leading to the charge

under
Section 120B
IPC in the case before a Hyderabad

court and in fact some of the accused having been found

guilty of the charge also in the same set of facts the accused

had faced trial and they cannot be proceeded against in the

present case also.        However, the argument of Sri Nilogal,

learned SPP being that the evidence of PW46 also reveals
179
facts relating to meeting held at Batkurki in Raydurg taluk

and it is here that further plans were hatched for carrying

activities in furtherance of activities which had already been

agreed to.
191. No doubt, Sri Pasha has raised a legal contention that

PW46 being in the position of an accomplice who had very

much participated in the meeting, if at all the meeting had

taken place, it should not have been brought through the

backdoor testimony of PW46 as a witness and the argument

is sought to supported by authorities
referred to above
, we

find that in the testimony of PW46, there is no reference to

the action plan sought to be carried out at Bangalore, as the

present case relating to the incident which had taken place

at Bangalore and more importantly which is the result of an

accidental blast.   While for the purpose of examining the

testimony of PW46, we do reject the submission of Sri Pasha

that this witness could not have been examined as a witness

for the reason firstly that he had not been arrayed as an
180
accused and secondly the testimony does reveal that he had

not agreed to be part of the acts of sabotage or acts of

sedition or waging war against the state, if at all was

suggested to be carried out by the leader of the movement.

In this state of factual position and as to whether he could

have been arrayed as an accused at all being firstly in the

wisdom of the prosecution and secondly if found it is a case

of a person committing offences, it is for the court to direct

him to be arrayed as an accused, and that having not been

done, we find that this witness was in fact a de facto witness

and not an accused person.     The procedure that is required

to be followed for accepting the evidence of an accused as

approver as permitted by court in terms of
Sections 306
and
307
CrPC is not exactly attracted to the present situation.

It is, therefore, we are examining the evidence of this witness

at its face value.
192. While our examination of the position of PW.46 for

testifying before the court has revealed that his evidence
181
cannot be rejected for not following the procedure of
sections

306
,
307
of Cr.PC as virtually he will be in the position of

the accused and therefore his testimony cannot be kept out,

but nevertheless, this witness having himself stated that he

was a participant in the meeting that had taken place at

Batkurki in Karnataka and even the earlier meeting in

Hyderabad and though he had exonerated himself by

claiming that he had attended the meeting only for the

purpose of recovering the dues from other accused persons

and he had also expressly disassociated from carrying on

violent acts of sabotage, nevertheless, in our considered

opinion, remains in the position of an accomplice whose

evidence is made acceptable within the scope of
section 133
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
Section 133
of this Act

recognizes even accomplice to be a competent witness

against the accused persons and the conviction being not

rendered     illegal     merely     because    it    is     based    on

uncorroborated         testimony   of    accomplice.      However,   as

pointed    out   by     Sri.   Pasha,    learned    counsel   for    the
182
appellants, there is a rider to this
section 133
of the

Evidence Act at illustration[b] to
section 114
of the Evidence

Act, reads as,

     "That an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he
     is corroborated in material particulars;

and begins with preamble 'The court may presume'.
193. Though Mr. Nilogal contended that PW.46 cannot also

be placed in the position of an accomplice as he was only

attending the meeting for recovery of money etc., we find it

difficult to accept this proposition and on the other hand

even according to his own testimony he having attended the

meeting regularly and being a follower of the movement even

as per his own statement, necessarily stands in the position

of an accomplice and therefore the caution aired in

illustration[b] to
section 114
of the Evidence Act, has to be

kept in mind while appreciating his evidence and therefore

corroboration to his testimony which is in our opinion is the

required aspect which merits examination.
183
194.
In this regard, while Mr. Pasha, learned counsel for the

appellants has placed reliance on the Judgment of the Privy

Council in the case of
'BHUBONI SAHU v. THE KING'
reported in AIR 1949 PC 257 and submits it does call for

corroboration, Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP has submitted that

corroboration has to be found in the admission and

submitted even assuming PW.46 should be treated as

accomplice, then corroboration is very much available in the

form of admission of the accused persons themselves.
195. We find it difficult to accept the submissions of Mr.

Nilogal, learned Public Prosecutor for the reason that

corroboration should be forthcoming from independent

quarters and not by way of admission of accused person and

on the other hand it could be the other way that in respect of

an admission, testimony by witness who is in the position of

accomplice may constitute corroboration but not vice versa.
196. Though Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP contends that even if

he is an accomplice, being in the nature of passive
184
participant who had not agreed to participate in the

conspiracy, there is no requirement of examining his

testimony for acceptance with corroboration any material

particulars, we are unable to accept this submission, as we

find that PW.46 is not a totally independent witness, but a

witness who had been involved in the activities of other

accused and belonging to the same organization and

therefore he is very much in the position of an accomplice

and the provisions of
section 114
of the Indian Evidence Act,

1872, is attracted, particularly, illustration[b] of
section 114
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
197. With no independent corroboration forthcoming to

corroborate the material particulars the testimony of PW.46,

evidence   adduced    by   the   prosecution   through   PW.46

remains a weak evidence for the purpose of securing

conviction based on such weak evidence.
198. We, nevertheless, find the testimony of PW46 is not

linking to the meetings said to have been held at Batkurki or
185
to the incident at Bangalore and the testimony only relates

to the conspiracy for the subject matter of the case and the

trial before the Hyderabad court and even according to the

prosecution, there is fresh facts, fresh conspiracy hatched

and in the present case, even in terms of the prosecution

version, the conspiracy if at all is hatched in the house of A-

1 and 9 and there being no reference in the testimony of

PW46 to these efforts at Bangalore and for the purpose of

such efforts, we are of the considered opinion that the

testimony of PW46 does not constitute a piece of evidence to

make good a charge of conspiracy against the accused

persons in respect of the event of accidental blast that had

taken place in the Maruti van belonging to A-1, which got

blasted on 9-7-2000.
199. Yet another situation which creates doubts about the

testimony of PW46 and as pointed out by Sri Pasha, learned

counsel for the appellants, is that PW46 was not a charge

sheet witness, but has been examined as a witness much

later on an application filed by the prosecution on 29-9-
186
2006, an application filed under
Section 311
CrPC. It is on

record that this witness had been examined under
Section

164
CrPC    in   connection    with   a   case   registered    at

Keshavapura police station, Hubli by a magistrate at Hubli.

More so, when the version of PW46 being sought to be

brought on record more than six years after the prosecution

filed charge sheet as against the accused persons and

therefore the evidence of PW46 does not necessarily inspire

the   confidence   of   this   court for    acceptability of    his

deposition.   It is, therefore, we hold that the testimony of

PW46 in no way advances the case of the prosecution for

supporting the charge under Section 120B to hold that there

was a conspiracy to commit offences and which, according to

the prosecution, could not be carried out due to the

accidental blast that took place at Magadi road.
200. From the examination of the evidence of PW46, we find

that the testimony is not supportive of the prosecution case

of a fresh conspiracy being hatched up either at the meeting
187
held at Batkurki or in the houses of A1 and A9 at Bangalore.

We have also found on an examination of documentary

evidence, particularly, through the mahazars drawn at the

house of A1, at the house and work place of A9, the

prosecution has failed to make good its version of fresh

conspiracy being hatched up on acceptable legal evidence.

Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP, appearing for the respondent-state,

having specifically contented that the prosecution case and

the charges pressed into service against the accused persons

being based only on the fact situation, such as, further

meeting and conspiracy for the bomb blast that took place in

the Maruthi van on Magadi Road, Bangalore and therefore

the argument of Sri Pasha, learned counsel for the

appellants, that the prosecution is bad for violating the

safeguard of double jeopardy as enshrined in
Section 300
CrPC is not violated, as the prosecution itself has limited the

case and therefore technically speaking
Section 300
CrPC is

not attracted on facts. Prosecution having failed to make

good the case of fresh conspiracy, prosecution charge under
188
Section 120-B
IPC fails. However for the purpose of

answering point No.1 raised, we hold that in the present

case on the version of the prosecution case,
Section 300
CrPC is not attracted and this point is answered accordingly.
201. In so far as the evidentiary value of ExP260 is

concerned, considerable weighty arguments have been

advanced,     both on the      side   of   prosecution and       the

appellants-accused.        It is no doubt true that on the

authorities referred to and relied upon by Sri Pasha, learned

counsel     for   the   appellants,   it   cannot   constitute    a

confessional statement either within the provision of
Section

164
CrPC nor is a piece of evidence to advance the case of

prosecution, but the prosecution has sought to support the

contents of ExP260 by contending that it is in the nature of

extra-judicial confession, admissible within the scope of
Section 24
of the Evidence Act.
202. It is also the version of prosecution that once it is

admitted to be an extra-judicial confession saved under
189
Section 24
, and within the limits of
Section 24
, there cannot

be any further restriction for the operation of
Section 30
of

the   Evidence   Act   for   the   confession   of   an   accused

constituting a material for securing conviction of a co-

accused.
203. On the other hand, though Sri Pasha, learned counsel

for the appellants, very strongly contended that ExP260

being in the nature of a letter addressed to the third

additional chief metropolitan magistrate, Bangalore and the

circumstance under which it had come into existence is

highly suspicious and doubtful, particularly as it was said to

have been written by A-8 while he was in jail and running

into such details; that it was not possible for any one to

remember so much of the past incidents so vividly and put

into in narration running into 42 pages and the contents of

it by itself makes it highly doubtful about the voluntary

nature etc., before going into the contents etc., we would like

to examine the legality, in the sense, acceptability of ExP260
190
as a piece of evidence. If ExP260 should have been an extra

judicial confession, it could not have been sent to a

magistrate and a confessional statement addressed to a

magistrate is, as per the submission of Sri Pasha, to be only

in accordance with the provisions of
Section 164
CrPC and

the authorities to support this argument to say that a thing

required to be done in law, in a particular manner, can be

done only in that manner and in no other manner.         This

proposition is supported by authorities
referred to above
.
204. It is to be noticed that
Section 164
CrPC is a special

provision in
CrPC
and enables using of confessional

statement of an accused as an admission and can be proved

as evidence against him.   It constitutes an exception to the

settled legal principle, that an accused cannot be compelled

to lead evidence against himself.        It is, therefore, the

procedural safeguard should be followed to the hilt, as

contemplated in
Section 164
CrPC.     Though it is addressed

to a magistrate by A-8, the magistrate has not bestowed his
191
attention to it nor has he examined A-8 before him to follow

the procedure and also to administer caution etc., required

to be done under
Section 164
CrPC.
205. It is also submitted by Sri Pasha who has placed

reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
SITA RAM
[supra], pointing out that even a letter

addressed by an accused person found near the body of his

wife that he had murdered was good enough as an extra-

judicial confession, we find that and as pointed out by Sri

Pasha that the accused person was in judicial custody at the

relevant time and the contents of ExP260 while is addressed

to the magistrate is more in the nature of a bargain for

securing his freedom and for being pardoned and therefore

cannot be a voluntary free confessional statement but being

in the nature of a bargain.
206. Though the learned SPP has placed reliance on an

authority to submit that a confession coming from the

bottom of the heart should not be doubted, we have our own
192
doubt as to the acceptability, having regard to the nature of

the contents of ExP260, whether it is a confession made out

of remorse or for bargaining a pardon, is not free from

doubt.   But, more importantly, and as pointed out by Sri

Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants, ExP260 remains

as a letter assuming that it had been written by A-8 and was

testified by PW65 - superintendent of central jail, Bangalore,

it does not go further, as it has neither reached the person to

whom it has been addressed, in which event the procedure

contemplated under
Section 164
CrPC should have been

followed, nor the contents of it, which is sought to be relied

upon by the prosecution has been made good in the manner

as permitted by law and under the provisions of
Sections 61
and
62
of the Evidence Act.        What is pointed out by Sri

Pasha is that if it should be treated as an extra-judicial

confession to any third party, other than the magistrate, it

can be proved only by examining the person to whom an

accused person has confessed, who should come and testify

before the court to withstand the test of cross-examination.
193
207. In the instant case, we find the contents of ExP260

assuming that it can be treated as a document in the nature

of confession statement, it has not been proved by

examining any person much less the magistrate to whom it

has been addressed to.      Examination of the magistrate to

prove the contents of ExP260 also being not permitted, in

view of the requirement of strict compliance of the provisions

of
Section 164
CrPC, that is not a legally permissible course

of action.    In such circumstance, it should be held that

ExP260, assuming that it is a letter in the nature of a

document which the prosecution seeks to rely as an extra-

judicial confession, having not been proved for its contents

nor can it be admitted as evidence in the absence of proof of

the contents, it remains as a letter and not resulted in either

an extra-judicial confession within the scope of
Section 24
of

the Evidence Act or as a document proved for its contents in

terms of
Sections 61
and
62
of the Evidence Act.         When

ExP260 is not a piece of evidence which has been admitted
194
as per legally enabled provisions, it being relied upon in

terms of
Section 30
of the Evidence Act for constituting

material against other accused is a far fetched proposition.
208. Sri Nilogal, learned SPP, has pointed out that A-8 has,

for the first time, disputed contents of ExP260 while being

examined for recording his statement under
Section 313
CrPC, which was more than seven years and therefore the

court should not reject ExP260 as a confession statement

just because of the retraction, we find that it is of no

consequence, as the question of examining the effect of

retraction in the wake of earlier confessional statement

comes into picture only when the confessional statement is

accepted and is a statement as recognized in law, either as a

confessional statement or as a document, contents of which

have been proved. We, having found that ExP260 cannot be

either treated as a confessional statement even within the

scope of
Section 24
of the Evidence Act as an extra-judicial

confession and even otherwise to be treated as a piece of
195
evidence whose contents having been proved. It being not

an admissible piece of evidence for the contents of the

documents though it had been so marked, the acceptability

of the confession and rejecting the retraction does not arise

in the present situation.
209. Therefore, we do not propose to examine further the

reliance placed on by Sri Nilogal, learned SPP on several

authorities to indicate that just because a voluntary

statement is retracted later and much later, the confessional

statement does not necessarily lose all its value and it is for

the court to examine the acceptability of the earlier

confessional statement in the wake of a belated or an

afterthought retraction.    It is, therefore we hold that Ex260

cannot have any evidentiary value for supporting the case of

prosecution.
210. That takes us to the testimony against A.16 the

evidence on record available against A.16 for finding him

guilty of the offences with which he was charged on the
196
basis of Ex.P.265 said to be a chit in the handwriting of A.16

which reveals the distribution of responsibilities to different

persons including the accused for carrying on the different

acts of sabotage and for achieving the object of the

organization. Ex.P.265 is a chit recovered under Ex.P.177

mahazar drawn at the residence of A.9.
211. This recovery being independent of any information

contained in any electronic device and recovery by itself and

the prosecution having got it exhibited and having claimed

that is in the handwriting of A.16 and recovery in the house

of co-accused pursuant to Ex.P.177 -mahazar and if it is so,

the effect of this recovery will have to be examined vis-à-vis

A.16.   It is the case of the prosecution that Ex.P.265 had

been    sent   for   examination   and   verification   of   the

handwriting to the handwriting expert PW.67 along with

specimen writings of A.16 and the handwriting expert PW.67

had opined that it is in the handwriting of A.16 and

confirmed in the oral testimony the report that in his opinion
197
handwriting   on   Ex.P.265   and   the   specimen sent for

comparison are similar and tallies with one another. It is

therefore, the prosecution has attributed that A.16 is also

one of the active participants in the criminal activities for

which the accused persons have been charged.         It is not

even the case of prosecution that except for this material

there is any other evidence on record, which connects or

links A.16, who is the resident of Movva, Krishna District,

Andhra Pradesh to the offending acts with which he and

other accused persons have been charged.
212. Mr. Pasha, learned counsel for the appellants has

pointed out that a testimony of this nature is never sufficient

to secure conviction for the serious offence with which A.16

has been charged even assuming that is acceptable.

However, Mr. Pasha has pointed out that the evidence

against A.16 based on the opinion of the handwriting expert

is not trust worthy of acceptance for the reason that the

comparison of the handwriting on Ex.P.265 is not with
198
reference to any admitted writings and signatures of A.16,

but even the prosecution case is that it is with some request

writings of A.16, that further weakens the quality of the

evidence and in our considered opinion a weak material and

a weak evidence of this nature, while it is rather difficult to

sustain the conviction based on only an incriminating

document being attributed to an accused person based on a

handwriting expert opinion; that is similar to the one

examining, the comparison being not with that of admitted

writing but with a specimen writing, the quality of evidence

further gets deteriorated and it is therefore, that we have to

hold that convictions in respect of A.16 on this material

alone is not sustainable and is liable to be set aside.
213. In addition to the above evidence prosecution has also

relied upon the testimony of the investigating officers PW.58

and PW.59. PW.59 was the second investigating officer and

PW.66 was the investigating officer, who took over from

PW.59 and completed the investigation and laid charge-
199
sheet before the Court. These witnesses have supported the

prosecution case by supporting the mahazars draw by

speaking to the correctness and validity of the mahazars

drawn by them.
214. This apart, we find the evidence of PW.49 - R.N. Natraj

Police Inspector, who had drawn the mahazar at the

residence of A.10 in Chikkaballapur, has also supported the

mahazar Ex.P.9 and the recovery of pamphlets MOs.87 to 94

amongst, which was MO.87 consisting 6 letters at Item No.7

and there was 6 copies of the pamphlets warning Christian

Missionaries, etc.
215. Mr. Nilogal, learned SPP, for the purpose of supporting

the judgment under appeal, apart from placing reliance in

the above evidence on behalf of the prosecution has also

submitted that the involvement of the accused persons in

similar offence and being prosecuted for like conduct in the

sessions case before the Hyderabad Court and being

convicted for criminal conspiracy and being prosecuted in
200
other sessions case, where the accused persons were tried

for like offence is relevant consideration in appreciating the

conduct, we find it is not a supporting circumstance in

favour of the prosecution to make good its case before the

court and to prove the charges against the accused persons.

A court undoubtedly is permitted to examine and appreciate

the evidence on record.    What has happened and what is

the allegation made against the very accused in some other

case cannot have any bearing and at any rate cannot be

supplemented as additional evidence for the purpose of

making good the prosecution case in any given case.
216. Sri H N Nilogal, learned SPP has very strongly urged

that the organization of which the accused persons are

members, has been shown to be a militant organization

since its inception; that the members of the organization

have been systematically carrying out acts of violence

against the members belonging to other communities and

the organization has also been now declared as banned
201
organization with effect from 28.04.2001, but this should

not make any difference to the nature of the activities of the

members of the organization, as they are carrying on violent

acts even before the organization came to be formally

declared as a banned organization and in this background,

the incidents leading to the blast of explosive materials in a

public place resulting in injuries to persons and loss of

properties cannot be overlooked, though on the date of the

actual incident of blast, the organization was not one which

had been banned for its existence.
217. We have examined this argument, but found no

substance to accept the same, as any act which amounts to

an offence either under the provisions of
IPC
or other special

enactments, must be an offence on the date of its

commission and subsequent amendments in existing law or

enacting a new law making the very act an offence will not in

any way rope in the persons who might have committed the
202
act before the activity was declared to be an offending act

under a law made by a competent legislature.
218. We find that there is a constitutional bar on the

making of an accomplished act an offence by enacting a

retroactive law.   Also mere membership of an organization

unless it is a banned organization and even by being a

member cannot also result in the commission of an offence.

That by itself will not render such a member an offender and

if the organization is not a banned organization, unless the

members of such an organization are shown to have

committed other acts which constitute an offence under

different laws, those persons cannot be prosecuted.    We are

supported in taking this view in the light of the decisions of

the Supreme Court in the case of
ARUP BHUYAN               vs

STATE OF ASSAM
[AIR 2011 SC 957] and INDRA DAS vs

STATE OF ASSAM [2011 CRL.L.J 1646]. In this view of the

matter, we reject the argument advanced on behalf of the

state by Sri H N Nilogal, learned SPP.
203
219. Evidence placed before the court by the prosecution

though has revealed possible subversive activities on the

part of persons who may be either in possession of such

material, relating to strategic defence organizations and their

locations, places of manufacture of essential goods and

supplies and names of senior executives in the control of

such organizations, that by itself is not an end, as unless it

is also shown that the information was in possession of the

accused persons and the same was further used for sending

it outside the country, and in this case to Pakistan where A-

7   resides,   and   the   involvement   of   accused   is   also

demonstrated, a mere possibility of enabling the accused to

do something with the information and such possibility

being not made good beyond reasonable doubt and the

prosecution having not tied up all loose ends to definitely

attribute the recoveries from A-9 and 17 specifically to any of

the accused persons and such materials having remained

without a definite connecting link to the accused persons,
204
the accused cannot be found guilty of the offences with

which they are charged with any degree of certainty.       It is

because of such uncertainties, the accused persons get the

benefit of doubt resulting in acquittal by reversing the order

of conviction.
220. What is relevant is only the evidence adduced on

behalf of the prosecution, in that particular case, until and

unless otherwise enabled in law either for taking note of any

other material or evidence as enabled in law. On the other

hand, we notice that in terms of the provisions of
Section 53
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 "In criminal cases, previous

good character relevant.- In criminal proceedings, the fact that

the person accused is of a good character, is relevant." and

not bad character of an accused unless it had been held

previously that he was a person of a good character. It is

therefore, that we find no relevance or weight can be given to

the factum of the accused either being prosecuted or having

been convicted in other similar cases to advance the case of
205
prosecution and at any rate not supportive of the evidence of

accused persons.        It is for this reason, we reject the

argument addressed on behalf of the prosecution.      It is in

the light of the above evidence, it is required to be examined

as to whether prosecution has made good its charges against

the accused persons.
221. We find that accused persons A.5, A.6, A.13, A.14 and

A.18 have all been convicted for the offences punishable

reading as follows :-
"A.5 namely Shaik Hashim Ali is hereby convicted
     U/s.235 [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s. 120-B r/w
S.121-A
IPC and he shall undergo imprisonment
     for life and for the offence U/s.124-A
IPC
shall
     undergo imprisonment for life and for the offence
     U/s.153-A
IPC
shall undergo RI for 3 years.

     A.6 Mohd. Farooq Ali is hereby convicted U/s.235
     [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s. 120-B r/w
S.121-A
IPC and he shall undergo imprisonment for life
     and for the offence U/s.124-A
IPC
shall undergo
     imprisonment for life and for the offence U/s.153-
     A
IPC
shall undergo R1 for 3 years.
A.13 namely Abdul Habeed is hereby convicted
     U/s. 235 [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s. 120-B r/w
S.121-A
IPC and he shall undergo imprisonment
206
for life and for the offence U/s.124-A
IPC
shall
     undergo imprisonment for life and for the offence
     U/s.153-A
IPC
shall undergo RI for 3 years.

     A.14 namely Syed Shamshuzama is hereby
     convicted U/s. 235 [2] for the offence U/s. 120-B
     r/w.
S.121-A
IPC    and he shall undergo
     imprisonment for life and for the offence U/s.124-
     A
IPC
shall undergo imprisonment for life and for
     the offence U/s. 153-A
IPC
shall undergo RI for 3
     years.
A.18 namely Syed Abdul Khader Jilani is hereby
     convicted U/s.235 (2)
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s.
     120-B r/w
S.121-A
IPC and he shall undergo
     imprisonment for life and for the offence U/s.124-A
IPC
shall undergo imprisonment for life and for the
     offence U/s.153-A
IPC
shall undergo RI for 3
     years."
222. It is not in dispute that the substantial evidence as

against A.5, A.6, A.13, A.14 and A.18 as discussed above is

only the so called confessional statement of A.8 in terms of

Ex.P.260.   We have already found that Ex.P.260 is not

proved as either extra judicial confession statement or as to

the contents of the document.
223. Insofar as the evidence as against these accused

persons A.5, 6, 13, 14 and 18 are concerned, we find that
207
the conviction by the Sessions Court is mainly based on

Ex.P.260, which we have already held has not been proved

as acceptable piece of evidence for its contents. We do not

find any other evidence, which can otherwise incriminate

these accused and bind to the offence with which they are

charged.
224. In this view of the matter it is obvious that the

conviction of A.5, A.6, A.13, A.14 and A.18       under the

provisions referred to above cannot be sustained as the rest

of the evidence against them is very weak and not really one

convincing for convicting them for the offences with which

they were charged.       The evidence on record in our

considered opinion, does not make good the charges beyond

reasonable doubt with which they were leveled and therefore

reverse the order of conviction against them and we acquit

A.5, A.6, A.13, A.14 and A.18 of the offences with which they

were charged and accordingly, the sentence is set aside.
208
225. Insofar as A.8 is concerned, who is convicted for the

offences as follows :-
"A.8 namely Syed Hasanuzama is hereby
      convicted U/s. 235[2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s.
121
IPC
and sentenced to death, he shall be
      hanged by neck till he is dead, subject to
      confirmation by the Hon'ble High Court of
      Karnataka U/s. 366[1]
Cr.P.C
.           A.8 Syed
      Hasanuzama is hereby convicted U/s.235 [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s. 120-B r/w. 121-A
IPC
and he shall undergo imprisonment for life. This
      A.8 Syed Hasanuzama is also convicted U/s.235
      [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s. 124-A
IPC
and he
      shall undergo imprisonment for life.       For the
      offence U/s.153-A
IPC
to undergo imprisonment
      for 3 years."
Here again the prosecution has placed heavy reliance on his

confessional    statement   Ex.P.260   for   securing      such

conviction. Other than Ex.P.260 in the case of this accused,

we do not find any commensurate evidence to secure

conviction of this accused for the offences with which he was

charged.
226. Insofar A.10 is concerned, who is convicted for the

offences punishable as follows :-
209
"A.10 namely Mod. Siddique is hereby convicted
     U/s.235 [2]
Cr.P.C
. for the offence U/s.120-B
     r/w.
S.121-A
IPC     and he shall undergo
     imprisonment for life and for the offence U/s. 124-
     A
IPC
shall undergo imprisonment for life and for
     the offence U/s.153-A
IPC
shall undergo RI for 3
     years."
and we find that apart from reliance placed by the

prosecution   on   Ex.P.260   insofar   as   this   accused   is

concerned, the other evidence placed before the Court by the

prosecution is in the form of recovery of four pamphlets from

his house at Chikkaballapur and we find as submitted by

Mr. Pasha, learned counsel that recovery of material cannot

by itself pin point for securing conviction under the serious

nature of offence with which he had been charged. In our

considered opinion, the evidence on record is not in the

nature of a clinching evidence and if at all the benefit of

doubt enures to the accused and not to the prosecution and

as such the conviction is not sustainable.
210
227. A9 has been found guilty of the offences p/u/ss.121,

121A, 153A of
IPC
and is imposed the death sentence apart

from other smaller sentences.
228. The prosecution has heavily relied upon the recoveries

made at the instance of this accused at his residence and

work place and also the oral testimony of PW46 and

documentary evidence of P260 for securing conviction.

Having found that the recoveries from the residence and

work   place   of   this   accused   which   according   to   the

prosecution has revealed incriminating material particularly

for holding the accused guilty of the offence
u/s.121
and

121A and other smaller offence and we have found the kind

of evidence as revealed through the recoveries is not

foolproof, for not having observed the necessary safeguards

for the purpose of effecting seizure and also for the purpose

of retrieving the information that had been stored in an

electronic device. The evidence on record is not good enough

to secure conviction under various provisions under which
211
he has been charged and even
u/s.121A
of IPC conspiracy

very material based on which charges were placed against

this accused being found not foolproof. Therefore, the

conviction does not sustain.
229. A16 has been found guilty of the offences punishable

under Section 120B r/w
Sections 121A
,
124A
and
153
IPC

and sentenced as below :-
He shall undergo imprisonment for life and for the
     offices U/s 124-A
IPC
shall undergo imprisonment
     for life and for the offence U/s.153-A
IPC
shall
     undergo RI for 3 years.
230. We have already discussed evidence against these

accused to be only in the form of the testimony of PW67

hand writing expert and said to be only incriminating

document against these accused.      We find conviction does

not sustain.
231. In so far as A17 is concerned, he is also found guilty of

the offence
u/s.121
and 121A, 124A and
153
and he is also
212
imposed the punishment of death sentence with other lesser

sentences.
232. In case of A17 also the evidence against A17 as per the

prosecution case is, apart from reliance placed on the

testimony of PW46 and Ex.P260, the information as revealed

from the mahazar drawn at his house and at his work place,

we have held that recoveries at his residence during the

second search and on being led to his residence on the basis

of the information as revealed by this accused, is suspect

and even the material and information as revealed through

the recovery in terms of the mahazar Ex.P13 is also suspect

due to the factum of the seizure that has been put by the

security officer have not been opened and not so opened

before the panchas before recoveries were effected. The

evidence against this accused in terms of the recoveries

therefore, become suspect and that other evidence having

been found wanting, we are of the view that prosecution has
213
not been able to make good the charges as against this

accused to sustain the conviction.
233. That leaves us with the conviction and the punishment

imposed on A1. Though Mr.Pasha has urged the arguments

as to the quality of evidence as against this accused for

securing conviction, he submitted that it is also suspect and

an alternative argument is also submitted that if at all A1

can be found guilty of the offence punishable
u/s.5
of the

Explosive Substances Act, and
Section 9(1)(b)
of the

Explosives Act, and that he cannot be convicted
u/s.3
of the

Explosive Substances Act or u/s. 304 Part II of
IPC
, we find

that on the evidence available on record and it being a fact

as proved by the prosecution evidence that A1 was found in

possession of the van wherein was being transported

explosive substances, is a person who is to be held guilty of

the offence punishable under
Section 5
of the Explosive

Substances Act and under rule 5 of Explosives Rules r/w.
Section 9(1)(b)
of the Explosives Act.
214
234. Insofar   as   conviction   u/s.304   Part-II   of
IPC
is

concerned, we find that submission of Sri.Hashmath Pasha,

learned counsel for the appellants, merits acceptance for the

reason that the explosion that took place in the Maruthi Van

while it was being driven on Magadi Road is not any

deliberate act, but is an accidental explosion and if at all can

be attributed to the rash and negligent driving of A1, the

explosion being accidental, provisions of
Section 3
are not

attracted as it is not a deliberate explosion and for the same

reason conviction u/s.304 part II cannot sustain as it is not

an intended act of explosion.      However, we find that the

accused is to be found guilty of a lesser offence viz.

u/s.304A of the penal code for causing the accident

resulting in the death of A2 and A3 due to rash and

negligent driving of the motor vehicle and accordingly we

convict him for the offence
u/s. 304-A
IPC.
235. Due to the explosion caused in the Maruthi Van the

damage to the Maxi cab which was in the vicinity and
215
injuries to PW1, the driver of the Maxi cab is made good on

record   and   through   the     evidence   and   therefore,   the

conviction u/s.337, 427 are sustained.
236. We find that the conviction insofar as the offences

punishable under
Sections 121
,
121A
,
124A
and
153A
IPC

and
u/s. 3
of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 are not

made good by the prosecution on acceptable, clinching

evidence and therefore, the conviction of A1 under these

provisions is not sustainable.
237. As an outcome of the discussion of the evidence on

record, we have held that the evidence of PW46 being in the

nature of weak evidence not by itself capable of securing

conviction and Ex.P260 cannot be of evidentiary value either

as an extra judicial confession or as an independent

document to prove its contents. We have also held that the

recoveries and the material gathered to as recoveries as

evidence, are suspect and therefore, the evidence on record

can hardly sustain the convictions against accused persons
216
except for A1 and in respect of the offence as noticed above

and on record.
238. It is therefore, we hold the evidence and the documents

placed on record before the trial Court by the prosecution

was not good enough to sustain the charges against the

accused except against A1 and to the limited extent of the

offences for which we have found guilty as discussed above.
239. Accordingly, we set aside the conviction and sentence

imposed by the trial Court on all accused except for A1 and

to the extent he is found guilty for the offence punishable

under
Sections 304A
,
337
,
427
of IPC and
u/s. 5
of the

Explosive Substance Act, and
u/s. 9(1)(b)
r/w. Rule 5 of the
Explosives Act
and Explosives Rules respectively.
240. A1 is sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period

of two years for the offence
u/s.304A
of IPC, rigorous

imprisonment for six months for the offence
u/s.337
of IPC

and further sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
217
a period of two years for the offence under
Section 427
of

IPC.
241. Insofar as the conviction
u/s.5
of the Explosive

Substances Act is concerned, the sentence as imposed by

the trial Court sentencing him to undergo R.I. for a period of

10 years is affirmed.
242. In respect of the conviction
u/s.9(1)(b)
r/w.Rule 5 of

the
Explosives Act
and Rules sentence of two years R.I. as

imposed by the trial Court is affirmed.
243. We direct the sentences imposed on A1 under the

above statutory provisions to run concurrently.
244. In respect of the sentences of imprisonment imposed

on A1 is concerned, he is entitled for the set off in terms of
Section 428
Cr.PC. for the period of detention which he has

already undergone.
218
245. For the purpose of claiming set off for the period of

detention, Mr.Pasha has submitted that A1 had been

arrested by PW59 and had obtained an order of detention

from the Jurisdictional Magistrate till 21.7.2000 which

subsequently came to be extended as and when it expired.
246. This step has been taken by PW59 as A1 was seriously

injured in the blast and was not in a position to be produced

before the Magistrate. Therefore, he submits that he has

already served the sentence as his period of detention is

much longer than the sentence imposed on him which is 10

years. It is therefore, requested that direction may be issued

to the jail authorities to set him at liberty forthwith.
247. Sri.Nilogal, learned Special SPP on the other hand

submits that this accused has not, as per the records,

undergone detention for more than 10 years as after his

detention in the present case he had been taken to

Hyderabad under a body warrant for the purpose of

investigation and trial of the case before the Hyderabad
219
Court and had not been brought back to the Central Jail at

Bangalore under body warrant on and after 23.12.2004.

Therefore, the accused cannot claim set off of the period he

has spent for the purpose of investigation and trial of the

accused before the Hyderabad court. In view of the language

of the provisions of Section 428 which specifically indicates

that the period for which set off can be claimed is only the

period of detention which he has undergone during the

investigation, enquiry or trial of the very case and not in

respect of the period of detention, assuming that he was

under detention, during the period of investigation, enquiry

or trial or the cases before the Hyderabad Court.
248. While on a perusal of the provisions of Section 428, it

does appear that set-off can only be claimed in respect of

period during which investigation, enquiry or trial was

taking place in respect of the very case for which the person

is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment, but we

nevertheless find that the initial detention of the accused
220
person which was on 14.7.2000 was in connection with this

case and that had not come to an end or brought to an end

by any positive judicial order, but he was only allowed to be

taken to Hyderabad under a body warrant issued by the

court at Hyderabad and even otherwise he had not been

released from custody in the present case and therefore, his

custody in the present case is deemed to have been

continued more so when the investigation and trial before

the Hyderabad court was over, he having been brought back

under body warrant as on 23.11.2004 and his custody

having been continued thereafter also till date.   Therefore,

we are of the view that the detention which A1 has

undergone is taken to be from 14.7.2000 and as part of the

detention undergone in connection with the present case.
249. In the result, we find the judgment and convictions

rendered by the trial Court is not sustainable in terms of the

above discussion. Accordingly, we proceed to pass the

following:
221
ORDER

        Criminal Appeal No.1202/08 insofar as it relates to

accused Nos.8, 9 & 17 is concerned is allowed in full. The

judgment and order of conviction and sentences passed on

the     said    appellants    are   all   set   aside.    These

accused/appellants are acquitted of all the offences with

which they are charged and convicted by the trial Court.

They are ordered to be set at liberty forthwith if not required

in any other case.
Insofar as the first appellant/first accused in Criminal

Appeal No.1202/08 is concerned, the appeal is allowed in

part.
Insofar as the conviction and sentences passed on him

u/ss.121, 120-B r/w.121A, 124A, 153A and 304 Part II of
IPC
and
u/s.3
of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 are

concerned, they are set aside.
222
In respect of his conviction u/s.304 Part II of
IPC
, we

set aside the same.     Instead, we convict him on a lesser

charge for the offence punishable under
Section 304A
of IPC

and sentence him to undergo R.I. for two years.
Insofar as the conviction for the offences
u/s.337
,
427
of IPC and
u/s.5
of the Explosive Substances Act 1908 and

u/s.9(1)(b) of the
Explosives Act, 1884
r/w.Rule 5 of the

Explosives Rules 1983 is concerned, it is confirmed.        The

sentences as imposed by the trial Court on the first accused

for the said offences is also confirmed.
All the sentences passed on accused No.1 are ordered

to run concurrently. He is also given the benefit of set-off for

the period of detention he has undergone so far.
ORDERS ON R.C.NO.5/08
The reference made by the trial Court for confirmation

of death sentence imposed on A1, 8, 9 and 17 does not

sustain for examination in view of our allowing the appeals

and these accused persons against their conviction for the
223
offence
u/s.121
of IPC and having acquitted them for the

offence punishable under
Section 121
of IPC for which

conviction alone they were imposed the death sentence and

that by setting aside of the conviction, automatically the

sentence falls to ground and reference does not survive for

examination and is accordingly, rejected.
Registry is directed to communicate the operative

portion of this order to the jail authorities immediately for

taking necessary action.
Sd/-
JUDGE




                                             Sd/-
JUDGE



AN, SA, RS, pjk,
SS, MP, KM, NG
224
DVSKJ/HSKJ:                  Criminal Appeal No 1202 of 2008
27-02-2013                                              C/w
                               Criminal Appeal No 39 of 2009
                                 & Criminal RC No 5 of 2008

             ORDER ON 'BEING SPOKEN TO'
These appeals and Criminal RC, which were disposed

of by our judgment dated 12-12-2012, have been listed

again before the court for issuing directions to prepare the

operative portion of the judgment fully in consonance with

the operative portion of the judgment which was dictated on

the   same   day   and   which   was   also   directed   to   be

communicated to the jail authorities for implementation.
We have subsequently noticed that the last paragraph

of the operative portion ordered to be communicated to the

jail authorities, reading as under:
Crl.A.39/09 preferred by Accused Nos.5, 6,
      10, 13, 14, 16 and 18 is allowed. The judgment
      and order of conviction and sentences passed on
      the said accused/appellants is set aside. They
      are acquitted of all the charges leveled against
      them. They are in custody. They are ordered to
225
be set at liberty forthwith if not required in any
     other case.
is not incorporated into the main judgment, though it is to

be part of the judgment and operative portion had already

been signed by us and also communicated through the

registry to the jail authorities immediately. We find that the

discussion    relating   to   this   aspect    though   figures    at

paragraphs 224 and 226 of the judgment, this part of the

judgment which is in the operative portion relating to the

result of Criminal Appeal No 39 of 2009 has not been found

part of the main judgment, which makes the judgment

incomplete and it is for issue of direction to include this

portion as part of the judgment, the matter is listed today.
Sri     Hashmath     Pasha,     learned    counsel   for     the

appellants-accused also submits that it is so and, as noticed

above, discussion with regard to appellants in Crl Appeal No

39 of 2009 is found in paragraphs 224 and 226 of the

judgment, but the omission is a mistake and for making the

judgment complete, adding this part in the operative portion
226
of the main judgment is a proper course of action.    It is also

submitted by Sri Pasha that this omission is in the nature of

a typographical mistake and by correction to the judgment

what had been ignored or omitted is being included.
Sri H N Nilogal, learned special public prosecutor

appearing for the respondent-state also submits to the same

effect.   He submits that it is necessary to issue such a

direction for incorporating the said portion as part of the

main judgment.
In the light of the above discussion and reasoning and

in view of the submissions made by the learned counsel, we

direct the registry to incorporate the following portion in the

operative portion of the judgment:
Crl.A.39/09 preferred by Accused Nos.5, 6,
      10, 13, 14, 16 and 18 is allowed. The judgment
      and order of conviction and sentences passed on
      the said accused/appellants is set aside. They
      are acquitted of all the charges leveled against
      them. They are in custody. They are ordered to
      be set at liberty forthwith if not required in any
      other case.
227
and issue certified copy of the judgment, free of cost, to the

parties who have already obtained certified copy of the

judgment and also to the learned special public prosecutor.
Ordered accordingly.
Sd/-
JUDGE


                                          Sd/-
JUDGE
*pjk
