Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 2 of 1974
Citation: SCC 543 : AIR 1998
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/76792139/

[Cites
50
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Mrs. Zaheda Inamdhar vs Dr. Fatima Hassina Sayeedha on 19 July, 2024
Author:
M. Nagaprasanna
Bench:
M. Nagaprasanna
1



Reserved on   : 09.07.2024
Pronounced on : 19.07.2024                               R
       IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

           DATED THIS THE 19TH DAY OF JULY, 2024

                          BEFORE

         THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA

         WRIT PETITION No.3519 OF 2024 (GM - RES)


BETWEEN:

MRS. ZAHEDA INAMDHAR
W/O SHERKHAN M. INAMDHAR
AGED ABOUT 63 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.865,
1ST FLOOR, 15TH CROSS
1ST STAGE, 1ST PHASE,
CHANDRA LAYOUT
BENGALURU - 560 072.
                                              ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI P.P.HEGDE, SR.ADVOCATE FOR
    SMT.MONISHA N.S., ADVOCATE)

AND:


DR. FATIMA HASSINA SAYEEDHA
AGED ABOUT 41 YEARS
RESIDING AT K MEHBOOB HUSSAIN
PLOT NO.12, OPP. RAILWAY STATION
NEAR MASJID-E-HUDA
REHAMATH NAGAR
                                  2




GULBARGA - 585 102.
                                                     ... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI UMESH M.N., ADVOCATE)


      THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226
AND
227
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA READ WITH SECTION 482 OF
CR.P.S., PRAYING TO QUASH THE RECORDING OF EVIDENCE OF
THE ACCUSED/RESPONDENT BY WAY OF AFFIDAVIT IN C.C NO.
27337/2017 ON THE FILE OF 22ND ADDL. CHIEF METROPOLITAN
MAGISTRATE AT BANGALORE, VIDE ANNEXURE-D AS ILLEGAL AND
CONSEQUENTLY DIRECT THE TRIAL COURT TO RECORD THE
EVIDENCE OF THE ACCUSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND
ETC.,

     THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 09.07.2024, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-


                                ORDER
The petitioner is before this Court calling in question

proceedings of recording of evidence of the accused by way of an

affidavit   in   C.C.No.27337   of   2027 pending   before   the   22nd

Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengalore arising out of a

complaint filed under
Section 200
of the Cr.P.C., alleging offences

punishable under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act,

1881 ('the Act' for short) and has sought quashment of the order

dated 13-12-2023 which rejects
Section 311
Cr.P.C. application
3
filed by the petitioner seeking further cross-examination of the

respondent/accused.
2. Heard Sri P.P. Hegde, learned senior counsel appearing for

the petitioner and Sri M.N.Umesh, learned counsel appearing for

the respondent.
3. Facts, in brief, germane are as follows:-
The petitioner and the respondent have a transaction. The

transaction leads to issuance of a cheque by the accused in favour

of the complainant. The presentation of the cheque leads to it

getting dishonored. The dishonouring of the cheque leads the

complainant before the concerned Court invoking
Section 200
of the

Cr.P.C., by registering a complaint. Presently, the proceedings are

pending before the concerned Court in C.C.No.27337 of 2017. The

issue in the lis does not pertain to the merit of the claim of the

complainant or the defence of the accused. On 16-11-2018, the

petitioner was cross-examined by the counsel for the accused. This

again happens on 18-02-2019. On 25-03-2019 the accused files an
4
affidavit. On the affidavit, further cross-examination of DW-
1/accused was taken up and recorded as nil owing to the absence

of the complainant. The complainant then prefers an application

under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., seeking further cross-examination

of DW-1. The accused files objections. An order comes to be passed

rejecting the application filed under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C. It is

this order that has driven the petitioner to this Court in the subject

petition.
4. The learned senior counsel Sri P P Hegde appearing for the

petitioner would submit that what is called in question is the

proceedings that entertained filing of affidavit by the accused in lieu

of her presence for examination-in-chief.        The learned senior

counsel would contend that the accused sitting in Dubai files the

affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief and the Court accepts it.
While an application is filed seeking further cross-examination

under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., by the petitioner, it is rejected,

which is contrary to law.       He would seek quashment of the

aforesaid action and not to permit the accused to continue the trial

on the strength of the affidavit that is filed as examination-in-chief.
5
It is his submission that it runs completely counter to plethora of

judgments rendered by the Apex Court, co-ordinate Bench of this

Court and several other High Courts.
5.   Per   contra,   the    learned   counsel      appearing   for   the

respondent would vehemently refute the submissions contending

that there is no illegality in the learned Magistrate taking the

affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief of the accused as there is no

bar in law for such action. He would also place reliance on certain

judgments to buttress his submissions. Insofar as the application

under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., is concerned, the learned counsel

would submit that the accused was offered for cross-examination

on 28-06-2023. The complainant did not choose to cross-examine

her. Therefore, it was taken as nil and would submit that there is no

warrant to recall the defence witness No.1 for further cross-
examination.     He   would      seek   dismissal   of   the   petition.   The

judgments relied on by both the learned counsel would bear

consideration qua their relevance in the course of the order.
6
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions

made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the

material on record. In furtherance thereof, the issues that fall for

consideration are:
(i)    Whether the act of the concerned Court in
            permitting filing of an affidavit in lieu of
            examination    in-chief by  the   accused is
            sustainable?
(ii)   Whether the rejection of the application filed
            under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., is tenable in
            law?
Issue No.1:
(i)    Whether the act of the concerned Court in
            permitting filing of an affidavit in lieu of
            examination    in-chief by  the   accused is
            sustainable?
7. To consider this issue, it is germane to notice
Sections 138
and
145
of the Act. They read as follows:
"138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of
     funds in the account.--Where any cheque drawn by a person
     on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of
     any amount of money to another person from out of that
     account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or
     other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of
     the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is
     insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount
     arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made
7
with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed
an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provision of
this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the
amount of the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply
unless--
(a)   the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period
      of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within
      the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b)   the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the
      case may be, makes a demand for the payment of the said
      amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the
      drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of
      information by him from the bank regarding the return of
      the cheque as unpaid; and
(c)   the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the
      said amount of money to the payee or as the case may be,
      to the holder in due course of the cheque within fifteen days
      of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "debt or
other liability" means a legally enforceable debt or other
liability."
...                ...            ...
"145. Evidence on affidavit.--(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
1973 (2 of 1974), the evidence of the complainant may
be given by him on affidavit and may, subject to all just
exceptions be read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or
other proceeding under the said Code.
(2) The court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the
application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and
examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the facts
contained therein."
(Emphasis supplied)
8
Section 145
of the Act confers a right on the complainant to give

affidavit evidence. It stops at that.         It does not confer the same

right on the accused. The contention is that since the law does not

expressly bar, it should be permitted. Heavy reliance is placed by

the learned counsel for the respondent on the judgment rendered

by the coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of AFZAL PASHA

v. MOHAMED AMEERJAN1. The coordinate Bench has held in the

said judgment as follows:
"....   ....   ....
5. In the light of the above, the point for consideration
        before this Court is whether it would be impermissible for the
        accused to tender evidence by way of affidavit having regard to
        the tenor of
Section 145
of the NI Act.
It is seen that
Sections 143
to
147
of the NI Act were
        inserted by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment &
        Miscellaneous Provisions)Act, 2002. One of the objects to bring
        about the new Legislation mentioned in the Objects and Reasons
        of the Act of 2002 was to provide for summary trial of the cases
        under the Act, with a view to speed up the disposal of cases.
Section 143
provides for the cases under the
NI Act
being tried
        summarily. Hence
Sections 262
to
265
of the CrPC would be
        applicable.
Section 145
of the NI Act, provides for a departure in
        the manner of tendering evidence at the trial, and permits
        evidence by way of affidavit.
The said Section is extracted hereunder for ready
        reference:
1
ILR 2016 KAR 4145.
9
"145. Evidence on affidavit.-- (1) Notwithstanding
      anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973,
      the evidence of the complainant may be given by him on
      affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions be read in
      evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding under the
      said Code.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the
      application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and
      examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the fact
      contained therein."
Sub-Section (1) contemplates an option which the
complainant has of tendering his evidence by way of an
affidavit. The omission of reference to the accused is for an
obvious reason as shall be presently pointed out.
Sub-Section (2) would indicate that there could be
affidavit evidence of both witnesses for the complainant and
also witnesses for the accused. For otherwise, there would be no
need to refer to an "application of the prosecution" to "examine
any person giving evidence on affidavit..."
This is in consonance with the procedure prescribed for a
Summary trial (which is the same as is specified for the trial of a
Summons case, under the
CrPC
. See:
Section 262
CrPC). The
procedure prescribed there under does not contemplate the
accused standing as a witness. Though he may examine
witnesses on his behalf.
Chapter XXTV of the
CrPC
contains the General Provisions
as to Enquiries and Trials. Section 315 thereof reads as
follows:--
"315. Accused person to be competent witness.--
(1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal
      Court shall be a competent witness for the defense and may
      give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges made against
      him or any person charged together with him at the same
      trial:
Provided that--
10
(a)    he shall not be called as a witness except on his own
             request in writing;
(b)    his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject
             of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or give
             rise to any presumption against himself or any person
             charged together with him at the same trial

              (2) Any person against whom proceedings are
      instituted in any Criminal Court under
section 98
, or
section
      107
, or
section 108
, or
section 109
, or
section 110
, or under
      Chapter IX or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter X,
      may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings:
Provided that in proceedings under
section 108
,
section 109
or
section 110
, the failure of such person to give
      evidence shall not be made the subject or any comment by
      any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any
      presumption against him or any other person proceeded
      against together with him at the same inquiry."
Therefore, it is clear that having regard to the Scheme of
the
CrPC
, the Legislature in its wisdom has left it open to the
accused to exercise the option of examining himself as a witness
for an offence punishable under
Section 138
of the NI Act, in
deliberately omitting any reference to the evidence of the
accused by way of affidavit For it would run against a first
principle in criminal law namely, that an accused shall not be
called as a witness except on his own request in writing. The
evidence on behalf of the accused would include that of the
accused, subject to
Section 315
CrPC. If the evidence of the
witnesses could be by way of affidavit in terms of
Section 145
NI Act, the evidence of the accused could also be way of
affidavit.
A closer scrutiny of
Section 145
would indicate that the
same is intended to ensure that the trial is concluded as
expeditiously as possible. The said provision does not in any
manner affect the right of the accused to cross examine the
complainant and his witnesses. The said provision enables even
the defence evidence to be led by affidavits. Thus, the said
provision is purely procedural in nature.
In this behalf, the Apex
Court has in
Shreenath v. Rajesh
[(1998) 4 SCC 543 : AIR 1998
SC 1827] , has held that in interpreting any procedural law,
where more than one interpretation is possible, the one which
11
curtails the procedure without eluding the justice, is to be
adopted. The procedural law is always subservient to and is in
aid to justice.
Ksl Industries v. Khandelwal
[2006 (1) Mh.LJ (Cri)
86] .
The    Apex    Court  in Mandvi Co-Operative   Bank
Limited (supra), has not examined the matter in the above
perspective.
On the other hand, the view taken and the directions
issued in a more recent decision of the Apex Court, in the case
of Indian Bank Association (supra) does contemplate evidence
by affidavit by the accused. The relevant portion is extracted
hereunder:
"DIRECTIONS:
21. Many of the directions given by the various High
Courts, in our view, are worthy of emulation by the Criminal
Courts all over the Country dealing with cases under
Section
138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, for which the following
directions are being given -
(1)   Metropolitan Magistrate/Judicial Magistrate (MM/JM), on the
      day when the complaint under
Section 138
of the Act is
      presented, shall scrutinize the complaint, and if the cmplaint
      is accompanied by the affidavit, and the affidavit and the
      documents, if any, are found to be in order, take cognizance
      and direct issuance of summons.
(2)   The MM/JM should adopt a pragmatic and realistic approach
      while issuing summons. Summons must be properly
      addressed and sent by post as well as by e-mail address got
      from the complainant. The court, in appropriate cases, may
      take the assistance of the police or the nearby court to serve
      notice on the accused. For notice of appearance, a short date
      be fixed. If the summons is received back un-served,
      immediate follow up action be taken.
(3)   The court may indicate in the summons that if the accused
      makes an application for compounding of offences at the first
      hearing of the case and, if such an application is made, the
      court may pass appropriate orders at the earliest.
12
(4)   The court should direct the accused, when he appears to
      furnish a bail bond, to ensure his appearance during trial and
      ask him to take notice under
Section 251
Cr.P.C. to enable
      him to enter his plea of defence and fix the case for defence
      evidence, unless an application is made by the accused under
Section 145(2)
for re-calling a witness for cross-examination.
(5)   The Court concerned must ensure that examination-in-chief,
      cross-examination and re-examination of the complainant
      must be conducted within three months of assigning the case.
The court has option of accepting affidavits of the witnesses,
      instead of examining them in court. The witnesses to the
      complaint and accused must be available for cross-
      examination as and when there is direction to this
      effect by the court.
22. We, therefore, direct all the criminal courts in the
Country dealing with
Section 138
cases to follow the
abovementioned procedures for speedy and expeditious disposal
of cases falling under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments
Act. The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of as above."
Incidentally, in the above judgment, the Supreme Court
has referred to with approval the views expressed in the
following decisions, in stating thus:--
"22. We notice, considering all those aspects, few High
      Courts of the Country have laid down certain procedures for
      speedy disposal of cases under
Section 138
of the Negotiable
      Instruments Act. Reference, in this connection, may be made
      to the judgments of the Bombay High Court in
KSL AND
      INDUSTRIES LTD. V. MANNALAL KHANDELWAL
[2005
      CRI.LJ     1201     (BOM)] ,     INDO       INTERNATIONAL
      LTD. V. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA [2006 Cri.LJ 208] , and
      HARISCHANDRA             BIYANI V. STOCK            HOLDING
      CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD., [(2006) 4 Mh.LJ 381] , the
      judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
MAGMA LEASING
      LIMITED V. STATE OF WEST BENGAL
[(2007) 3 CHN 574]
      , and the judgment of the Delhi High Court in RAJESH
      AGARWAL V. STATE [ILR (2010) 6 Del 610] .
In
KSL     AND      INDUSTRIES        LTD. v. MANNALAL
KHANDELWAL
(supra), a Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court in order to accomplish the underlying object of the Act,
has issued certain directions, one of which reads as follows:--
13
"(b) The Court concerned must ensure that
      examination-in-chief cross-examination and reexamination of
      the complainant must be concluded within three months of
      assigning the case. The Court has option of accepting
      affidavits of the witnesses, instead of examining them in
      Court. Witnesses to the complaint and accused must be
      available for cross-examination as and when there is
      direction to this effect by the Court."
(emphasis supplied)

      In M/s
INDO-INTERNATIONAL LTD. V. STATE OF
MAHARASHTRA
(supra),   the decision in
KSL AND
INDUSTRIES LTD. V. MANNALAL KHANDELWAL
(supra) has
been relied upon and followed.
In
HARISCHANDRA        BIYANI V. STOCK        HOLDING
CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
(supra), the Bombay High
Court has again applied and followed the decision in
KSL AND
INDUSTRIES LTD. V. MANNALAL KHANDELWAL
(supra).
In
MAGMA     LEASING      LTD. V. STATE     OF    WEST
BENGAL
(supra), there is a reference to
KSL AND
INDUSTRIES LTD. V. MANNALAL KHANDELWAL
(supra),
and the same has been referred to and relied upon in holding
that
Section 145
enables the accused or defence to lay evidence
by affidavit.
In
RAJESH AGARWAL V. STATE
, (supra), again the
decision in
KSL AND INDUSTRIES LTD. V. MANNALAL
KHANDELWAL
(supra), has been applied and the consistent
view taken in these decisions has been approved and applied by
the Supreme Court in direction No. 5, referred to hereinabove.
Hence, in keeping with judicial propriety, the later
judgment of the Apex Court can safely be applied when the
divergent view is that of a co-ordinate bench of the same Court.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed. The Trial Court is
directed to receive the affidavit evidence of the petitioner on his
request, in accordance with
Section 315
CrPC and proceed with
the pending case in accordance with law."
14
On     the   basis    of
the   said   judgment
the   argument   of   the

respondent/accused is now built up. Whether this requires to be

followed, as it is a judgment of the coordinate Bench is necessary to

be noticed. Though the judgment of the coordinate Bench considers

the judgments of the Apex Court, I deem it appropriate to follow

the judgments of the Apex Court and not the judgment of the

coordinate Bench.
8. The Apex Court in the case of
MANDVI COOPERATIVE

BANK LIMITED v. NIMESH B.THAKORE2
has held as follows:
"....   ....   ....
44. Coming now to the last question with regard to
         the right of the accused to give his evidence, like the
         complainant, on affidavit, the High Court has held that
         subject to the provisions of
Sections 315
and
316
of the
         Code of Criminal Procedure the accused can also give his
         evidence on affidavit. The High Court was fully conscious
         that
Section 145(1)
does not provide for the accused to
         give his evidence, like the complainant, on affidavit. But
         the High Court argued that there was no express bar in
         law against the accused giving his evidence on affidavit
         and more importantly providing a similar right to the
         accused would be in furtherance of the legislative intent
         to make the trial process swifter.
45. In para 29 of the judgment, the High Court observed
         as follows:
2
(2010) 3 SCC 83
15
"It is true that
Section 145(1)
confers a right on
      the complainant to give evidence on affidavit. It does
      not speak of similar right being conferred on the
      accused. The legislature in their wisdom may not have
      thought it proper to incorporate the word 'accused'
      with the word 'complainant' in sub-section (1) of
Section 145
in view of the immunity conferred on the
      accused from being compelled to be a witness against
      himself under
Article 20(3)
of the Constitution of
      India...."
Then in para 31 of the judgment it observed:
"....Merely because,
Section 145(1)
does not
      expressly permit the accused to do so, does not mean
      that the Magistrate cannot allow the accused to give
      his evidence on affidavit by applying the same analogy
      unless there is just and reasonable ground to refuse
      such permission. There is no express bar on the
      accused to give evidence on affidavit either in the Act
      or in the Code.... I find no justified reason to refuse
      permission to the accused to give his evidence on
      affidavit subject to the provisions contained in
      Sections 315 and 316 of the Code."
46. On this issue, we are afraid that the High Court
overreached itself and took a course that amounts to
taking over the legislative functions. On a bare reading of
Section 143
(sic
Section 145
) it is clear that the
legislature provided for the complainant to give his
evidence on affidavit and did not provide for the accused
to similarly do so. But the High Court thought that not
mentioning the accused along with the complainant in
sub-section (1) of
Section 145
was merely an omission by
the legislature that it could fill up without difficulty. Even
though the legislature in their wisdom did not deem it
proper to incorporate the word "accused" with the word
"complainant" in
Section 145(1)
, it did not mean that the
Magistrate could not allow the accused to give his
evidence on affidavit by applying the same analogy
unless there was a just and reasonable ground to refuse
such permission.
16
47. There are two errors apparent in the reasoning of the
        High Court. First, if the legislature in their wisdom did not think
        "it proper to incorporate a word 'accused' with the word
        'complainant' in
Section 145(1)
....", it was not open to the High
        Court to fill up the self-perceived blank. Secondly, the High
        Court was in error in drawing an analogy between the evidences
        of the complainant and the accused in a case of dishonoured
        cheque. The case of the complainant in a complaint under
Section 138
of the Act would be based largely on documentary
        evidence.
48. The accused, on the other hand, in a large number of
        cases, may not lead any evidence at all and let the prosecution
        stand or fall on its own evidence. In case the defence does lead
        any evidence, the nature of its evidence may not be necessarily
        documentary; in all likelihood the defence would lead other
        kinds of evidences to rebut the presumption that the issuance of
        the cheque was not in the discharge of any debt or liability. This
        is the basic difference between the nature of the complainant's
        evidence and the evidence of the accused in a case of
        dishonoured cheque. It is, therefore, wrong to equate the
        defence evidence with the complainant's evidence and to extend
        the same option to the accused as well."
(Emphasis supplied)


The Apex Court holds that statute confers a right on the

complainant to file his affidavit by way of evidence. The same right

is not conferred upon the accused. Therefore, the act of permitting

evidence of the accused by way of an affidavit was erroneous. The

Apex Court, later, in the case of INDIAN BANK ASSOCIATION v.
UNION OF INDIA3 has held as follows:
"....    ....    ....
3
(2014) 5 SCC 590
17
13.
Section 145
of the Act deals with the evidence on
affidavit and reads as follows:
"145.Evidence on affidavit.--(1) Notwith-standing
      anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973
      (2 of 1974), the evidence of the complainant may be given
      by him on affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions,
      be read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding
      under the said Code.
(2) The court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the
      application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and
      examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the
      facts contained therein."
14. The scope of
Section 145
came up for consideration
before this Court in
Mandvi Coop. Bank Ltd. v. Nimesh B.
Thakore
[(2010) 3 SCC 83 : (2010) 1 SCC (Civ) 625 : (2010) 2
SCC (Cri) 1] , and the same was explained in that judgment
stating that the legislature provided for the complainant to give
his evidence on affidavit, but did not provide the same for the
accused. The Court held that even though the legislature in their
wisdom did not deem it proper to incorporate the word
"accused" with the word "complainant" in
Section 145(1)
, it
does not mean that the Magistrate could not allow the accused
to give his evidence on affidavit, unless there was just and
reasonable ground to refuse such permission.
15. This Court while examining the scope of
Section 145
in
Radhey Shyam Garg v. Naresh Kumar Gupta
[(2009) 13 SCC
201 : (2009) 5 SCC (Civ) 61 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 980] , held as
follows: (SCC p. 208, para 19)

             "19. If an affidavit in terms of the provisions of
Section 145
of the Act is to be considered to be an
      evidence, it is difficult to comprehend as to why the court
      will ask the deponent of the said affidavit to examine
      himself with regard to the contents thereof once over again.
      He may be cross-examined and upon completion of his
      evidence, he may be re-examined. Thus, the words
      'examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the
      facts contained therein, in the event, the deponent is
      summoned by the court in terms of sub-section (2) of
Section 145
of the Act', in our opinion, would mean for the
18
purpose of cross-examination. The provision seeks to attend
               a salutary purpose."
16. Considerable time is usually spent on recording
         the statement of the complainant. The question is
         whether the court can dispense with the appearance of
         the complainant instead, to take steps to accept the
         affidavit of the complainant and treat the same as
         examination-in-chief.
Section 145(1)
gives complete
         freedom to the complainant either to give his evidence by
         way of affidavit or by way of oral evidence. The court has
         to accept the same even if it is given by way of an
         affidavit. The second part of
Section 145(1)
provides that
         the complainant's statement on affidavit may, subject to
         all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any inquiry,
         trial or other proceedings.
Section 145
is a rule of
         procedure which lays down the manner in which the
         evidence of the complainant may be recorded and once
         the court issues summons and the presence of the
         accused is secured, an option be given to the accused
         whether, at that stage, he would be willing to pay the
         amount due along with reasonable interest and if the
         accused is not willing to pay, the court may fix up the
         case at an early date and ensure day-to-day trial."
(Emphasis supplied)


The Apex Court follows the judgment in the case of MANDVI CO-
OPERATIVE BANK LIMITED
supra and reiterates the same view.
A coordinate Bench of this Court in SRI B.N. ASHWATH

NARAYAN v. SRI SHANKAR4 has after following
MANDVI

COOPERATIVE BANK LIMITED
case holds that the accused shall
4
Crl.R.P.No.1333 of 2018 decided on 02-02-2023
19
not be permitted to lead evidence by way of an affidavit. The

finding of the coordinate Bench qua on this point is as follows:
"15(xv)     In view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex
                     Court   in
MANDVI     COOPERATIVE      BANK
                     LIMITED v. NIMESH B.THAKORE
, (2010) 3 SCC
                     83, the accused shall not lead his evidence in
                     defence by way of an affidavit."
(Emphasis supplied)
9. Now coming to the judgments rendered by the other High

Courts.      The High Court of Punjab and Haryana in the case of
RAJNI DHINGRA v. SANJEEV CHUGH5
has held as follows:
"....   ....    ....
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that in
        case of
Indian Bank Association v. Union of India
, (2014) 5 SCC
        590, it has been observed that the Court in the complaint case
        under the provisions of
Negotiable Instruments Act
may allow
        the accused to give his evidence on affidavit unless there is a
        just and reasonable ground to refuse such permission.
Statement of accused, in this case, is based on lot of
        documentary evidence, which cannot be deposed in oral
        statement, as such, allowing of permission to accused to give
        his evidence on affidavit will not cause any prejudice to
        complainant and order of trial Court relying on observations in
        case of
Mandvi Cooperative Bank Ltd.
(supra) is not sustainable.
4. The Apex Court in case of
Mandvi Cooperative Bank
        Ltd.
(supra) took up and decided the issue as to whether the
        accused can be allowed to give evidence on affidavit as per
5
2019 SCC OnLine P & H 2464
20
provisions of
Section 145 (2)
of the Negotiable Instruments Act
and observed as follows:--
"44. Coming now to the last question with regard to
      the right of the accused to give his evidence, like the
      complainant, on affidavit, the High Court has held that
      subject to the provisions of
sections 315
and
316
of the Code
      of Criminal Procedure the accused can also give his evidence
      on affidavit. The High Court was fully conscious that
section
      145(1)
does not provide for the accused to give his evidence,
      like the complainant, on affidavit. But the High Court argued
      that there was no express bar in law against the accused
      giving his evidence on affidavit and more importantly
      providing a similar right to the accused would be in
      furtherance of A the legislative intent to make the trial
      process swifter.
45. In paragraph 29 of the judgment, the High Court
      observed as follows:
"It is true that
section 145(1)
confers a right
            on the complainant to give evidence on affidavit. It
            does not speak of similar right being conferred on
            the accused. The Legislature in their wisdom may not
            have thought it proper to incorporate a word
            'accused' with the word 'complainant' in subsection
            (1) of
section 145
in view of the immunity conferred
            on the accused from being compelled to be a witness
            against himself under
Article 20(3)
of the
            Constitution of India...."
Then in paragraph 31 of the judgment it observed:
".... Merely because,
section 145(1)
does not
            expressly permit the accused to do so, does not
            mean that the Magistrate cannot allow the accused
            to give his evidence on affidavit by applying the
            same analogy unless there is just and reasonable
            ground to refuse such permission. There is no
            express bar on the accused to give evidence on
            affidavit either in the Act or in the Code.....I find no
            justified reason to refuse permission to the accused
            to give his evidence on affidavit subject to the
            provisions contained in sections 315 and 316 of the
            Code."
21
46. On this issue, we are afraid that the High Court
overreached itself and took a course that amounts to
taking-over the legislative functions. 32. On a bare
reading of
section 143
it is clear that the legislature
provided for the complainant to give his evidence on
affidavit and did not provide for the accused to similarly
do so. But the High Court thought that not mentioning the
accused along with the complainant in sub-section (1) of
section 145
was merely an omission by the legislature
that it could fill up without difficulty. Even though the
legislature in their wisdom did not deem it proper to
incorporate the word 'accused' with the word
'complainant' in
section 145(1)
, it did not mean that the
Magistrate could not allow the accused to give his
evidence on affidavit by applying the same analogy unless
there was a just and reasonable ground to refuse such
permission.
47. There are two errors apparent in the reasoning
of the High Court. First, if the legislature in their wisdom
did not think "it proper to incorporate a word 'accused'
with the word 'complainant' in
section 145(1)
......", it was
not open to the High Court to fill up the self perceived
blank. Secondly, the High Court was in error in drawing
an analogy between the evidences of the complainant and
the accused in a case of dishonoured cheque. The case of
the complainant in a complaint under
section 138
of the
Act would be based largely on documentary evidence.
48. The accused, on the other hand, in a large
number of cases, may not lead any evidence at all and let
the prosecution stand or fall on its own evidence. In case
the defence does lead any evidence, the nature of its
evidence may not be necessarily documentary; in all
likelihood the defence would lead other kinds of evidences
to rebut the presumption that the issuance of the cheque
was not in the discharge of any debt or liability. This is
the basic difference between the nature of the
complainant's evidence and the evidence of the accused
in a case of dishonoured cheque. It is, therefore, wrong to
equate the defence evidence with the complainant's
evidence and to extend the same option to the accused as
well."
22
5. After discussing the law on the point, the Apex Court
did not agree with observations of High Court allowing
permission to accused to lead evidence on affidavit and
observed in para 52 as follows:--
"52. In light of the above we have no hesitation in
      holding that the High Court was in error in taking the view,
      that on a request made by the accused the magistrate may
      allow him to tender his evidence on affidavit and
      consequently, we set aside the direction as contained in
      sub-paragraph (r) of paragraph 45 of the High Court
      judgment. The appeal arising from SLP (Crl.) No.
      3915/2006 is allowed."
6. The above observations of the Apex Court in case
of
Mandvi Cooperative Bank Ltd.
(supra) have not been set
aside    or    dissented      in   case   of
Indian     Bank
Association
(supra), wherein in para 12 a reference was made
to above observations as follows:--
"12. The scope of
Section 145
came up for
      consideration before this Court in
Mandvi Cooperative Bank
      Limited v. Nimesh B. Thakore
(2010) 3 SCC 83, and the
      same was explained in that judgment stating that the
      legislature provided for the complainant to give his evidence
      on affidavit, but did not provide the same for the accused.
      The Court held that even though the legislature in their
      wisdom did not deem it proper to incorporate a word
      "accused" with the word "complainant" in
Section 145 (1)
, it
      does not mean that the Magistrate could not allow the
      complainant to give his evidence on affidavit, unless there
      was just and reasonable ground to refuse such permission."
7. The   Apex    Court    in   case    of
Indian   Bank
Association
(supra) was dealing with the issue of laying down
appropriate guidelines/directions to be followed by the Courts
while trying complaints under
Section 138
of the Negotiable
Instruments Act and the issue before the Apex Court was to
ensure expeditious disposal of such cases.
Though, reference to
observations of the Apex Court in case of
Mandvi Cooperative
Bank Ltd.
(supra) was made in para 12 of the judgment but
as already discussed the law settled by the Apex Court
in that
case
is clear and has not been set aside or dissented so far.
23
Even that was not in issue before the Apex Court in case
        of
Indian Bank Association
(supra).
8.
In view of clear proposition of law as
laid down
        in
Mandvi Cooperative Bank Ltd.
(supra) by Hon'ble Apex
        Court, the petitioner being an accused, who is facing trial in
        complaint under the provisions of
Negotiable Instruments Act
, is
        not competent to tender his evidence through affidavit and
        learned trial Court has not committed any error while declining
        permission to this effect to petitioner."
The High Court of Punjab and Haryana follows the judgments in

MANDVI COOPERATIVE BANK LIMITED and INDIAN BANK

ASSOCIATION cases supra. It further becomes germane to notice

the     judgment    of   the   High     Court    of    Bombay   in
VIRAL

ENTERPRISES v. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA6
wherein it is held

as follows:
"....   ....        ....
7. The substance of the petition is that if viewed in
        the light of the object of insertion of the provisions
        contained in
section 143
to
147
of the NI Act, 1881, by
        Act, 55 of 2002, the accused also has a right to adduce
        his evidence on an affidavit. The learned Metropolitan
        Magistrate was in error in declining to accept such
        evidence on affidavit by placing reliance on the decision
        of the Supreme Court in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
        bank
Limited v. Nimesh B. Thakore1
as the subsequent
        judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Indian
        Bank Association v. Union of India2
had further expanded
        the scope of provisions contained in
section 145
of the NI
        Act, 1881, with a view to give impetus for expeditious
        conclusion of the proceedings under
section 138
of NI
6
2024 SCC OnLine Bom.1774
24
Act, 1881 and
the said decision
was not properly
construed by the learned Magistrate. Thus, to advance
the    object   of    the     provisions    contained  in
sections 143
and
145
of     the NI     Act,   1881,   the
petitioners/accused deserve to be permitted to adduce
the evidence on an affidavit.
...                ...                  ...
9. At the outset, Mr. Karia, learned counsel for
respondent No. 2 submitted that the aforesaid question sought
to be raised by the petitioner/accused is no longer res integra.
The question stands firmly concluded against the accused by the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Mandvi
Cooperative bank (supra). Moreover, this Court in the cases
of
SBI     Global     Factors    Limited v. The     State     of
Maharashtra
and Nitin Shriram Sabe v. Prakashrao Keshavrao
Deshmukh, has repelled the endeavour of the accused, who are
facing the prosecution under
section 138
of NI Act, to reopen
the issue on the ground of subsequent judgment in the cases
of
Indian Bank Association
(supra), and the judgment of Gujrat
High Court in the case of Rakeshbhai Maganbhai Barot v. State
of Gujrat5. Thus, this petition being devoid of substance and
having been filed with a view to delay the disposal of the
complaints, deserves to be summarily dismissed.
...                ...                  ...
12. Mr. Patel further urged, the omission to include the
word "accused" in
section 145
of the NI Act, 1881 is for an
obvious reason which the learned single Judges of the
Karnataka High Court and Gujrat High Court have expounded in
the aforesaid decision. It was further urged that, at any rate, no
element of prejudice is likely to be caused to the complainant if
the accused is permitted to adduce evidence on an affidavit. The
complainant would have effective opportunity to cross examine
the accused. Therefore, a procedure which advances the cause
of    expeditious    conclusion    of   the    complaint    under
section 138
of NI Act, 1881 deserves to be preferred, submitted
Mr. Patel.
13.
In the case of
SBI Global Factors Limited
(supra)
and Nitin Sabe (supra), the learned single judge of this Court
have held that the question sought to be raised by the accused,
like petitioner herein, is no longer res integra and stands
concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
25
of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra). At the outset, it must be
noted these decisions, being rendered by co-ordinate Benches,
bind this Court.
14. Mr. Patel made a strenuous effort to demonstrate
that the issue cannot be said to have been concluded by the
judgment in the case of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra) as the
scope of
section 145
of the NI Act, 1881 was further expanded
by the Supreme Court in the case of
Indian Bank
Association
(supra) and, therefore, this Court, if warranted, may
refer the issue to a larger Bench.
15. I have given anxious consideration to the submissions
canvassed on behalf of the parties.
In view of the submission
canvassed by Mr. Patel, on the premise that
Indian Bank
Association
(supra) deviates from the decision in the case
of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra), I deem it appropriate to
consider the issue sought to be raised in this petition in the light
of the text and context of the provisions contained in
sections 143
and
145
of the NI Act, 1881. With the insertion of
Chapter XVII into NI Act, 1881
, there was an exponential
increase in the complaints under
section 138
of NI Act,
1881 putting enormous strain on the criminal justice
administration     system.
The     Negotiable       Instruments
(Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2002
introduced
sections 143
to
147
in Chapter XVII in addition to a
number of changes in
Sec. 138
,
141
and
142
of NI Act, 1881, as
they stood then.
...                ...                   ...
19. This Court while dealing with a large number of
petitions wherein the various facets of the amended provisions
of
NI Act, 1881
came up for consideration, inter alia, held that
the evidence in defence like the complainant's evidence also be
given on an affidavit. When the matter went in appeal before
the Supreme Court, in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
bank (supra), the Supreme Court, inter alia, considered the
following question:--
"Whether the right to give evidence on affidavit as
      provided to the complainant under
Section 145(1)
of the Act
      is also available to the accused?"
26
20. After an elaborate analysis, the Supreme Court held
that this Court had overreached itself and took the course that
amounts to taking over legislative functions. The observations of
the Supreme Court in paragraph Nos. 44 to 48 and 52 are
instructive and, hence, extracted below.
44] Coming now to the last question with regard to the
      right of the accused to give his evidence, like the
      complainant, on affidavit, the High Court has held that
      subject to the provisions of
sections 315
and
316
of the Code
      of Criminal Procedure the accused can also give his evidence
      on affidavit. The High Court was fully conscious that
section
      145(1)
does not provide for the accused to give his evidence,
      like the complainant, on affidavit. But the High Court argued
      that there was no express bar in law against the accused
      giving his evidence on affidavit and more importantly
      providing a similar right to the accused would be in
      furtherance of the legislative intent to make the trial process
      swifter.
45] In para 29 of the judgment, the High Court
      observed as follows:
"It is true that
section 145(1)
confers a right on
             the complainant to give evidence on affidavit. It does not
             speak of similar right being conferred on the accused. The
             Legislature in their wisdom may not have thought it proper
             to incorporate a word 'accused' with the word
             'complainant' in sub-section (1) of
section 145
in view of
             the immunity conferred on the accused from being
             compelled to be a witness against himself under
Article 20(3)
of the Constitution of India...."
Then in paragraph 31 of the judgment it observed:
".... Merely because,
section 145(1)
does not expressly
      permit the accused to do so, does not mean that the Magistrate
      cannot allow the accused to give his evidence on affidavit by
      applying the same analogy unless there is just and reasonable
      ground to refuse such permission. There is no express bar on the
      accused to give evidence on affidavit either in the Act or in the
      Code..... I find no justified reason to refuse permission to the
      accused to give his evidence on affidavit subject to the provisions
      contained in sections 315 and 316 of the Code."
46] On this issue, we are afraid that the High Court
      overreached itself and took a course that amounts to taking-
      over the legislative functions. On a bare reading of
section
27
143
it is clear that the legislature provided for the
complainant to give his evidence on affidavit and did not
provide for the accused to similarly do so. But the High Court
thought that not mentioning the accused along with the
complainant in sub-section (1) of
section 145
was merely an
omission by the legislature that it could fill up without
difficulty. Even though the legislature in their wisdom did not
deem it proper to incorporate the word 'accused' with the
word 'complainant' in
section 145(1)
, it did not mean that the
Magistrate could not allow the accused to give his evidence on
affidavit by applying the same analogy unless there was a
just and reasonable ground to refuse such permission.
47] There are two errors apparent in the reasoning of
the High Court. First, if the legislature in their wisdom did not
think "it proper to incorporate a word 'accused' with the word
'complainant' in
section 145(1)
......", it was not open to the
High Court to fill up the self perceived blank. Secondly, the
High Court was in error in drawing an analogy between the
evidences of the complainant and the accused in a case of
dishonoured cheque. The case of the complainant in a
complaint under
section 138
of the Act would be based largely
on documentary evidence.
48] The accused, on the other hand, in a large number
of cases, may not lead any evidence at all and let the
prosecution stand or fall on its own evidence. In case the
defence does lead any evidence, the nature of its evidence
may not be necessarily documentary; in all likelihood the
defence would lead other kinds of evidences to rebut the
presumption that the issuance of the cheque was not in the
discharge of any debt or liability. This is the basic difference
between the nature of the complainant's evidence and the
evidence of the accused in a case of dishonoured cheque. It
is, therefore, wrong to equate the defence evidence with the
complainant's evidence and to extend the same option to the
accused as well.
.. ....
52] In light of the above we have no hesitation in
holding that the High Court was in error in taking the view,
that on a request made by the accused the magistrate may
allow him to tender his evidence on affidavit and
consequently, we set aside the direction as contained in sub-
paragraph (r) of paragraph 45 of the High Court judgment.
The appeal arising from SLP (Crl.) No. 3915/2006 is allowed.
28
21. Indian Bank Association and Others filed Writ
Petition before the Supreme Court under
Article 32
of
the Constitution of India seeking appropriate guidelines,
directions to be followed by all the Courts dealing with
complaints under
section 138
of NI Act, 1881 so as to
ensure expeditious disposal of the complaints.
In
Indian
Bank Association
(supra), the Supreme Court took note of
the decision in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
bank (supra) and issued a number of directions. Direction
5, on which Mr. Patel placed very strong reliance, reads as
under:--
(5) The Court concerned must ensure that
      examination-in-chief, cross-examination and re-examination
      of the complainant must be conducted within three months of
      assigning the case. The Court has option of accepting
      affidavits of the witnesses, instead of examining them in
      Court. Witnesses to the complainant and accused must be
      available for cross-examination as and when there is direction
      to this effect by the Court.
(emphasis supplied)
22. Special emphasis was laid on the observations,
"the Court has option of accepting affidavits of the
witnesses. The word "witnesses", according to Mr. Patel,
subsumes in its fold an accused.
Therefore Indian Bank
Association
(supra) expands the scope of
section 145
and
permits the Court to record the evidence of accused on
affidavit.
To    this   extent,    the
Indian    Bank
Association
(supra) deviates from the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
bank (supra).
23. To bolster up the aforesaid submission, Mr. Patel
invited the attention of the Court, to the decision of the Gujrat
High Court in the case of Rakeshbhai Barot (supra) and
Karnataka High Court in the case of Afzal Pasha (supra).
24. I have perused the judgments in the cases
of Rakeshbhai Barot (supra) and Afzal Pasha (supra).
Rakeshbhai Barot (supra) substantially followed the
reasoning of the decision of the Karnataka High Court in
29
the case of Afzal Pasha (supra). It would, therefore, be
expedient to extract the observations in the case of Afzal
Pasha (supra), which reads as under:--
2) The petition is filed by the accused, against whom a
     complaint is filed before the court below alleging an offence
     punishable under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments
     Act, 1881 (Hereinafter referred to as the '
NI Act
', for brevity).
The petitioner is contesting the case. At the stage when the
     case was set down for the evidence of the accused, he is said
     to have filed an application under
Section 145(2)
of the NI
     Act, seeking permission of the court to file an affidavit in lieu
     of oral evidence. The trial court having rejected the
     application on the ground that the same is not permissible,
     the present petition is filed.
3) The learned counsel for the petitioner places
     reliance on the language of
Section 145
of the NI Act to
     contend that the trial court has not taken into consideration
     the intent of the provision, which has been interpreted by the
     Apex Court in the case of
Indian Bank Association v. Union of
     India
, (2014) 5 SCC 590.
...... .....
5) ...... Therefore, it is clear that having regard to the
     Scheme of the
CrPC
, the legislature in its wisdom has left it
     open to the accused to exercise the option of examining
     himself as a witness for an offence punishable under
Section 138
of the NI Act, in deliberately omitting any
     reference to the evidence of the accused by way of affidavit.
     For it would run against a first principle in criminal law
     namely, that an accused shall not be called as a witness
     except on his own request in writing. The evidence on behalf
     of the accused would include that of the accused, subject to
Section 315
CrPC. If the evidence of the witnesses could be
     by way of affidavit in terms of
Section 145
NI Act, the
     evidence of the accused could also be way of affidavit.
A closer scrutiny of
Section 145
would indicate that the same
     is intended to ensure that the trial is concluded as
     expeditiously as possible. The said provision does not in any
     manner affect the right of the accused to cross examine the
     complainant and his witnesses. The said provision enables
     even the defence evidence to be led by affidavits. Thus, the
     said provision is purely procedural in nature.
In this behalf,
     the Apex court has in
Shreenath v. Rajesh
, (1998) 4 SCC
30
543 : AIR 1998 SC 1827, has held that in interpreting any
      procedural law, where more than one interpretation is
      possible, the one which curtails the procedure without eluding
      the justice, is to be adopted. The procedural law is always
      subservient to and is in aid to justice.
(See :
KSL
      Industries v. Khandelwal
, (2006) 1 Mah LJ (Cri) 86).
The Apex Court in
Mandvi Cooperative Bank Limited
,
      (supra), has not examined the matter in the above
      perspective.
On the other hand, the view taken and the directions
      issued in a more recent decision of the Apex Court, in the
      case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra) does contemplate
      evidence by affidavit by the accused.
.......... ....
Hence, in keeping with judicial propriety, the later
      judgment of the Apex court can safely be applied when the
      divergent view is that of a co-ordinate bench of the same
      court.
25. Evidently, the Karnataka High Court has proceeded
on the premise that the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra) takes a divergent view
from that of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra), and
Indian Bank
Association
(supra), being a latter decision, it can be safely
applied as both the judgments were rendered by Benches of co-
equal strength.
26. Two questions come to the fore. First whether
Indian
Bank Association
(supra) has taken a divergent view?
Second,
even if one proceeds on the premise that there is a deviation
from the decision in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
bank (supra), whether the decision in the case of
Indian Bank
Association
(supra) commands precedential value for being
latter in point of time.
27.
In the case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra), after
referring to the decision in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
bank (supra), the Supreme Court observed, inter alia, as
under:--
12] The scope of
Section 145
came up for
      consideration before this Court in
Mandvi Cooperative Bank
31
Limited v. Nimesh B. Thakore
, (2010) 3 SCC 83, and the
      same was explained in that judgment stating that the
      legislature provided for the complainant to give his evidence
      on affidavit, but did not provide the same for the accused.
      The Court held that even though the legislature in their
      wisdom did not deem it proper to incorporate a word
      "accused" with the word "complainant" in
Section 145(1)
, it
      does not mean that the Magistrate could not allow the
      complainant to give his evidence on affidavit, unless there
      was just and reasonable ground to refuse such permission.
......
16] We have indicated that under
Section 145
of the
      Act, the complainant can give his evidence by way of an
      affidavit and such affidavit shall be read in evidence in any
      inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the Court, which makes
      it clear that a complainant is not required to examine himself
      twice i.e. one after filing the complaint and one after
      summoning of the accused. Affidavit and the documents filed
      by the complainant along with complaint for taking
      cognizance of the offence are good enough to be read in
      evidence at both the stages i.e. pre-summoning stage and the
      post summoning stage. In other words, there is no necessity
      to recall and re-examine the complaint after summoning of
      accused, unless the Magistrate passes a specific order as to
      why the complainant is to be recalled. Such an order is to be
      passed on an application made by the accused or under
Section 145(2)
of the Act suo moto by the Court. In summary
      trial, after the accused is summoned, his plea is to be
      recorded under Section 263(g) Cr. P.C. and his examination,
      if any, can be done by a Magistrate and a finding can be given
      by the Court under Section 263(h) Cr. P.C. and the same
      procedure can be followed by a Magistrate for offence of
      dishonour of cheque since offence under
Section 138
of the
      Act is a document based offence. We make it clear that if the
      proviso (a), (b) & (c) to
Section 138
of the Act are shown to
      have been complied with, technically the commission of the
      offence stands completed and it is for the accused to show
      that no offence could have been committed by him for specific
      reasons and defences.
28. From a correct reading of the decision in the case
of
Indian Bank Association
(supra), I find it rather difficult to
accede to the submission on behalf of the accused that
the said
decision
deviates from the view taken by the Supreme Court in
the case of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra) in the matter of
32
permitting the accused to lead evidence on an affidavit. The
question that arose for consideration in the case of Mandvi
Cooperative bank (supra) was in the context of the import of
amended
section 143
and
145
of the NI Act, 1881, in particular.
On the contrary, a larger issue of expeditious completion of the
trial in the complaints under
section 138
of the NI Act, 1881 was
the subject matter of the Writ Petition filed by the
Indian Bank
Association
(supra). In that context, the Supreme Court gave
certain directions.
However, despite noting the decision in the
case of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra), especially the fact
that the provisions contained in
section 145
were restricted to
permitting the complainant to lead evidence on affidavit and do
not provide the same dispensation to the accused,
Indian Bank
Association
(supra) did not struck a discordant note.
29. It is true in clause 5 of the directions in paragraph 21
in the case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra) (extracted
above), the Supreme Court observed that the Court has option
of accepting affidavits of the witnesses, instead of examining
them in Court. However, the said direction cannot be read out of
context. It is well recognized that the words in a judgment
cannot be read like statute. A decision is an authority for what it
actually decides and not what logically flows from
the said
decision
.
30. In the case of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra),
a Bench of co-equal strength of the Supreme Court has
elaborately considered the specific question as to
whether an accused can be permitted to adduce evidence
on oath and ruled against such course of action ascribing
reasons. It cannot be urged that in the the case of
Indian
Bank Association
(supra), another two Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court delved into the correctness of the said
view and took a diametrically opposite view. The decision
in the case of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra), in my
view, still holds the field.
31. The       second    aspect       of
Indian    Bank
Association
(supra), being a decision latter in point of time,
commands precedence, may not detain the Court. The legal
position is absolutely clear.
33
32. As noted above, in my humble opinion, there is
no conflict between the decisions in the cases of Mandvi
Cooperative bank (supra) and
Indian Bank Association
(supra).
Even if one proceeds on the premise that
decisions    in    the    cases    of Mandvi     Cooperative
bank (supra) and
Indian Bank Association
(supra) are
irreconcilable, the rule is to apply the earliest view as the
succeeding one would fall in the category of per incuriam.
It would be suffice to note the statement of law in the case
of
Sundeep Kumar Bafna v. State of Maharashtra
.
19] It cannot be over-emphasised that the discipline
      demanded by a precedent or the disqualification or diminution
      of a decision on the application of the per incuriam rule is of
      great importance, since without it, certainty of law,
      consistency of rulings and comity of Courts would become a
      costly casualty. A decision or judgment can be per incuriam
      any provision in a statute, rule or regulation, which was not
      brought to the notice of the Court. A decision or judgment can
      also be per incuriam if it is not possible to reconcile its ratio
      with that of a previously pronounced judgment of a Co-equal
      or Larger Bench; or if the decision of a High Court is not in
      consonance with the views of this Court. It must immediately
      be clarified that the per incuriam rule is strictly and correctly
      applicable to the ratio decidendi and not to obiter dicta. It is
      often encountered in High Courts that two or more mutually
      irreconcilable decisions of the Supreme Court are cited at the
      Bar. We think that the inviolable recourse is to apply the
      earliest view as the succeeding ones would fall in the category
      of per incuriam.
(emphasis supplied)
33. Thus, this Court regrets its inability to agree
with the view of the Karnataka High Court in the case
of Afzal Pasha (supra) on both the counts namely there
being an inconsistency in the decisions in the cases
of Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra) and
Indian Bank
Association
(supra) and
Indian Bank Association
(supra),
being a latter decision, deserves to be followed.
34. At this stage, it must be noted that apart from the
decisions of learned single Judges of this Court, in the cases
of
SBI Global Factors Limited
(supra) and Nitin Shriram
Sabe (supra), there are decisions of the other High Courts which
34
have consistently held that Mandvi Cooperative bank (supra)
     still holds the field despite the pronouncement of the Supreme
     Court in the case of
Indian Bank Association
(supra), to which
     the attention of the Court was invited by Mr. Karia, namely,
(
i) Rajni    Dhingra v. Sanjeev    Chugh
;  (
ii) P.T.   Joy v. K.V.
     Sivasankaran
; (
iii) Prabhudas Panjainmal Rice and Dal
     Mill v. Avon Trade Link, Shakti Nagar, Katni
; and (
iv) Rajeshwar
     Dayal Pareek v. Alankar Marble and Grenite
.
35. The upshot of aforesaid consideration is that,
     the decisions of this Court in
SBI Global Factors
     Limited
(supra) and Nitin Shriram Sabe (supra) have
     correctly held that the question sought to be raised by
     the petitioners is no longer res integra and stands
     concluded against the accused by the judgment of the
     Supreme Court in the case of Mandvi Cooperative
     bank (supra).
This Court does not find any reason to take
     a different view of the matter than the one taken by the
     coordinate Benches in the cases of
SBI Global Factors
     Limited
(supra)     and Nitin    Shriram    Sabe (supra).
     Therefore, I decline the invitation of Mr. Patel to take a
     different view of the matter and refer the question to a
     larger Bench."
(Emphasis supplied)

The Bombay High Court holds that it does not agree with the view

taken by this Court in the case of AFZAL PASHA supra, as it

completely runs counter to the judgments of the Apex Court in the

cases of MANDVI CO-OPERATIVE BANK LIMITED and INDIAN

BANK ASSOCIATION cases (supra).             This Court is also of the

same view that the judgment in the case of AFZAL PASHA though

rendered by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court, it has lost its

precedential value, on the score that it is inconsistent with the
35
judgments rendered by the Apex Court supra. Therefore, holding

the said decision as per incuriam, I deem it appropriate to hold that

the statute does not confer any right on the accused to file his

evidence by way of an affidavit. It is the right of the complainant,

and the legislature in its wisdom has excluded the same right to be

conferred upon the accused. In that light, holding no right to the

accused to file the affidavit evidence, the proceedings of the

learned Magistrate who has permitted filing of the evidence by way

of an affidavit by the accused is illegal and unsustainable.
Therefore, the said action of the learned Magistrate will have to be

obliterated from the stage of acceptance of affidavit evidence of the

accused. Accordingly, Issue No.1 is answered in favour of the

petitioner, holding that the accused has no right to tender

his evidence by way of an affidavit.
Issue No.2:
(ii)   Whether the rejection of the application filed
             under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., is tenable in
             law?
10. The petitioner files an application under
Section 311
of

the Cr.P.C., Section 311 reads as follows:
36
"311. Power to summon material witness, or
        examine person present.--Any Court may, at any stage of
        any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, summon
        any person as a witness, or examine any person in attendance,
        though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine
        any person already examined; and the Court shall summon and
        examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his
        evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the
        case."
The purport of
Section 311
Cr.P.C. need not detain this Court for

long or delve deep into the matter. The Apex Court in the case of
VARSHA GARG v. STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH7
has held as

follows:
"....    ....    ....
31. Having clarified that the bar under Section 301 is
        inapplicable and that the appellant is well placed to pursue this
        appeal, we now examine
Section 311
of CrPC. Section 311
        provides that the Court "may":
(i)    Summon any person as a witness or to examine any person
               in attendance, though not summoned as a witness; and
(ii)   Recall and re-examine any person who has already been
               examined.
32. This power can be exercised at any stage of any
        inquiry, trial or other proceeding under the
CrPC
. The
        latter part of Section 311 states that the Court "shall"
        summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such
        person "if his evidence appears to the Court to be
        essential to the just decision of the case". Section 311
        contains a power upon the Court in broad terms. The
        statutory provision must be read purposively, to achieve
        the intent of the statute to aid in the discovery of truth.
7
2022 SCC OnLine SC 986
37
33. The first part of the statutory provision which uses
the expression "may" postulates that the power can be
exercised at any stage of an inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
The latter part of the provision mandates the recall of a witness
by the Court as it uses the expression "shall summon and
examine or recall and reexamine any such person if his evidence
appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case".
Essentiality of the evidence of the person who is to be examined
coupled with the need for the just decision of the case constitute
the touchstone which must guide the decision of the Court. The
first part of the statutory provision is discretionary while the
latter part is obligatory.
34. A two judge Bench of this Court in Mohanlal Shamji
Soni (supra) while dealing with pari materia provisions of
Section 540 of the Criminal Code of Procedure 1898 observed:
"16. The second part of Section 540 as pointed out
      albeit imposes upon the court an obligation of summoning
      or recalling and re-examining any witness and the only
      condition prescribed is that the evidence sought to be
      obtained must be essential to the just decision of the case.
      When any party to the proceedings points out the
      desirability of some evidence being taken, then the court
      has to exercise its power under this provision -- either
      discretionary or mandatory -- depending on the facts and
      circumstances of each case, having in view that the most
      paramount principle underlying this provision is to discover
      or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts in order to meet
      the requirements of justice."
35. Justice S Ratnavel Pandian, speaking for the two
judge Bench, noted that the power is couched in the widest
possible terms and calls for no limitation, either with regard to
the stage at which it can be exercised or the manner of its
exercise. It is only circumscribed by the principle that the
"evidence to be obtained should appear to the court essential to
a just decision of the case by getting at the truth by all lawful
means." In that context the Court observed:
"18 ...Therefore, it should be borne in mind that the
      aid of the section should be invoked only with the object of
      discovering relevant facts or obtaining proper proof of such
38
facts for a just decision of the case and it must be used
      judicially and not capriciously or arbitrarily because any
      improper or capricious exercise of the power may lead to
      undesirable results. Further it is incumbent that due care
      should be taken by the court while exercising the power
      under this section and it should not be used for filling up the
      lacuna left by the prosecution or by the defence or to the
      disadvantage of the accused or to cause serious prejudice to
      the defence of the accused or to give an unfair advantage to
      the rival side and further the additional evidence should not
      be received as a disguise for a retrial or to change the
      nature of the case against either of the parties."
36. Summing up the position as it obtained from various
decisions of this Court, namely
Rameshwar Dayal v. State of
U.P.
,
State of W.B. v. Tulsidas Mundhra
,
Jamatraj Kewalji
Govani v. State     of   Maharashtra
,      Masalti v. State   of
U.P. Rajeswar     Prosad   Misra v. State    of    W.B. and R.B.
Mithani v. State of Maharashtra, the Court held:
"27. The principle of law that emerges from the
      views expressed by this Court in the above decisions
      is that the criminal court has ample power to summon
      any person as a witness or recall and re-examine any
      such person even if the evidence on both sides is
      closed and the jurisdiction of the court must
      obviously be dictated by exigency of the situation,
      and fair play and good sense appear to be the only
      safe guides and that only the requirements of justice
      command the examination of any person which would
      depend on the facts and circumstances of each case."
37. The power of the court is not constrained by the
closure of evidence. Therefore, it is amply clear from the
above discussion that the broad powers under Section
311 are to be governed by the requirement of justice. The
power must be exercised wherever the court finds that
any evidence is essential for the just decision of the case.
The statutory provision goes to emphasise that the court
is not a hapless bystander in the derailment of justice.
Quite to the contrary, the court has a vital role to
discharge in ensuring that the cause of discovering truth
as an aid in the realization of justice is manifest.
39
38.
Section 91
CrPC empowers inter alia any Court to
     issue summons to a person in whose possession or power a
     document or thing is believed to be, where it considers the
     production of the said document or thing necessary or desirable
     for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other
     proceeding under the
CrPC
.
39.
Section 91
forms part of Chapter VII of
CrPC
which is
     titled "Processes to Compel the Production of Things". Chapter
     XVI of the
CrPC
titled "Commencement of Proceedings before
     Magistrates" includes Section 207 which provides for the supply
     to the accused of a copy of the police report and other
     documents in any case where the proceeding has been
     instituted on a police report. Both operate in distinct spheres.
40. In the present case, the application of the
     prosecution for the production of the decoding registers is
     relatable to the provisions of
Section 91
CrPC. The decoding
     registers are sought to be produced through the representatives
     of the cellular companies in whose custody or possession they
     are found. The decoding registers are a relevant piece of
     evidence to establish the co-relationship between the location of
     the accused and the cell phone tower. The reasons which
     weighed with the High Court and the Trial Court in dismissing
     the application are extraneous to the power which is conferred
     under
Section 91
on the one hand and Section 311 on the other.
     The summons to produce a document or other thing under
Section 91
can be issued where the Court finds that the
     production of the document or thing "is necessary or desirable
     for the purpose of any investigation, trial or other proceeding"
under the
CrPC
. As already noted earlier, the power under
     Section 311 to summon a witness is conditioned by the
     requirement that the evidence of the person who is sought to be
     summoned appears to the Court to be essential to the just
     decision of the case."
If the findings of the Apex Court is pitted against the order

impugned rejecting the application, it would undoubtedly run foul of

the judgment of the Apex Court.        Owing to the absence of the
40
complainant on a particular day, the cross-examination of the

accused is rendered nil, apart from the illegality of permitting her to

file the evidence by way of affidavit. It cannot be that the accused

is not cross-examined at all, by the complainant. Therefore, the

Court ought to have permitted further cross-examination of the

accused/DW-1. In that light, issue No.2 is also answered in favour

of the petitioner.
11. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
ORDER
(i)       Writ Petition is allowed.
(ii)      The   proceedings        of   the   XXII        Additional   Chief
                Metropolitan Magistrate at Bengaluru insofar as it
                permits filing of an affidavit by the accused is
                quashed. The accused shall appear before the Court
                and tender her evidence if she so desires.
(iii)     The order     rejecting the application filed under
Section 311
of the Cr.P.C., for further cross-
examination    of    the      accused      is     quashed.    The
41
application filed by the petitioner seeking further
               cross-examination of DW-1 is allowed.
(iv)   The XXII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate at
               Bengaluru in terms of the order and the observations
               made in the order is directed to regulate his
               procedure and conclude the trial within a outer limit
               of six months from the date of this order, if not,
               earlier.
Sd/-
JUDGE




bkp
CT:MJ
