Title: Search
Court: High Court on 11.1.2013 in MACA No.792/2006 titled Oriental Insurance Co.
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 748, held:­
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/78342224/

[Cites
32
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi District Court
Master Ritik Bajaj vs Savitri Raghuraman on 9 February, 2015
IN THE COURT OF MS. GEETANJLI GOEL, PO: MOTOR ACCIDENT 
        CLAIMS TRIBUNAL­2, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI

                                       Suit No.38/14

Date of Institution: 16.09.2006

IN THE MATTER OF:

1.   Master Ritik Bajaj 
S/o Shri Rajan Bajaj 

2.  Master Rahil Bajaj
S/o Shri Rajan Bajaj

(Minors through
Mrs Ritu Arora, their next friend
but now have attained majority)

Both Residents of:­
E­372, Greater Kailash
Part II,New Delhi­110048.                              ...Petitioners

Versus 

1. Savitri Raghuraman
R/o A­143, Sector 27 
Noida, Gautambudh Nagar 

2. Sanjay Kumar
S/o Shri Pammi Singh
R/o Village Afzalpur Nistauli
Ghaziabad, UP.




Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                    Page No. 1 of 75
 3. Ramkumar
S/o Shri Babu Jatav
R/o Afzalpur, Nistauli
Police Station Sahibabad
Ghaziabad, UP.

4. Mr Rajan Bajaj 
R/o E­372, Greater Kailash, Part II
New Delhi­110048 

5. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Oriental House A­25/27
Asaf Ali Road
New Delhi ­110002

Branch Off­ 8, 1576
1st Floor, Church Road
Kashmere Gate
Delhi 110006.                                           ...Respondents
Final Arguments heard                         :   24.01.2015
Award reserved for                            :   09.02.2015
Date of Award                                 :   09.02.2015

AWARD
1.       Vide this judgment­cum­award, I proceed to decide the petition filed
u/s 

166
and
140
of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, as amended up­to­date (hereinafter 

referred to as the Act) for grant of compensation in a road accident.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                    Page No. 2 of 75
2.       It is the case of the petitioners that on 4.2.2006 at about 4 a.m Mrs. 

Renu   Bajaj   (since   deceased)   as   occupant   of   Toyota   Car   No.DL5C­B­3456 

driven by Mr. Rajan Bajaj was proceeding on Delhi ­ Noida Expressway in front 

of Mayur School on way from Noida to New Delhi. It is averred that the car was 

being driven by its driver at a high speed rashly, negligently in disregard to the 

traffic regulations. It is averred that ahead of the car was a Maruti car bearing 

registration   No.UP­16­A­7841   and   the   driver   of   the   Toyota   Car   intended   to 

overtake the Maruti Car ahead of it. It is averred that the Maruti car driver 

swerved   the   car   slightly   to   the   left   and   abruptly   applied   brakes,   as   a 

consequence   thereof,   the   Toyota   car   struck   against   the   rear  portion   of  the 

Maruti Car, became imbalanced and turned up­side down and the occupant of 

the car as well as the driver suffered multiple grievous injuries. It is averred 

that the deceased  due  to the  serious injuries was brought and  admitted  to 

Bhardwaj Hospital NH­1 Sector 29, Noida where she was declared brought 

dead at 4.15 a.m on 4.2.2006. It is averred that the accident was caused on 

account   of   composite   negligence   on   the   part   of   the   drivers   of   both   the 

vehicles. It is stated that in respect of the accident FIR was registered at PS 

Sector 39, Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar. It is averred that the deceased was 

taken to Bhardwaj Nursing and Maternity Home Pvt. Ltd. Noida.
3.       It is averred that the deceased was a young lady of 45 years of age with 

High Educational Qualifications, sound health and physique and was working 

as Director in Private Limited Companies of repute, drawing monthly salary of
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 3 of 75
 Rs.57,200/­ besides perks and she was earning a salary and having bright 

future prospects. It is averred that the deceased besides pursuing her career 

as a Director of two companies of repute was also looking after the petitioners 

as mother and her husband as wife. It is averred that she was spending a 

major portion of her income for the welfare, upkeep and maintenance of the 

family and the petitioners assume the monetary value of the services rendered 

by her to them at a bare minimum of Rs.50,000/­ per month. It is averred that 

the deceased was very hard­working and a self­made woman and she joined 

the   company   at   about   19   years   age   and   reached   a   level   of   distinction   on 

account of her own efforts. It is averred that the deceased was holding the 

position   as   Director   in   two   companies   viz.   Medisphere   Marketing   Ltd.   and 

Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. bearing the same address 201,28,29 Link Road, Feroze 

Gandhi   Marg,   Lajpat   Nagar,   New   Delhi­24   and   was   drawing   a   good 

remuneration. It is averred that the deceased was having very good health and 

was very active and she was not addicted to any vice and would have lived for 

another 45­50 years if not killed in the accident. It is averred that there was a 

history   of   longevity   in   the   family   of   the   deceased   and   the   father   of   the 

deceased namely Shiv Kumar Raizada aged about 75 years was still alive and 

healthy. The mother of the deceased namely, Shobhi Raizada aged about 65 

years was still alive and healthy. It is averred that the claimants' pleasure and 

comforts   of   life   had   been   completely   shattered   and   the   deceased   had   left 

behind the two petitioners aged 17 years and aged 15 years who were fully 

dependent   upon   the   deceased   for   their   upbringing,   for   financial   and   moral
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 4 of 75
 support. It is averred that the petitioners No.1 and 2 had lost the love, affection 

and  care provided to them by the deceased mother and the death  of Mrs. 

Renu Bajaj had caused a great loss to the petitioners because it was under
her guidance, support and help that the family was being run. It is averred that 

the death of the deceased had caused great mental shock to the whole of the 

family who had been deprived of the assistance that would have been made 

available  to them by the  deceased  for at least 50  years if not killed  in the 

accident. It is averred that the deceased was spending her entire income on 

her family and the deceased had earnest desire to provide the best possible 

education, training and facilities to her children. It is averred that the whole of 

the   family   was   secure   and   happy   under   the   guidance   and   shelter   of   the 

deceased and had become emotionally and morally insecure after her death. It 

is averred that the petitioners are also entitled for compensation for shock, 

bodily pain and mental tension suffered by the deceased on account of the 

accident. It is averred that the vehicle of Shri Rajan Bajaj i.e. Toyota Prado 

bearing No.DL­5CB­3456 was insured with Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., 

Oriental House A­25/27 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi. It is prayed that an amount 

of Rs.2,00,00,000/­ be awarded as compensation in favour of the petitioners 

and   against   the   respondents.   It   is   averred   that   at   the   time   of   accident   the 

respondent No.1 was driving the offending vehicle and respondent No.2 is the 

owner   of   the   offending   vehicle   and   the   respondent   No.3   is   the   insurance 

company of the offending vehicle, therefore, all the respondents are liable to 

pay the compensation to the petitioners jointly or severally.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                  Page No. 5 of 75
4.       Written  statement was filed on behalf of the respondent No.1 taking the 

preliminary objection that the respondent No.1 had sold the Maruti 800 car 

with registration number UP­16A­7841 on 5.8.2004 much before the alleged 

accident   dated   4.2.2006   to   Shri   Sanjay   Kumar   s/o   Shri   Pammi   Singh   r/o 

Village Afzalpur, Nistauli, Ghaziabad i.e. the respondent No.2. The averments 

made in the claim petition were denied. It is denied that the respondent No.1 

was the owner of the car No.UP­16A­7841 on the date of the accident. It is 

averred that the respondent No.1 not being the owner of the Maruti car on the 

date of the accident had nothing to do with the application for compensation 

and   was   in   no   way   connected   with   the   car   after   its   delivery   and   sale   on 

5.8.2004.
5.       Written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent No.2 taking the 

preliminary objections that the respondent No.2 did not have any hand in the 

manner in which the accident had resulted as was clear from the pleadings in 

the petition itself and the accident had solely and squarely been caused by the 

rash and negligent driving of the respondent No.4, father of the petitioners who 

had been driving the car in which the deceased was claimed to have been 

travelling. It is the specific admission in the petition that his Toyota Car bearing 

No.DL­5C­3456 was being driven by its driver i.e. the respondent No.4 on the 

Delhi Noida Expressway in front of Mayur  School on way from Noida to New 

Delhi   at   a   high   speed,   rashly   and   negligently   in   disregard   to   the   traffic 

regulations and  in  view of such clear and specific pleadings, there  was no
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 6 of 75
 question of any responsibility being attributed to the driver of the Maruti Car ­ a 

much smaller car ­ claimed to be driven by its driver specially when it was the 

car driven by the respondent No.4 in which the petitioners had been traveling 

along with their deceased mother which went out of control after hitting from 

behind the Maruti car moving ahead and driven by its driver which had led to 

the   alleged   accident.   It   is   averred   that   the   respondent   No.4   was   definitely 

responsible for contributory negligence which had led to the accident and to 

make matters worse, had filed the present petition merely to encash the most 

unfortunate accident wherein the deceased is claimed to have lost her life. It is 

averred that the petitioners have failed even to specify the basis on which the 

amount claimed as compensation   has been calculated and the petition has 

clearly been filed just to encash the unfortunate demise of the mother of the 

petitioners in the alleged  accident. It is averred that the petition is merely an 

abuse   of   the   process   of   law   and   the   entire   incident   is   based   on   the   bare 

allegations of the petitioner's father who was driving his Toyota car in a most 

irresponsible,   negligent   and   careless   manner   even   though   his   wife   and 

children were accompanying him and the allegations were wholly insufficient 

for attributing any fault on the part of the respondent No.2.  It is averred that 

the   respondent   No.2   had   never   been   involved   in   the   accident   wherein   the 

vehicle number had been recorded merely on the basis of information provided 

by some mischievous element. The averments made in the claim petition were 

denied. It is averred that the respondent No.2 did not have any part in the 

events leading to the accident wherein the deceased is claimed to have lost
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                 Page No. 7 of 75
 her life. It is averred that for any failure of the driver of the Toyota car to move 

in   a   safe   speed   limit   and   not   in   a   careless   manner,   the   respondent   No.2 

cannot be penalized. It is averred that the petition is silent about the purpose 

for which the deceased had been moving with the respondent No.4 at that 

unearthly hour and also about the physical condition of the respondent No.4, 

especially when it was the respondent No.4 who had lost control of his car 

after   having   driven   the   same   in   a   high   speed,   rashly,   negligently   and   in 

disregard   to   the   traffic   regulations   which   ultimately   led   to   his   car   swerving 

uncontrollably and turning upside down and resulting in the alleged injuries to 

the petitioners' mother. It is averred that the petition does not specify the place 

from  where   the   respondent  No.4   and   his  wife   were  coming   and   there   is  a 

distinct   possibility   of   the   respondent   No.4   being   under   the   intoxication   of 

drugs, liquor or the like owing to which he could not control his car and struck 

the   Maruti   car moving   ahead   of  it from  behind.  It   is  denied  that  either  the 

Maruti   car   or   the   persons   occupying   the   same   had   any   responsibility   for 

causing the accident. It is averred that it is admitted in the petition that while 

driving at high speed the respondent No.4 had intended to overtake the Maruti 

car ahead of it which swerved slightly to the left and abruptly applied brakes 

and as a consequence thereof, the Toyota car struck against the rear portion 

of the car. It is averred that if the Maruti car had been hit even after swerving to 

its left, that would mean that the Toyota car was being driven in a manner so 

as to overtake the Maruti car from its left side and had thus resulted in the 

accident   and   overtaking   from   the   left   side   is   against   the   traffic   rules   and
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 8 of 75
 regulations and for any resulting incident, it would be the respondent No.4 who 

would be responsible and not the driver of the Maruti car. It is stated that the 

Toyota car was a much bigger car and according to the provisions of the Act, it 

was   solely   responsible   for   the   alleged   accident   and   the   resultant   injuries 

suffered by anyone in the accident and the manner in which the accident had 

occurred even according to the own showing of the petitioners clearly absolves 

the smaller Maruti car and its driver and owner of any liability or responsibility 

arising out of such accident. It is averred that the petitioners have failed to 

explain the basis on which the amount of compensation has been claimed by 

them.
6.       Written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent No.3 taking the 

preliminary objections that the petitioners have not come with clean hands and 

have suppressed the material facts from the court. It is averred that no cause 

of   action   has   arisen   in   favour   of   the   petitioners   as   the   alleged   accident 

occurred due to fault on the part of the respondent No.4 who was driving the 

vehicle in which the deceased was aboard at the time of the accident. It is 

averred that the petition is bad for misjoinder of parties. The averments made 

in the claim petition were denied. It is averred that the respondent No.3 and 

the respondent No.2 are friends and on the day of the alleged accident, the 

respondent No.3 had borrowed the said vehicle from the respondent No.2. It is 

averred   that   the   alleged   accident   occurred   due   to   fault   on   part   of   the 

respondent   No.4.   It   is   averred   that   the   respondent   No.3   is   not   the   regular
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 9 of 75
 driver of the vehicle. It is averred that the amount of compensation is highly 

exaggerated   and   the   respondent   No.3   is   not   liable   for   the   same   as   the 

accident was caused due to the fault on the part of the respondent No.4. It is 

averred   that   at   the   time   of   the   alleged   accident,   the   car   driven   by   the 

respondent No.3 was ahead of the car being driven by the husband of the 

deceased. The respondent No.3 was driving the car at reasonable speed and 

in compliance of all the traffic rules. It is averred that the driver of the Toyota 

car was persistently blowing horns to overtake the respondent No.3. However 

as the way ahead of the car of the respondent No.3 was not clear, he did not 

give   side   to   the   Toyota   car.   It   is   averred   that   infuriated   by   the   same,   the 

respondent No.4 hit the car driven by the respondent No.3 from the back and 

as   the   Toyota   car   was   being   driven   at   a   very   high   speed   and   rashly   and 

negligently in defiance of all the traffic rules, it could not be controlled by the 

driver of the vehicle and it went upside down. It is denied that the accident was 

caused because of any negligence on the part of the respondent No.3. It is 

averred   that   the   accident   was   wholly   caused   due   to   the   rash   driving   and 

negligence on the part of the respondent No.4.
7.       Written   statement   was   filed   on   behalf   of   the   respondent   No.4   Rajan 

Bajaj to the petition  not disputing the contents of the same  and it was not 

disputed  that  the  respondent No.4  was the  owner of Toyota  Prado  bearing 

No.DL­5­CB ­3456 and also its driver on the date of accident. It is submitted 

that the petitioners are the sons of the deceased and the respondent No.4. It is 

stated that late Smt. Renu Bajaj was traveling in car bearing No.DL­5­CB­3456
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                  Page No. 10 of 75
 as   an   occupant   and   the   car   got   involved   in   the   accident   at   Delhi   Noida 

Expressway in front of Mayur School, on way from Noida to New Delhi. It is 

stated   that   the   place   of   accident   is   an   Expressway   and   the   vehicles   on 

Expressway go at high speed, the respondent No.4 too was driving the car at 

a speed of around 100 kmph. The allegations of rash and negligent driving on 

the   part   of   the   respondent   No.4   were   denied.   It   is   averred   that   the 

circumstances relating to the accident undisputedly establish that the accident 

was caused on account of absolute negligence on the part of the driver of the 

Maruti car and the stand of the respondent No.4 finds support from the fact 

that   the   police   authorities   after   thorough   investigation   of   the   case   had 

registered a case for causing the accident against the driver of the Maruti car.
It   is   averred   that   the   respondent   No.4   too   has   suffered   unbearable   loss, 

material as well as physical on account of the pre­mature death of Smt. Renu 

Bajaj.
8.       Written   statement   on   behalf   of   Oriental   Insurance   Company   Ltd 

respondent No.5 was filed taking the preliminary objections that the petition is 

bad for misjoinder of necessary and proper parties. It is stated that the driver, 

owner and insurer of DL­5CB­3456 are not the necessary and proper parties. 

It is averred that the respondent No.4 was not holding a valid driving license 

and   hence   the   terms   and   conditions   of   the   policy   of   insurance   had   been 

willfully violated by the insured and hence no liability could be imposed on the 

respondent No.5. It is averred that the petition has not been filed by a duly
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 11 of 75
 authorized person as the father and natural guardian of the petitioners was 

alive  and hence  the  petition  could not be  filed by the  guardian against the 

father of the petitioners who had been made a party as respondent/ owner / 

insured, even otherwise the husband of the deceased was a necessary party 

as a petitioner. The averments made in the claim petition were denied. It was 

denied that vehicle No.DL­5CB­3456 was responsible for the alleged accident 

as alleged or at all. It is averred that the police has also filed the charge sheet 

against the respondent No.3 and not against the respondent No.4. It is averred 

that the respondent No.5 had issued a policy bearing No.271601/2006/3186 for 

the period 12.10.2005 to 11.10.2006 insuring vehicle No.DL­5CB­3456 on the 

representation of Shri Rajan Bajaj to be the registered owner. It is averred that 

the   offending   vehicle   was   UP­16A­7841.   It   is   averred   that   the   amount   of 

compensation as claimed is highly exorbitant, excessive, arbitrary and without 

any basis. It is averred that there was no rash and negligent driving on behalf 

of  the   driver  and   the   vehicle   No.DL­5CB­3456  was  not  responsible  for   any 

alleged accident. It is averred that the respondent No.3 was arrested by the 

police   and   the   trial   was   pending   against   him.   It   is   averred   that   vehicle 

No.DL­5CB­3456 was not the offending vehicle as per the record of the police.
9.       Vide order dated 24.2.2007 of my learned predecessor the respondent 

No.4   was   proceeded   ex­parte.   The   application   filed   on   behalf   of   the 

respondent No.4 for setting aside the ex­parte order was allowed vide order 

dated 25.10.2007 of my learned predecessor. Defence of the respondent No.5
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 12 of 75
 was struck off vide order dated 25.10.2007. Interim award was passed in favour 

of   the   petitioners   vide   order   dated   25.10.2007   of   my   learned   predecessor. 

From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed vide order 

dated 25.10.2007 of my learned predecessor:
1.   Whether   deceased   suffered   fatal   injuries   in   an   accident 
           which took place on 4.2.2006 at about 4.00 A.M involving two 
           vehicles   Maruti   car   bearing   No.UP   16A   7841   driven   by 
           respondent No.3, owned by respondent No.1 and Toyota car 
           No.DL 5CB  3456  driven  and owned  by respondent No.4  and 
           insured with respondent No.5 due to composite negligence of 
           respondent No.3 and 4?  OPP.
2.   Whether   respondent   No.2   is   not   liable   to   pay   the 
           compensation on account of preliminary objections taken by 
           him in his Written Statement?  OPP
3. Whether petitioners are entitled to compensation? If so, to 
           what amount and against which of the respondents?
4.Relief.
PE   was   closed   on   7.9.2009.   An   application   was   filed   on   behalf   of   the 

petitioners under order XXXII rule 12 read with
Section 151
CPC to take on 

record the factum of minor petitioners having attained the age of majority and 

for directions to discharge the guardian and the next friend which was allowed 

vide order dated 19.1.2011 of my learned predecessor. An application under
Section 151
CPC and
Section 169
MV Act filed on behalf of the respondent
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 13 of 75
 No.5 for condoning the delay in filing the written statement was allowed vide 

order dated 21.12.2011 of my learned predecessor and the respondent No.5 

was allowed to enter the proceedings. An application filed under
Section 151
CPC filed on behalf of the respondent No.5 for cross­examining the petitioners' 

witness   and   respondents   No.1   to   3   and   4   was   allowed   vide   order   dated 

23.4.2013 of my learned predecessor as also an application under
Section 170
MV Act filed on behalf of the respondent No.5. An application under
Section 

65
Evidence Act filed on behalf of the respondent No.1 was allowed vide order 

dated   24.3.2014.   The   evidence   of   respondent   No.4   was   closed   vide   order 

dated   22.5.2014.   RE   was   closed   on   16.7.2014.   An   application   under   order 

XVIII rule 17
CPC
was filed on behalf of the respondent No.4 for being recalled 

for cross­examination but it was held that the respondent No.4 could not be 

allowed   to   be   recalled   for   further   cross­examination   vide   order   dated 

23.9.2014.
10.      On behalf of the petitioners Ms. Ritu  Arora appeared in the witness box 

as PW1 and led her evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex PW1/A reiterating 

the   averments   made   in   the   claim   petition.   She   deposed   that   she   is   the 

guardian and next friend as paternal aunt of the petitioners. She stated that 

the deceased was the authorized competent person in relation to manufacture 

of drugs by M/s Medisphere Ltd. She stated that the deceased was a very 

hard working and a self­made woman. She joined the company about 19 years 

prior and reached a level of distinction on account of her own efforts. She
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 14 of 75
 stated   that   the   deceased   besides   pursuing   her   career   as   director   of   two 

companies of repute was also looking after the petitioners as mother and her 

husband as wife. She stated that the IO after completion of investigation had 

filed   challan   against   the   respondent   No.3.   Marksheet   of   the   deceased   of 

University   of   Bombay   is   Ex.PW1/1,   Form   20B   (license   granted   by   the 

Licensing Authority) is Ex.PW1/2, pay slips for the month of January, 2006 of 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. and Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. are Ex.PW1/3 and 4, ITRs 

of the deceased for the assessment years 2004­2005, 2005­2006, 2006­2007 

are   Ex.PW1/5   to   7,   copies   of   election   card   and   PAN   card   of   Smt.   Shobhi 

Raizada are Mark P1 and P2, certificates of Ritik Bajaj of Sheffield Hallam 

University   are   Ex.PW1/8   (colly),   insurance   cover   note   and   terms   and 

conditions of policy in respect of the Toyota Prado car are Ex.PW1/9 (colly) 

and   copies   of   FIR   and   charge   sheet   are   Ex.PW1/10   and   11.  She   was   not 

cross­examined on behalf of the respondent No.4.
11.      The respondent No.1 appeared in the witness box as RW1 and led her 

evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex RW1/A . She deposed that she was 

the owner of Maruti Car No.UP­16A­7841 which was sold to Mr. Sanjay the 

respondent No.2, 4­5 years prior and the physical possession was also given 

to him. She stated that on the alleged date of the accident i.e. 4.2.2006 she 

was neither the owner nor in possession of the Maruti Car No.UP­16A­7841 

and was in no way concerned with the vehicle.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 15 of 75
12.        The respondent No.2 appeared in the witness box as R2W1 and led 

his evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex.R2W1/A stating that the averments 

made in the written statement were true. He stated that the petitioners were 

not entitled to the amount of compensation claimed against him since he did 

not   have   any   parting   events   leading   to   the   accident.   He   stated   that   the 

financial liability arising out of the alleged injuries sustained in the accident 

could either be that of the respondent No.4 or the insurer of the said vehicle 

but not his. He stated that he intended to bring out the glaring error on the part 

of the petitioners when they claimed in para 35 of the petition that they would 

find out the particulars about the owner and driver of the Maruti car and its 

insurance company yet they had impleaded him as one of the respondents 

which clearly showed that no financial liability could be attached against him. 

He stated that he was not the registered owner of the Martui Car against which 

the allegations about having been involved in the accident were made, thus 

rendering the entire claim petition as redundant against him. He stated that as 

such the petitioners were not entitled to the relief claimed. He was not cross­

examined on behalf of the respondents No.3 and 4.
13.      The respondent No.3 appeared in the witness box as R3W1 and led his 

evidence   by   way   of   affidavit   which   is   Ex.R3W1/A.   He   deposed   that   on 

4.2.2006   at  about  4  a.m  he   was  driving   his  car  in   a  normal   speed   and   in 

compliance of all the traffic rules, when he reached at Delhi­Noida express 

way in front of Mayur School, suddenly a Toyota Car which was driven by its
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 16 of 75
 driver in a very high speed, rashly, negligently and without obeying the rules of 

the traffic and blowing horn came from the back side and hit his Maruti car but 

the driver of the Toyota who was in hurry and driving his vehicle in very high 

speed and rashly could not control his vehicle which turned upside down. He 

stated that the accident took place due to the sole negligence on the part of 

the driver of the Toyota Car bearing No.DL­5CB­3456. He stated that a false 

case was registered against him by the police. He was not cross­examined on 

behalf of the respondent No.2.
14.       The respondent No.4 appeared in the witness box as R4W1 and led 

his evidence by way of affidavit which is Ex.R4. He deposed that on 4.2.2006 

at about 4 a.m he was driving Toyota car No.DL5CB 3456 with Mrs. Renu 

Bajaj,   his   wife   as   occupant   therein   and   was   proceeding   on   Noida­Delhi 

expressway in front of Mayur School on way from Noida to New Delhi. He 

stated that ahead of the car driven by him was a Maruti car bearing registration 

No.UP­16A­7841. He stated that he intended to overtake the Maruti Car and 

gave light indication to that effect. The driver of the Maruti car swerved the 

vehicle to his right. He stated that while he was attempting to overtake from 

the left, the Maruti car driver swerved his car to his right, as a consequence 

thereof, his car struck against the rear left side of the Maruti car and thereafter 

against the side railing of the Expressway and turned upside down. He stated 

that on account of the impact, both he and the occupant of the car suffered 

multiple   grievous   injuries.   He   stated   that   both   of   them   were   rushed   to
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                         Page No. 17 of 75
 Bhardwaj Hospital NH­1 Sector 29, Noida where his wife was declared brought 

dead, later, post mortem was performed on her body at AIIMS. He stated that 

he was married to Mrs. Renu Bajaj on 09.02.1983 and his wife was a young 

lady of 45 years of age with high Educational Qualification, sound health and 

physique and was working as Director in Private Ltd. companies of repute, 

drawing monthly salary of Rs.57,200/­  besides perks. He stated that his wife 

was   earning   a   salary,   having   bright   future   prospects.   Documents   of 

qualification of his wife are Ex.R/1 (colly). He stated that his wife was very hard 

working and a self­made woman. She joined the company about 19 years prior 

and reached a level of distinction on account of her own efforts. He stated that 

the   deceased   was   holding   the   position   as   Director   in   two   companies   viz. 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. and Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. bearing the same address 

201, 28­29 Link Road, Feroz Gandhi Marg, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi­24 and 

was   drawing   a   good   remuneration.     He   deposed   that     Mrs.   Renu   Bajaj, 

besides pursuing her career as director of two companies of repute was also 

looking   after   the   petitioners     as   mother   and   him   as   his   wife   and   she   was 

spending   a   major   portion   of   her   income   for   the   welfare,   upkeep   and 

maintenance  of the family. He deposed that he assumed the monetary value 

of the services rendered by her to them at a bare minimum of Rs.50,000/­ per 

month. He  stated that his wife  was having  very  good health  and  was  very 

active and  she was not addicted to any vice and would have lived for another 

45­50 years if not killed in the accident  in question as there was a history of 

longevity   in   the   family  of  the   deceased.     He   stated   that  his  pleasures  and
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 18 of 75
 comforts   of   life   had   been   completely   shattered.   He   had   also   lost   the   love, 

affection and care provided to them by the deceased wife and the death of 

Mrs. Renu Bajaj had thus, caused a great loss to him, because it was under
her guidance, support and help that the family was being run. He stated that 

his   vehicle   i.e.   Toyota   Prado   No.DL   5CB   3456   was   insured   with   Oriental 

Insurance Company Ltd. and documents in that respect are Ex.R/2. He stated 

that he was duly filing his returns every year and his Income Tax Return for the 

year   2007­2008   is   Ex.R/3.   He   was   not   cross­examined   on   behalf   of   the 

respondents No.1 and 2. He was partly cross­examined and his further cross­

examination was deferred but thereafter he did not appear on several dates 

and subsequently some documents were placed on record by the respondent 

No.4.
15­16.            On behalf of the respondent No.5 Oriental Insurance Company 

Ltd. Ms. Pallavee Thukral appeared in the witness box as R5W1 and led her 

evidence  by way of affidavit which is Ex.R5W1/A. She deposed that Oriental 

Insurance Company Ltd. had issued the policy bearing No.271601/2006/3186 

for the period 12.10.2005 to 11.10.2006 for vehicle bearing No.DL 5CB 3456 to 

the respondent No.4 and the computerized policy and its terms and conditions 

are   Ex.R5W1/A   collectively.   She   stated   that   the   liability   of   the   respondent 

insurance company was to indemnify the insured towards the third party. She 

stated that the deceased was the wife of the respondent No.4, deceased was 

not third  party  and   the   insurance   company  was  not  liable   to   indemnify  the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                              Page No. 19 of 75
 insured. She stated that the charge sheet was filed only against the driver of 

vehicle No.UP­16A­7841 respondent No.3/ Ram Kumar s/o Shri Babu Jatav. 

She relied upon the policy and the copy of the standard form of the private car 

policy   and   copy   of   Indian   Motor   Tariff   is   Ex.R5W1/A.   She   was   not   cross­

examined on behalf of the respondents No.1 and 2.
17.      I  have   heard  the  Learned   Counsel  for  the   petitioners  as well  as the 

Learned Counsels for the respondents and perused the record. The petitioners 

were also examined on 20.10.2014 in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble 

High Court on 11.1.2013 in MACA No.792/2006 titled Oriental Insurance Co.
Ltd.  v. Ranjit Pandey and Ors
.
18.      At the outset an objection was taken on behalf of the respondents No.1, 

2, 3 and 5 that PW1 was not appointed as legal guardian of the petitioners by 

any   court   and   she   could   not   have   represented   the   petitioners   when   their 

natural guardian, father was alive and in fact the petitioners were represented 

through her as the father of the petitioners was responsible for the accident 

and was in collusion with the petitioners in order to get compensation. During 

cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.1 PW1 stated 

that at that time the age of Ritik Bajaj was 19 years and Rahil Bajaj was about 

17 years. She stated that the petitioner No.1 Shri Ritik Bajaj was having sound 

health and he was not having any disablement and her reply was the same in 

respect of Rahil Bajaj also. She stated that Rahil had just appeared in the 12th
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 20 of 75
 Board Examination and Ritik was a student of College in USA. She stated that 

the petition had been filed by her as at the time of the accident both were 

minors. She admitted that she had not filed any petition till date regarding the 

factum of the getting of majority by the petitioner No.1 Ritik Bajaj. She admitted 

that the respondent No.4 Mr. Rajan is the father of both the petitioners. She 

admitted that the father of both the petitioners respondent No.4 Rajan Bajaj 

was having sound health and he could move anywhere even at the time of the 

accident as well as on that day. She admitted that he was doing his normal 

business and leading a normal life. PW1 admitted that she had no personal 

knowledge of the present case volunteered but the present petition had been 

filed by her being the legal guardian of the petitioners. She stated that she did 

not take   any  permission   from  the   court   to  become   a   legal   guardian   of  the 

petitioners as their father was still alive. She had not mentioned in her affidavit 

that one of the petitioners Ritik Bajaj had already got majority. She stated that 

she had taken her own decision to become a guardian of both the children 

with the consent of her brother Rajan Bajaj respondent No.4 and her old aged 

father. She stated that her old aged father still had sound health and mind. 

She   stated   that   Mr.     Rajan   Bajaj   handed   over   to   her   originals   of   all   the 

documents pertaining to the case. She stated that she was married and had 

two school going kids and her husband was a businessman. She stated that 

her brother Rajan Bajaj along with the two children who are the petitioners in 

the case were residing  separately from her at their own residence in GK Part 

2 which  was  situated  at a  distance  of two  kilometers from  her house. She
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 21 of 75
 stated that the respondent No.4 Rajan Bajaj obtained the certified copy of the 

criminal case record from the Noida Court on his own and not by her. She 

stated that except the present petition she was doing whatsoever would be 

done by their natural mother for them, even though both the petitioners were 

residing separately from her with their father in a separate house. She stated 

that she had done nothing regarding the admission of the petitioner No.1 for 

getting admission in college of USA. She stated that whatsoever was required 

the same had been done by his father Rajan Bajaj. She had not signed any 

application being the natural guardian for Ritik Bajaj for admission purpose nor 

any other application required for his visa. She stated that Ritik had gone to 

USA for study about one year prior. During the said period her brother Rajan 

Bajaj had not visited USA. She stated that the fee was paid by her brother 

Rajan Bajaj for the study of Ritik Bajaj who was studying in USA. She stated 

that she had not done any correspondence regarding the study of Ritik Bajaj. 

She denied the suggestion that she had filed the present petition in collusion 

with her brother Rajan Bajaj against the respondents No.1, 2, 3 and5. She 

denied   the   suggestion   that   she   was   not   the   natural   guardian   of   both   the 

petitioners. She admitted that she had not taken the permission of the court to 

become the natural guardian nor filed any document in that regard.
19.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

2   PW1   stated   that   she   is   the   aunt   (Bua­sister   of   the   father   of   children/ 

petitioners). She stated that she was doing garments business for the previous
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                              Page No. 22 of 75
 about   10   years   and   her   husband   was   doing   the   business   of   export   of 

handicraft items. She stated that the father of the children/ petitioners was also 

doing business of trading of medical equipments. She stated that the father of 

the children/ petitioners was earning well but she did not know the exact figure 

and he was an income tax payee. She stated that she had not filed the age 

proof document of both the children at the time of filing the petition or even at 

the time of recording of her statement. She stated that both the children were 

being looked after by her after the death of their mother as she used to go 

daily to their residence. She stated that before the death of the mother she 

used to visit their house twice or thrice a week. She stated that she had only 

one brother who is the father of the petitioners and she was having one more 

elder sister named Meenu Chawla w/o Shri Ajay Chawla r/o D­12 GK Enclave 

I, New Delhi. She stated that her father named Shri G.N. Bajaj was still alive 

and   was   aged   about   75   years.   She   stated   that   her   father   was   residing 

separately at Noida UP. During cross­examination by the learned counsel for 

the respondent No.3 PW1 denied the suggestion that the petition filed by her 

was bogus as she did not know the contents of it. She stated that the father of 

the petitioners was alive.
20.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

5   PW1   stated   that  she   had   not   applied   for   having   any   legal   guardianship 

certificate issued from the court. She stated that the father who is one of the 

respondents was living in E­372 Greater Kailash II at the time of the accident
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 23 of 75
 along with his children and presently, he was also residing at R­155 Greater 

Kailash I and the father was also residing presently with his children on the 

same address. On the next date she had not brought the originals and stated 

that there was change in the house of her brother due to which the documents 

could   not   be   traced.   She   admitted   that   all   the   originals   of   Ex.PW1/1   to 

Ex.PW1/7 were in the custody of her brother Rajan/ respondent No.4 and her 

brother Rajan was residing earlier at E372, Greater Kailash II and then he was 

residing   at   R­155   Greater   Kailash   I.   She   stated   that   the   petitioners   were 

residing at E­372 G.K II till end of 2012 and beginning of 2013 and then they 

were   residing   at   R­155   G.K.   I.   She   had   not   lodged   any   FIR   for   loss/ 

misplacement of the original documents Ex.PW1/1 to PW1/7 volunteered the 

documents had not been lost but had been misplaced. She stated that she 

had not applied for duplicate of the documents in the particular departments 

and she did not know whether the petitioners or the deceased had applied or 

not. She stated that Ritik Bajaj was helping in his father's business and Rahil 

Bajaj was studying in USA. She stated that his father was paying Rahil Bajaj's 

fees and other expenses from starting till then. She denied the suggestion that 

she was not the legal guardian or appointed guardian of the petitioners at the 

time of filing the present suit. She admitted that both the children have become 

major. She admitted that they had not filed any application as necessary party 

in the present suit, as major. She stated that she did not have any document to 

show that the petitioners were residing along with her at her address.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 24 of 75
21.      PW1 thus  stated that at that time (at the time of her examination) the 

age of Ritik Bajaj was 19 years and Rahil Bajaj was about 17 years. She stated 

that the petitioner No.1 Shri Ritik Bajaj was having sound health and he was 

not having any disablement and her reply was the same in respect of Rahil 

Bajaj also. She stated that the petition had been filed by her as at the time of 

the accident both were minors though she admitted that she had not filed any 

petition till date regarding the factum of the getting of majority by the petitioner 

No.1   Ritik   Bajaj.   She   also   admitted   that   the   father   of   both   the   petitioners 

respondent No.4 Rajan Bajaj was having sound health and he could move 

anywhere even at the time of the accident as well as on that day. It is pertinent 

that PW1 admitted that she had no personal knowledge of the present case. 

She stated that she did not take any permission from the court to become a 

legal guardian of the petitioners as their father was still alive. She also stated 

that   Mr.   Rajan   Bajaj   handed   over   to   her   originals   of   all   the   documents 

pertaining to the case and the respondent No.4 had obtained the certified copy 

of the criminal case record. She stated that her brother Rajan Bajaj along with 

the two children who are the petitioners in the case were residing  separately 

from her at their own residence in GK Part 2 which was situated at a distance 

of   two   kilometers   from   her   house.   She   stated   that   she   had   done   nothing 

regarding the admission of the petitioner No.1 for getting admission in college 

of USA  nor signed  any application.  She   stated  that both   the   children  were 

being looked after by her after the death of their mother as she used to go 

daily   to   their  residence.   She   admitted   that   all   the   originals   of  Ex.PW1/1   to
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 25 of 75
 Ex.PW1/7 were in the custody of her brother Rajan/ respondent No.4. She 

stated that Ritik Bajaj was helping in his father's business and Rahil Bajaj was 

studying in USA. She stated that she did not have any document to show that 

the petitioners were residing along with her at her address. As such it has 

come out during the cross­examination of PW1 that the petitioners were not 

residing with her and in fact were residing with their father who was hale and 

hearty. Further at the time of the evidence, one of the petitioners had already 

attained majority. It has also come on record that all the procedures regarding 

admission   of   the   petitioner   No.1   were   carried   out   by   his   father.   Even   as 

regards the present case PW1 had stated that she did not have any personal 

knowledge and all the documents in original were in possession of the father 

of the petitioners who is the respondent No.4 and he had obtained the record 

of the criminal court. Moreover PW1 had stated that she was looking after the 

children   but   the   fact   remains   that   the   father   of   the   children   who   was   their 

natural  guardian was alive and  the  petitioners were also residing  with their 

father and for all practical purposes were being looked after by their father. Yet 

the   petition  has  been  filed  through  PW1  without  seeking   permission  of  the 

court   for   the   same.   Even   R4W1   during   cross­examination   by   the   learned 

counsel for the respondent No.5 had stated that no guardian of the petitioners 

was appointed by order of any court. Thus it is clear that even no permission 

was   taken   from   the   court   by   PW1   to   pursue   the   matter   on   behalf   of   the 

petitioners. Be that as it may. The fact remains that both the petitioners have 

attained majority and not repudiated the proceedings on their behalf by PW1
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 26 of 75
 and subsequently an application was filed on their behalf to take on record the 

fact   of   their   having   become   major.   As   such   nothing   much   turns   on   this 

contention.
22.      My findings on the specific issues are as under:
Issue No. 1
23.      As the petition has been filed U/s 166
M.V Act
it was incumbent upon 

the petitioners to prove that the deceased sustained injuries in an accident 

caused due to the rash and negligent driving by the driver of the offending 

vehicle and in the instant case two vehicles were involved. To determine the 

negligence of the driver of the offending vehicle it has been held in
National 

Insurance Company Ltd. vs Pushpa Rana & Another
2009 Accident Claims 

Journal 287 as follows:
"The last contention of the appellant insurance company is that 
              the   respondents/claimants   should   have   proved   negligence   on 
              the part of the driver and in this regard the counsel has placed 
              reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in
Oriental 
              Insurance Company Ltd. V. Meena Variyal
(supra). On perusal 
              of the award of the Tribunal, it becomes clear that the wife of the 
              deceased had produced: (i) certified  copy of the criminal record 
              of   criminal   case   in   FIR   No.955   of   2004,   pertaining   to 
              involvement   of   offending     vehicle   (ii)   criminal   record   showing 
              completion of investigation of police and issue of charge sheet 
              under
sections 279
/
304A
, Indian Penal Code against the driver;
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 27 of 75
(iii)   certified   copy   of   FIR,   wherein   criminal   case   against   the 
              driver   was   lodged;   and   (iv)   recovery   memo   and   mechanical 
              inspection report of offending vehicle and vehicle of deceased.
These documents are sufficient proofs to reach the conclusion 
              that   the   driver   was   negligent.   Proceedings   under   the
Motor 
              Vehicle Act
are not akin to proceedings in a civil suit and hence 
              strict rules of evidence are not required to be followed in this 
              regard. Hence, this contention of the counsel for the appellant 
              also   falls   face   down.   There   is   ample   evidence   on   record   to 
              prove negligence on part of the driver."
It   is   established   law   that   in   a   claim   petition   under
Motor   Vehicle   Act
,   the 

standard of proof to establish rash and negligent driving by the driver of the 

offending vehicle is not at par with the criminal case where such rashness and 

negligence is required to be proved beyond all shadow of reasonable doubt.
In
Kaushnamma   Begum   and   others  v.  New   India   Assurance   Company 

Limited
, it was inter alia held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the issue of 

wrongful act or omission on the part of the driver of the motor vehicle involved 

in   the  accident  has  been  left  to  a  secondary  importance  and   mere   use   or 

involvement   of   motor   vehicle   in   causing   bodily   injury   or   death   to   a   human 

being   or   damage   to   property   would   make   the   petition   maintainable   under
Sections 166
and
140
of the Motor Vehicle Act.
24.      The   case   of  the   petitioners   is  that  on   4.2.2006   at  about  4   a.m  Mrs. 

Renu   Bajaj   (since   deceased)   as   occupant   of   Toyota   Car   No.DL5C­B­3456 

driven by Mr. Rajan Bajaj was proceeding on Delhi ­ Noida Expressway in front 

of Mayur School on way from Noida to New Delhi. It was averred that the car
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 28 of 75
 was being driven by its driver at a high speed rashly, negligently in disregard to 

the traffic regulations. It was averred that ahead of the car was a Maruti car 

bearing   registration   No.UP­16­A­7841   and   the   driver   of   the   Toyota   Car 

intended to overtake the Maruti Car ahead of it. It was averred that the Maruti 

car driver swerved the car slightly to the left and abruptly applied brakes, as a 

consequence   thereof,   the   Toyota   car   struck   against   the   rear  portion   of  the 

Maruti Car, became imbalanced and turned up­side down and the occupant of 

the car as well as the driver suffered multiple grievous injuries. It was averred 

that the deceased  due  to the  serious injuries was brought and  admitted  to 

Bhardwaj Hospital NH­1 Sector 29, Noida where she was declared brought 

dead at 4.15 a.m on 4.2.2006. It was averred that the accident was caused on 

account   of   composite   negligence   on   the   part   of   the   drivers   of   both   the 

vehicles. It  was stated  that  in  respect of the  accident FIR  No.29/2006  was 

registered at PS Sector 39, Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar. In paras 1 to 4 and 

12­13 of her affidavit Ex.PW1/A PW1 had reiterated the mode and manner of 

the accident as stated in the claim petition.
25.      The petitioners have placed on record the copy of the criminal record 

consisting   of   copy   of   charge   sheet   and   copy   of   FIR.   As   per   the   FIR   No.

29/2006 under
sections 279
/
338
/
304A
/
427
IPC, PS Sector 39, Noida the case 

was   registered   on   the   basis   of   complaint   of   SI   Anuj   Kumar   who   was   also 

stated to be an eye witness of the accident wherein he had stated about the 

manner of the accident. As per the charge sheet the respondent No.3 has
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                              Page No. 29 of 75
 been charge sheeted for the offence under
sections 279
/
338
/
304A
/
427
IPC 

and
Sections 177
/
184
MV Act.
26.      Written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent No.2 averring 

that the respondent No.2 did not have any hand in the manner in which the 

accident had resulted as was clear from the pleadings in the petition itself and 

the accident had solely and squarely been caused by the rash and negligent 

driving of the respondent No.4, father of the petitioners who had been driving 

the car in which the deceased was claimed to have been travelling. It was 

averred that it was the specific admission in the petition that his Toyota Car 

bearing No.DL­5C­3456 was being driven by its driver i.e. the respondent No.4 

on the Delhi Noida Expressway in front of Mayur  School on way from Noida to 

New Delhi at a high speed, rashly and negligently in disregard to the traffic 

regulations and  in  view of such clear and specific pleadings, there  was no 

question of any responsibility being attributed to the driver of the Maruti Car ­ a 

much smaller car ­ claimed to be driven by its driver specially when it was the 

car driven by the respondent No.4 in which the petitioners had been traveling 

along with their deceased mother which went out of control after hitting from 

behind the Maruti car moving ahead and driven by its driver which had led to 

the alleged accident. It was averred that the entire incident was based on the 

bare allegations of the petitioner's father who was driving his Toyota car in a 

most irresponsible, negligent and careless manner even though his wife and 

children were accompanying him. It was averred that the respondent No.2 had
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                 Page No. 30 of 75
 never  been   involved   in   the   accident  wherein   the   vehicle   number  had   been 

recorded merely on the basis of information provided by some mischievous 

element. It was averred that for any failure of the driver of the Toyota car to 

move in a safe speed limit and not in a careless manner, the respondent No.2 

could not be penalized. It was averred that the petition was silent about the 

purpose for which the deceased had been moving with the respondent No.4 at 

that unearthly hour and also about the physical condition of the respondent 

No.4, especially when it was the respondent No.4 who had lost control of his 

car after having driven the same in a high speed, rashly, negligently and in 

disregard   to   the   traffic   regulations   which   ultimately   led   to   his   car   swerving 

uncontrollably and turning upside down and resulting in the alleged injuries to 

the petitioners' mother. It was averred that the petition did not specify the place 

from where the respondent No.4 and his wife were coming and there was a 

distinct   possibility   of   the   respondent   No.4   being   under   the   intoxication   of 

drugs, liquor or the like owing to which he could not control his car and struck 

the Maruti car moving ahead of it from behind. It was denied that either the 

Maruti   car   or   the   persons   occupying   the   same   had   any   responsibility   for 

causing the accident. It was averred that it was admitted in the petition that 

while driving at high speed the respondent No.4 had intended to overtake the 

Maruti car ahead of it which swerved slightly to the left and abruptly applied 

brakes and as a consequence thereof, the Toyota car struck against the rear 

portion of the car. It was averred that if the Maruti car had been hit even after 

swerving to its left, that would mean that the Toyota car was being driven in a
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 31 of 75
 manner   so   as   to   overtake   the   Maruti   car   from   its   left   side   and   had   thus 

resulted in the accident and overtaking from the left side was against the traffic 

rules and regulations and for any resulting incident, it would be the respondent 

No.4   who   would   be   responsible   and   not   the   driver   of   the   Maruti   car.   The 

respondent No.2 had also appeared in the witness box as R2W1 though he 

did not depose anything specifically about the manner of the accident.
27.      Written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent No.3 averring 

that the alleged accident occurred due to fault on the part of the respondent 

No.4 who was driving the vehicle in which the deceased was aboard at the 

time   of   the   accident.   It   was   averred   that   the   respondent   No.3   and   the 

respondent   No.2   are   friends   and   on   the   day   of   the   alleged   accident,   the 

respondent No.3 had borrowed the said vehicle from the respondent No.2. It 

was averred that at the time of the alleged accident, the car driven by the 

respondent No.3 was ahead of the car being driven by the husband of the 

deceased. The respondent No.3 was driving the car at reasonable speed and 

in compliance of all the traffic rules. It was averred that the driver of the Toyota 

car was persistently blowing horns to overtake the respondent No.3. However 

as the way ahead of the car of the respondent No.3 was not clear, he did not 

give side to the Toyota car. It was averred that infuriated by the same, the 

respondent No.4 hit the car driven by the respondent No.3 from the back and 

as   the   Toyota   car   was   being   driven   at   a   very   high   speed   and   rashly   and 

negligently in defiance of all the traffic rules, it could not be controlled by the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 32 of 75
 driver of the vehicle and it went upside down. It was denied that the accident 

was caused because of any negligence on the part of the respondent No.3. It 

was averred that the accident was wholly caused due to the rash driving and 

negligence   on   the   part   of   the   respondent   No.4.   The   respondent   No.3   had 

appeared in the witness box as R3W1 reiterating the averments made in the 

written statement.
28.      Written   statement   was   filed   on   behalf   of   the   respondent   No.4   Rajan 

Bajaj to the petition  not disputing the contents of the same  and it was not 

disputed  that  the  respondent No.4  was the  owner of Toyota  Prado  bearing 

No.DL­5­CB ­3456 and also its driver on the date of the accident. It was stated 

that late Smt. Renu Bajaj was traveling in car bearing No.DL­5­CB­3456 as an 

occupant and the car got involved in the accident at Delhi Noida Expressway 

in front of Mayur School, on way from Noida to New Delhi. It was stated that 

the place of accident is an Expressway and the vehicles on Expressway go at 

high speed, the respondent No.4 too was driving the car at a speed of around 

100 kmph. The allegations of rash and negligent driving on the part of the 

respondent No.4 were denied. It was averred that the circumstances relating to 

the   accident   undisputedly   established   that   the   accident   was   caused   on 

account of absolute negligence on the part of the driver of the Maruti car and 

the stand of the respondent No.4 found support from the fact that the police 

authorities after thorough investigation of the case had registered a case for 

causing the accident against the driver of the Maruti car.  The respondent No.4 

appeared in the witness box as R4W1 and reiterated the averments made in
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 33 of 75
 the written statement.
29.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

1 PW1 stated that both the petitioners were not eye witness in the accident nor 

they were travelling in the car at the time of the accident. She stated that it was 

not in her knowledge whether her brother Rajan Bajaj received any notice or 

summon from the criminal court of Noida, UP or not. During cross­examination 

by the learned counsel for the respondent No.2 PW1 stated that she received 

the information regarding the accident of the mother of the children within half 

an hour of the accident. She stated that she did not visit the accident place. 

She had seen the dead body of the mother of the children at their residence 

first time after the accident. She stated that at the time of the accident the 

deceased and her brother were coming from Noida to their residence after 

attending   some   party  there. She   stated   that  the   deceased   and   her  brother 

were   the   members   of   one   Health   Club   and   the   deceased   was   having   life 

insurance policy. She stated that no FIR was registered against her brother for 

the present accident. During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the 

respondent No.3 PW1 stated that she was not eye witness to the accident. 

She denied the suggestion that the accident had taken place due to the sole 

negligence of her brother and not due to the negligence of the other vehicle's 

driver. During  cross­examination   by the  learned   counsel   for the  respondent 

No.5 PW1 stated that she was not the eye witness of the accident. She denied 

the suggestion that she had filed a wrong petition because Rajan Bajaj was
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                         Page No. 34 of 75
 one of the persons who was involved in the accident. Thus PW1 stated that 

both   the   petitioners   were   not   eye   witness   to   the   accident   nor   they   were 

travelling in the car at the time of the accident. PW1 stated that she received 

the information regarding the accident of the mother of the children within half 

an   hour   of   the   accident.   She   stated   that   at   the   time   of   the   accident   the 

deceased and her brother were coming from Noida to their residence after 

attending some party there. She also stated that no FIR was registered against 

her brother for the present accident. PW1 stated that she was not the eye 

witness to the accident. As such neither the petitioners nor PW1 was an eye 

witness to the accident. It would be argued on behalf of the respondents that 

the petitioners had not produced any eye witness in the witness box who could 

depose   about   the   manner   of   the   accident   and   as   such   they   had   failed   to 

establish the negligence of the offending vehicle. However there is not much 

dispute about the facts of the case and the manner in which the accident took 

place. There is no dispute that there were two vehicles involved in the accident 

i.e. Toyota Prado bearing No.DL­5CB­3456 being driven by the respondent No.

4 and Maruti car bearing No.UP­16A­7841 being driven by the respondent No.
3. The spot of accident is also not disputed. It is further not in dispute that the 

Maruti car was ahead of the Toyota Prado and as deposed by R4W1 himself 

the respondent No.4 intended to overtake the Maruti car and hit the Maruti car 

from behind. Further the Toyota Prado had overturned. The respondent No.4 

had even stated that he was driving at the speed of 100 km per hour it being 

an expressway.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 35 of 75
30.      During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners 

R3W1 stated that on 4.2.2006 he was driving Maruti car bearing No.UP 16A 

7841 and he was driving his car at the speed of 40 kmph. He stated that he 

was driving his car on the left lane of the road. He denied the suggestion that 

he was driving the Maruti car at a very high speed. He stated that he was not 

changing lanes while driving his Maruti car. He stated that the Prado vehicle 

had  hit on the middle back side of the  car. He  stated that there were four 

occupants in his car at the time of the accident including him. He stated that 

he was coming from Badarpur and was going to Bhangel (Noida). He stated 

that the Prado vehicle was trying to overtake him volunteered and was coming 

at a high speed. He denied the suggestion that while the Prado vehicle was 

trying to overtake him he abruptly changed the lane and came in front of the 

said   vehicle.   During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

respondent No.4 R3W1 stated that the Maruti vehicle which he was driving 

was mechanically fit. He stated that he was coming after attending marriage in 

Badarpur.   He   denied   the   suggestion   that   he   had   consumed   alcohol   in   the 

marriage.   He stated that all four occupants of the car had gone together to 

attend   the   marriage   and   thereafter   they   were   all   coming   together.   During 

cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent   No.5   R3W1 

admitted that criminal case was registered against him regarding the accident 

at PS Sector­39, Noida, District Gautam Budh Nagar. He stated that he had 

not   made   any   complaint   to   any   higher   police   official   or   any   higher 

administrative authority that the case at PS Sector 39, Noida, District Gautam
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                         Page No. 36 of 75
 Budh   Nagar   had   been   falsely   registered   against   him.   He   denied   the 

suggestion that the contents of his affidavit were false.
31.      R3W1 thus stated that he was driving his car at the speed of 40 kmph. 

He stated that he was driving his car on the left lane of the road. A suggestion 

was put to R3W1 that he was driving the Maruti car at a very high speed which 

he denied and in fact if the Maruti car was being driven at a very high speed 

the   Toyota   Prado   would   have   to   be   even   at   a   greater   speed   to   hit   it  from 

behind. He stated that he was not changing lanes while driving his Maruti car. 

He stated that the Prado vehicle had hit on the middle back side of the car. He 

stated that there were four occupants in his car at the time of the accident 

including   him   though   the   respondent   No.4   had   stated   about   6­7   persons 

coming out of the Maruti car but there is nothing to show the same. He stated 

that the Prado vehicle was trying to overtake him and he volunteered that it 

was   coming   at   a   high   speed   and   in   fact  the   respondent   No.4   himself   had 

stated that he intended to overtake the Maruti car. R3W1 stated that the Maruti 

vehicle which he was driving was mechanically fit. A suggestion was put to him 

that he had consumed alcohol in the marriage which he denied and there is 

even   nothing   to   show   the   same.   R3W1   admitted   that   criminal   case   was 

registered against him regarding the accident at PS Sector­39, Noida, District 

Gautam Budh Nagar and he had not made any complaint to any higher police 

official or any higher administrative authority that the case at PS Sector 39, 

Noida, District Gautam Budh Nagar had been falsely registered against him.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 37 of 75
 As such R3W1 had reiterated what was deposed by him though he had not 

made any complaint against his false implication in the case.
32.      During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners 

R4W1 stated that he had been driving the vehicle since the age of 22 years till 

date.   He   stated   that   he   knew   about   the   traffic   rules   and   regulations.   He 

admitted   that   the   Maruti   car   was   ahead   from   his   vehicle   and   prior   to   the 

accident he intended to overtake the Maruti car which was going in front of his 

vehicle. He stated that the accident took place early in the morning at about 

3.30 a.m. At that time he was driving Toyota Prado. He stated that when he 

was trying to overtake the vehicle he gave the signal to the Maruti car driver 

and after the accident he noticed that 6 to 7 persons got down from the Maruti 

car and came towards him volunteered the Maruti car was swirling so he tried 

to overtake from its left side. He stated that he did not give any signal prior to 

overtaking the Maruti Car. He stated that his right side bumper hit the rear 

bumper of the Maruti car towards its left side and due to the impact his car 

bumper fell on the road and his vehicle turned towards the railing and the left 

side   tyre   touched   with   the   patari   and   then   his   car   turned   side   as   he   lost 

balance of his car. He stated that the Maruti car driver did not give him any 

signal to take over volunteered as no back light of the Maruti car either blinked 

or was in working condition.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 38 of 75
33.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

3 R4W1 stated that at the time of the accident his wife was with him in the 

Prado car the number of which he did not remember then. He stated that the 

Maruti vehicle which was involved in the accident was in front of his vehicle 

and it was in front of his vehicle for about a kilometer of the distance travelled 

by him prior to the accident. He stated that he was maintaining a distance of 

2­5 meters from the Maruti car. He stated that his vehicle was badly mutilated 

in the accident and after the accident his vehicle over turned towards the right 

side volunteered his vehicle had touched the railing and the tyre burst and his 

wife was thrown out of the vehicle and thereafter the vehicle overturned on the 

road itself and after the accident his vehicle was lying about five metres from 

the Maruti car. He denied the suggestion that Shri Ram Kumar/ respondent 

No.3 took his wife to the hospital. He stated that at the time of the accident the 

speed of his vehicle was about 70­80 kmph. He stated that he was trying to 

overtake the Maruti vehicle and before overtaking the Maruti vehicle he had 

given dipper and he had not blown horn. He denied the suggestion that the 

accident took place due to his negligent driving  of his vehicle as he was giving 

horns constantly to the Maruti vehicle and in a hurry to overtake he struck 

against the Maruti Car and caused the accident.
34.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

5   R4W1   stated   that   no   criminal   case   had   been   registered   against   him 

regarding the accident. He stated that he had not been summoned by any
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                      Page No. 39 of 75
 court as an accused  regarding the accident. Thus R4W1  admitted that the 

Maruti car was ahead from his vehicle and prior to the accident he intended to 

overtake the Maruti car which was going in front of his vehicle. He stated that 

when he was trying to overtake the vehicle he gave the signal to the Maruti car 

driver and volunteered that the Maruti car was swirling so he tried to overtake 

from its left side. He however stated that he did not give any signal prior to 

overtaking the Maruti Car. He stated that his right side bumper hit the rear 

bumper of the Maruti car towards its left side and as such R4W1 had admitted 

about   his   car   hitting   the   Maruti   car   from   behind.   It   is   pertinent   that   R4W1 

himself stated that the Maruti car driver did not give him any signal to take over 

volunteered as no back light of the Maruti car either blinked or was in working 

condition. It is also significant that R4W1 stated that the Maruti vehicle was in 

front of his vehicle for about a kilometer of the distance travelled by him prior to 

the accident and as such it is not the case that he had not seen the car. He 

stated that he was maintaining a distance of 2­5 meters from the Maruti car 

but if he were maintaining a safe distance he would not have hit the Maruti car. 

He stated that at the time of the accident the speed of his vehicle was about 

70­80 kmph. He had denied the suggestion about negligence on his part. As 

such R4W1 had reiterated about trying to overtake the Maruti car and hitting it. 

He had stated about giving dipper to the Maruti car but no specific suggestion 

was put to the respondent No.3 in that regard.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 40 of 75
35.      It   is   pertinent   that   as   per   the   case   put   forth   by   the   petitioners   the 

accident had taken place due to the negligence of the respondents No.3 and 4 

and according to the respondent No.3 the accident had taken place due to the 

negligence of the respondent No.4 but the FIR was registered only against the 

respondent No.3 and R4W1 stated that no criminal case had been registered 

against him regarding the accident and he had not been summoned by any 

court as an accused regarding the accident. A perusal of the FIR shows that it 

was stated therein that the driver of the Prado tried to save the Maruti car but 

the driver of the Maruti car had negligently and all of a sudden braked the car 

due to which the Prado car coming from behind became 'disbalanced' and hit 

the Maruti and turned over. Even the respondent No.4 had contended that the 

Maruti car had swerved and the car of the respondent No.4 struck against the 

rear left side of the Maruti car. As such it is evident that both the driver of the 

Maruti car and the driver of the Toyota Prado had contributed to the happening 

of the accident in as much as the driver of the Maruti car had braked his car 

suddenly and swerved it due to which the Prado coming from behind it hit it 

while the Prado was being driven at high speed and the driver of the Prado 

was trying to overtake it from the wrong side and clearly did not maintain a 

safe distance from it and could not control his car in time and hit against the 

Maruti car and subsequently it overturned. No doubt the FIR was registered 

against only the respondent No.3 but it is evident that the accident had been 

caused due to the composite negligence of both the respondents No.3 and 4 

who were driving the Maruti car and the Toyota Prado respectively. The law is
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                   Page No. 41 of 75
 well settled that the claimants can chose the insurer and insured in respect of 

the vehicles as tort feasors to recover the compensation amount.
In
Om Wati 

& Ors. v. Mohd. Din & Ors.
2001 91 DLT 184 (decided by DB of Hon'ble High 

Court of Delhi) it was observed:
"Coming to the question of 'apportionment' it seems to us that 
                  First   Appellate   Court   was   in   error   in   holding   that   claimants 
                  would   have   to   forego   30%   share   of   their   awarded 
                  compensation   in   favour   of   the   joint   tort­feasors   of   the   truck 
                  present   before   the   Court   as   they   had   failed   to   implead   tort­
                  feasors   of   the   car   as   party­respondents   in   their   claim   suits. 
                  This is because the accident could not be wholly treated to be 
                  the result of contributory negligence. Even, if it was assumed 
                  that the drivers of the two vehicles contributed to the accident 
                  in some measure, the other two deceased who were travelling 
                  in   the   car   could   not   be   held   responsible   for   any   such 
                  negligence. Therefore, it was a case of composite negligence 
                  in   their   case.   The   principle   of   composite   negligence   is   that 
                  where more than one person are responsible for commission of 
                  the wrong, the person wronged has a choice of proceedings 
                  against all or any one or more. Any one of the wrong doer is 
                  liable for the whole damage if it is otherwise made out. In other 
                  words the liability of two sets of tort­feasors becomes both joint 
                  and several."
However   in   the   present   case   the   driver   and   owner   of   the   vehicle   bearing 

No.UP­16A­7841 and the driver cum owner and insurer of the vehicle bearing 

No.DL­5CB­3456 have all been joined as respondents.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 42 of 75
36.      Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
T.O. Anthony  v.  Karvarnan & 

Ors.
, (2008) 3 SCC 748, held:­ 

         "6. 'Composite negligence' refers to the negligence on the part of two or 
         more persons. Where a person is injured as a result of negligence on 
         the   part   of   two   or   more   wrongdoers,   it   is   said   that   the   person   was 
         injured on account of the composite negligence of those wrongdoers. In 
         such a case, each wrongdoer is jointly and severally liable to the injured 
         for   payment   of   the   entire   damages   and   the   injured   person   has   the 
         choice of proceeding against all or any of them. In such a case, the 
         injured need not establish the extent of responsibility of each wrongdoer 
         separately, nor is it necessary for the court to determine the extent of 
         liability   of   each   wrongdoer   separately.   On   the   other   hand   where   a 
         person suffers injury, partly due to the negligence on the part of another 
         person or persons, and partly as a result of his own negligence, then 
         the   negligence   of   the   part   of   the   injured   which   contributed   to   the 
         accident is referred to as his contributory negligence. Where the injured 
         is   guilty   of   some   negligence,   his   claim   for   damages   is   not   defeated 
         merely   by   reason   of   the   negligence   on   his   part   but   the   damages 
         recoverable   by   him   in   respect   of   the   injuries   stands   reduced   in 
         proportion to his contributory negligence."
Thus it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that each wrongdoer is jointly 

and severally liable to the injured for payment of the entire damages and the 

injured   person   has   the   choice   of   proceeding   against   all   or   any   of   them. 

However in the present case the petitioners have proceeded against all the 

parties as observed above.
37.      Coming to the facts of the present case the criminal record has been 

placed   on   record   which   shows   that   the   respondent   No.3   has   been   charge
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 43 of 75
 sheeted   for   the   offence   under
Sections   279
/
338
/
304A
/
427
IPC   though   as 

discussed   above   the   respondent   No.4   who   was   driving   the   Toyota   Prado 

bearing No.UP­16A­7841 was also negligent and contributed to the happening 

of   the   accident.   There   is   nothing   to   disprove   the   involvement   of   vehicles 

No.DL­5CB­3456 and UP­16A­7841. In view of the testimony of the witnesses 

and documents on record, the negligence of the respondents No.3 and 4 has 

been prima facie proved. Looking to the facts of the case the negligence of the 

respondent No.4 is apportioned as 60% and of the respondent No.3 as 40%.
38.      It was stated that due to the accident the occupant of the Toyota Prado 

car as well as the driver suffered multiple grievous injuries. It was averred that 

the   deceased   due   to   the   serious   injuries   was   brought   and   admitted   to 

Bhardwaj Hospital NH­1 Sector 29, Noida where she was declared brought 

dead   at   4.15   a.m  on   4.2.2006.   The   copy   of  the   post   mortem  report   of  the 

deceased is on record as per which the cause of death was coma due to head 

injury   caused   by  blunt   force   which   could   be   possible   in   the   circumstances 

which   were   mentioned.   Thus   it   stands   established   that   the   deceased   had 

sustained injuries in the alleged accident due to which she died. This issue is 

accordingly decided in favour of the petitioners and against the respondents.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 44 of 75
 Issue No.2
39.      Several objections were taken by the respondent No.2 in the written 

statement principally being that he was not responsible for the accident and 

it has already been held in issue No.1 that the accident had taken place due 

to the composite negligence of the respondents No.3 and 4 and it is not the 

case put forth by any party that the respondent No.2 was driving any vehicle. 

As such he cannot be held responsible for causing the accident. This issue 

is decided accordingly.
Issue No. 3
40.      Since   issue   No.1   has   been   decided   in   favour  of  the   petitioners   they 

would   be   entitled   to   compensation   as   per   the   provisions   of   the   Act.   The 

petitioners   are   the   sons   of   the   deceased.   The   respondent   No.4   was   also 

cross­examined   in   this   regard   though   it   may   be   mentioned   that   his   cross­

examination was not complete and during cross­examination by the learned 

counsel for the respondent No.5 R4W1 stated that he has two children i.e. 

both the petitioners. The date of birth of petitioner No.1 is 28.6.1989 and he 

had   finished   his   education   i.e.   Degree   in   Biotechnology   and   was   in   the 

process of setting up but he was unemployed at present. He stated that the 

date of birth of the petitioner No.2 is 12.4.1991 and he was doing course in 

Business Studies in America. He stated that his son i.e. petitioner No.1 had
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 45 of 75
 gone to USA for studies in September 2008. He stated that he (R4W1) had 

worked in America for sometime and he had insured himself and his children 

in America with Prudentials Insurance Company and the expenses of studies 

of his son were partly taken care of by him/ family and partly by Prudentials 

Insurance Company. He stated that M/s Birla Sunlife Insurance Company had 

paid   a   sum   of   Rs.Sixty   Five   Lacs   towards   insurance   of   his   wife   and   the 

education of his children was taken care of by the said amount. He could not 

tell the exact amount which was contributed by him and his family towards the 

studies of the petitioner No.1. He had the copies of the insurance policies of 

M/s Birla Sunlife Insurance Company & Prudentials Insurance Company. He 

stated   that   as   far   as   he   remembered   he   had   taken   insurance   policy   from 

Prudentials Insurance Company in the year 1995­1996 and insurance of his 

wife of M/s Birla Sunlife Insurance Company was taken about eight years prior 

to her death. He stated that the policy which was taken by his wife of M/s Birla 

Sunlife Insurance company was a Keyman's Policy. He stated that at the time 

of   the   accident   the   petitioners   were   residing   with   him.   He   stated   that   the 

petitioners were not residing with him for about one and half year to two years. 

He stated that at the time of the accident the petitioners were fully financially 

dependent on him and at present they were partly financially dependent on 

him. Thus R4W1 was cross­examined on what the petitioners were doing and 

how their studies were funded. He also stated that M/s Birla Sunlife Insurance 

Company had paid a sum of Rs.Sixty Five Lacs towards insurance of his wife 

and the education of his children was taken care of by the said amount though
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                              Page No. 46 of 75
 he could not tell the exact amount which was contributed by him and his family 

towards the studies of the petitioner No.1. He stated that at the time of the 

accident the petitioners were residing with him. He also stated that at the time 

of the accident the petitioners were fully financially dependent on him and at 

present they were partly financially dependent on him. It was sought to be 

contended   on   behalf   of   the   respondent   No.5   that   as   the   petitioners   were 

financially dependent on their father they could not be regarded as dependent 

on the deceased who was their mother. However it is the specific contention of 

the petitioners that the deceased was also working and was drawing salary 

and as such there is no merit in the contention that the petitioners who were 

minors would not be regarded as dependent on their mother. Though it has 

come out in the testimony of PW1 that the father of the petitioners was looking 

after their needs, however being minors at the time of the accident they would 

be regarded as dependent on the deceased.
41.      The petitioners have claimed loss of dependency on the basis that the 

deceased   was   a   young   lady   of   45   years   of   age   with   High   Educational 

Qualifications,   sound   health   and   physique   and   was   working   as   Director   in 

Private Limited Companies of repute, drawing monthly salary of Rs.57,200/­ 

besides   perks   and   she   was   earning   a   salary   and   having   bright   future 

prospects. It was averred that the deceased besides pursuing her career as a 

Director of two companies of repute was also looking after the petitioners as 

mother  and   her   husband   as   wife.   It   was  averred   that   she  was  spending   a
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 47 of 75
 major portion of her income for the welfare, upkeep and maintenance of the 

family   and   the   petitioners   assumed   the   monetary   value   of   the   services 

rendered by her to them at a bare minimum of Rs.50,000/­ per month. It was 

averred that the deceased was very hard­working and a self­made woman and 

she   joined   the   company   at   about   19   years   age   and   reached   a   level   of 

distinction on account of her own efforts. It was averred that the deceased was 

holding the position as Director in two companies viz. Medisphere Marketing 

Ltd. and Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. bearing the same address 201, 28­29 Link Road, 

Feroze Gandhi Marg, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi­24 and was drawing a good 

remuneration. It was averred that the deceased was having very good health 

and was very active and she was not addicted to any vice and would have 

lived for another 45­50 years if not killed in the accident. It was averred that 

there was a history of longevity in the family of the deceased and the father of 

the deceased namely Shiv Kumar Raizada aged about 75 years was still alive 

and healthy. The mother of the deceased namely, Shobhi Raizada aged about 

65 years was still alive and healthy. It was averred that the claimants' pleasure 

and comforts of life had been completely shattered and the deceased had left 

behind the two petitioners aged 17 years and aged 15 years who were fully 

dependent   upon   the   deceased   for   their   upbringing,   for   financial   and   moral 

support.   It   was   averred   that   the   petitioners   No.1   and   2   had   lost   the   love, 

affection and care provided to them by the deceased mother and the death of 

Mrs. Renu Bajaj had caused a great loss to the petitioners because it was 

under her guidance, support and help that the family was being run. It was
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 48 of 75
 averred that the death of the deceased had caused great mental shock to the 

whole of the family who had been deprived of the assistance that would have 

been made available to them by the deceased for at least 50 years if not killed 

in   the  accident.   It  was  averred  that  the   deceased   was spending  her  entire 

income on her family and the deceased had earnest desire to provide the best 

possible education, training and facilities to her children. It was averred that 

the whole of the family was secure and happy under the guidance and shelter 

of the deceased and had become emotionally and morally insecure after her 

death. It was averred that the petitioners are also entitled for compensation for 

shock, bodily pain and mental tension suffered by the deceased on account of 

the accident. PW1 in paras 5 to 11 of her affidavit Ex.PW1/A had deposed to 

that   effect.   She   stated   that   the   deceased   was   the   authorized   competent 

person in relation to manufacture of drugs by M/s Medisphere Ltd. She stated 

that   the   deceased   was   a   very  hard   working   and   a  self­made   woman.  She 

joined the company about 19 years prior and reached a level of distinction on 

account of her own efforts. She stated that the deceased besides pursuing her 

career   as   director   of   two   companies   of   repute   was   also   looking   after   the 

petitioners as mother and her husband as wife. Mark sheet of the deceased of 

University   of   Bombay   is   Ex.PW1/1,   Form   20B   (license   granted   by   the 

Licensing Authority) is Ex.PW1/2, pay slips for the month of January, 2006 of 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. and Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. are Ex.PW1/3 and 4, ITRs 

of the deceased for the assessment years 2004­2005, 2005­2006, 2006­2007 

are Ex.PW1/5 to 7 and copies of election card and PAN card of Smt. Shobhi
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 49 of 75
 Raizada are Mark P1 and P2. She was not cross­examined on behalf of the 

respondent No.4.
42.      The respondent No.4 who is the father of the petitioners had appeared 

in the witness box as R4W1 and also deposed to that effect. He stated that he 

was married to Mrs. Renu Bajaj on 09.02.1983 and his wife was a young lady 

of   45   years   of   age   with   high   Educational   Qualification,   sound   health   and 

physique and was working as Director in Private Ltd. companies of repute, 

drawing monthly salary of Rs.57,200/­  besides perks. He stated that his wife 

was   earning   a   salary,   having   bright   future   prospects.   Documents   of 

qualification of his wife are Ex.R/1 (colly). He stated that his wife was very hard 

working and a self­made woman. He stated that his pleasures and comforts of 

life had been completely shattered. He had also lost the love, affection and 

care provided to them by the deceased wife and the death of Mrs. Renu Bajaj 

had thus, caused a great loss to him, because it was under her guidance, 

support and help that the family was being run. He stated that he was duly 

filing his returns every year and his Income Tax Return for the year 2007­2008 

is Ex.R/3. He was not cross­examined on behalf of the respondents No.1 and
2.
43.      PW1 was not specifically cross­examined regarding the income of the 

deceased.   During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

respondent   No.5   PW1   stated   that   Mr.   Rajan   Bajaj   who   is   one   of   the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 50 of 75
 respondents was one of the Directors of Medisphere Marketing Ltd. She did 

not know who were the other Directors of Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd. She did 

not   know   how   much   shares   the   deceased   was   holding   in   Medishpere 

Marketing Ltd. She did not know whether Medisphere Marketing Ltd. was still 

running or not. She did not know the status of the business of the deceased 

whether it was still continuing or had been closed. Thus PW1 stated that the 

respondent No.4  was one of the  Directors of Medisphere  Marketing Ltd. in 

which the deceased was also stated to be a Director. She did not know how 

much   shares   the   deceased   was   holding   in   Medishpere   Marketing   Ltd.   and 

whether   Medisphere   Marketing   Ltd.   was  still   running   or   not   or   whether   the 

business of the deceased was still continuing or had been closed.
44.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

5 R4W1 stated that at the time of the accident he was filing annual returns of 

about Rs.16 lacs to Rs.18 lacs per annum. He stated that at the time of the 

accident he was working as Director in M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. from 

where   he   was   getting   remuneration   and   apart   from   that   he   was   Honorary 

Director   of   other   company   but   he   could   not   tell   the   name   of   the   said 

companies as he was on the Board of many companies. He stated that he, his 

wife   and   his   father   in   law   were   the   principal   directors   of   M/s   Medisphere 

Marketing Ltd. at the time of the accident. He stated that both the petitioners 

were also the directors apart from him of M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. He 

could not tell if the shares of his wife in M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. were
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                             Page No. 51 of 75
 taken over by his both sons or not. He stated both the petitioners had not 

invested any amount in M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. He stated that there 

was   a   provision   for   payment   of   remuneration   to   all   the   directors   in   M/s 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. however the company was in a financial mess and 

no amount was being paid to the directors. He had not brought any balance 

sheet of M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. He denied the suggestion that M/s 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. was not in a financial mess and was deriving profits 

and the petitioners were regularly getting income from the said company. Thus 

R4W1 stated that at the time of the accident he was working as Director in M/s 

Medisphere Marketing Ltd. and even the deceased was stated to be a Director 

in the said company. He stated that both the petitioners were also the directors 

apart from him of M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. He was asked if the shares 

of his wife in M/s Medisphere Marketing Ltd. were taken over by his both sons 

or not but he could not tell the same. He stated that the company was in a 

financial mess and no amount was being paid to the directors.
45.      R4W1   was   also   cross­examined   regarding   the   other   company   and 

during   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent   No.5 

R4W1 stated that his wife and Mr. Vivek Dean were the Principal Directors of 

M/s Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd. He stated that after the death of his wife, Mr. 

Vivek Dean resigned from M/s Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd. and R4W1 took 

over the company and the present status of the said company was zero. He 

stated that his chartered accountant might have informed the ROC regarding
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 52 of 75
 his taking over and the present status of M/s Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd. He 

denied   the   suggestion   that   M/s   Medidyne   Medicals   Pvt.   Ltd   was   still 

functioning and was having income and he was getting income from the said 

company. He stated that he had not invested any amount in M/s Medidyne 

Medicals Pvt. Ltd. He denied the suggestion that his wife was not deriving 

monthly   salary   from   all   the   companies   as   mentioned   in   para   No.4   of   his 

affidavit and the income of his wife as mentioned from various companies was 

merely shown in order to save taxes. Thus R4W1 stated that after the death of 

his   wife   R4W1   took   over   the   company   and   the   present   status   of   the   said 

company was zero. A suggestion was put to him that his wife was not deriving 

monthly   salary   from   all   the   companies   as   mentioned   in   para   No.4   of   his 

affidavit and the income of his wife as mentioned from various companies was 

merely shown in order to save taxes which he denied. He had also denied the 

suggestions  to  the   effect  that  M/s  Medisphere   Marketing   Ltd.  was not  in   a 

financial mess or that M/s Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd was still functioning and 

was   having   income.   In   fact   it   was   sought   to   be   contended   by   the   learned 

counsel   for   the   respondent   No.5   that   the   shares   of   the   companies   which 

belonged to the deceased had gone to the petitioners and the business still 

existed and as such the income of the deceased should be taken on a lower 

scale as the petitioners were still getting income from the business. However 

apart from the contention of the respondent No.4 that the companies were in a 

financial   mess,  it  is  pertinent  that  the  income   derived  from  the   shares  etc. 

cannot   be   deducted   from   the   compensation   payable   under   the
MV   Act
.
In
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                             Page No. 53 of 75
Vimal Kanwar & Ors.  v.  Kishore Dan & Ors.  Civil Appeal No.5513
of 2012 

decided on 3.5.2013: II (2013) ACC 752 (SC) the Hon'ble Supreme Court had 

held that PF, pension, insurance and similarly any cash, bank balance, shares, 

fixed deposits etc. are all a pecuniary advantage receivable by the heirs on 

account   of   one's   death   but   all   these   have   no   correlation   with   the   amount 

receivable under a statute occasioned only on account of accidental death and 

such amount will not come within the periphery of
Motor Vehicles Act
towards 

the pecuniary advantage liable for deduction. As such the shares etc would be 

construed as a pecuniary advantage receivable by the petitioners on account 

of   the   death   of   their   mother   but   they   have   no   correlation   with   the   amount 

receivable under
MV Act
and the said amount is not liable for deduction. The 

learned counsel for the respondent No.5 had also relied on the judgment of 

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in  Rani Gupta and Others  v.  M/s United India 

Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   and   Others  2009   (2)   TAC   745   (SC).
However   the 

question of the multiplier to be applied has been settled by the judgment of the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Sarla Verma v. Delhi Transport Corporation
2009 

ACJ   1298   (SC)   and   in   several   subsequent   judgments   the   importance   of 

bringing about standardization has been emphasized and it has been held that 

the multipliers as
laid down in
Sarla Verma should apply. Thus merely on the 

contention that the business remained in the family the multiplier to be applied 

cannot be reduced.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 54 of 75
46.      The petitioners have placed on record pay slips of the deceased for the 

month of January, 2006 of Medisphere Marketing Ltd. and Medidyne Pvt. Ltd. 

which   are   Ex.PW1/3   and   4   and   ITRs  of  the   deceased   for   the   assessment 

years   2004­2005,   2005­2006,   2006­2007   which   are   Ex.PW1/5   to   7.   The 

respondent No.4 had also placed on record the ITRs of the deceased and 

during   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent   No.5 

R4W1 stated that he had not brought the original income tax returns of his 

wife. He stated that the ITR Ex.R4W1/R1 was filed after the death of his wife 

and the same was signed by him. It was argued by the learned counsel for the 

respondent No.5 that the ITR filed after the death of a person could not be 

considered and the learned counsel for the respondent No.5 has relied upon 

the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
V. Subbulakshmi and others 

v. S. Lakshmi and another
2008 ACJ 936 wherein it was held that the income 

tax returns filed after the death were rightly not relied upon.
The issue came 

up before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and in a recent judgment in
Geeta & 

Ors. v. Dinesh Chander & Ors. MAC
. APP.23/2013 decided on 13th January, 

2015 it was held:
10.
In
Oriental   Insurance   Company   Limited   v.   Kanika   Arora   &  
                  Ors.,   MAC   APP.141/2012
,   decided   on   27.08.2012,   this   Court 
                  referred   to   the   judgment   of   the   Supreme   Court   in
V.  
                  Subbulakshmi & Ors. v. S. Lakshmi & Anr.
,(supra), and held that 
                  it was not laid down as a proposition of law that the ITRs filed 
                  after   the   death   of   the   deceased   cannot   be   taken   into 
                  consideration at all.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 55 of 75
11. In the instant case, the deceased filed ITRs for a period of 
                  about five years before his death and his income was gradually 
                  increasing. In the Assessment Year 2007­2008, he returned the 
                  income of Rs.1,51,250/­. In the Assessment Year 2009­2010, he 
                  returned   the   income   of   Rs.1,80,370/­   and   for   the   Assessment 
                  Year  2010­2011,  he   returned   the   income   of  Rs.2,20,950/­.  The 
                  last ITR for the relevant period was filed on 29.07.2010 on behalf 
                  of the deceased by his legal representatives.
12. I do not find any reason to suspect or doubt the ITRs as the 
                  income   from   the   Assessment   Year   2005­2006   was   gradually 
                  increasing."
Thus it was held that it was not laid down as a proposition of law that the ITRs 

filed after the death of the deceased cannot be taken into consideration at all.
47.      The   salary   certificate   issued   by   Medisphere   Marketing   Ltd.   for   the 

month   of   January,   2006   which   is   Ex.PW1/3   shows   the   total   salary   of   the 

deceased as Rs.25,200/­ but it also mentions that a sum of Rs.6,000/­ was 

deducted as TDS. Ex.PW1/4 is the pay slip for the month of January, 2006 

issued by Medidyne Medicals Pvt. Ltd. which shows the total salary as Rs.

27,500/­. However it also shows conveyance allowance of Rs.800/­ and others 

as   Rs.2,060/­   which   cannot   be   included   for   calculating   the   income   for 

computation of loss of income. It also shows that a sum of Rs.6,000/­ was 

deducted   as   TDS.   The   ITR   of   the   deceased   for   the   assessment   year 

2004­2005 is on record which shows the income from salary as Rs.4,73,800/­. 

Income from property was shown as Rs.1,01,580/­ and the total tax payable 

was   Rs.1,45,160/­.   The   ITR   for   the   assessment   year   2005­2006   shows   the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 56 of 75
 income from salary as Rs.5,10,940/­ and income from property as Rs.98,708/­

and   total   tax   payable   was   Rs.1,46,331/­.   The   ITR   for   the   assessment   year 

2006­2007 was filed subsequent to the death of the deceased and the same 

shows the income from salary as Rs.4,52,932/­ and there was no income from 

property   and   the   tax   payable   was   Rs.54,394/­.   There   is   no   reason   to 

disbelieve the said return and in fact there is not much deviation in the amount 

from the other documents on record. Thus if the last ITR  in respect of the 

deceased  is considered, after deducting the  income tax, the  income of the 

deceased   would   come   to   Rs.3,98,538/­.   Considering   the   facts   and 

circumstances,   the   income   of   the   deceased   for   the   computation   of   loss   of 

dependency is taken as Rs.4,00,000/­ p.a.
48.              It is the case of the petitioners that the deceased was aged about 

45 years and it was so stated in the claim petition. The ITRs show the date of 

birth of the deceased as 28.9.1960. Thus the deceased would have been more 

than   45   years   old   on   the   date   of   the   accident   i.e.   4.2.2006.  As   per   the 

judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Sarla Verma and others v. Delhi 

Transport Corporation and others
2009 ACJ 1298 (SC) case the multiplier 

of 14 applies for calculating the loss of income where the age of the deceased 

is   41   to   45   years   and   the   multiplier   of   13   applies   where   the   age   of   the 

deceased is 46 to 50 years. However as the deceased was still not 46 years 

old the multiplier of 14 would be applicable in the instant case.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                 Page No. 57 of 75
49.      As observed above the dependents on the deceased were her sons. As 

per the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Sarla Verma
's case as the 

number of dependents was 2 there would be 1/3rd deduction towards personal 

and   living   expenses   of   the   deceased.
As   regards   the   future   prospects  the 

Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Reshma Kumari & Ors. v. Madan Mohan & Anr.
, 

(2013) 9 SCC 65  while approving the ratio with regard to future prospects in
Sarla Verma (Smt.) & Ors.
(supra) held as under:­


                            "38.
With   regard   to   the   addition   to   income   for   future  
                            prospects, in Sarla Verma [Sarla Verma v. DTC, (2009) 6  
                            SCC 121 : (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 770 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri)  
                            1002],   this   Court   has   noted   the   earlier   decisions   in
Susamma Thomas [Kerala SRTC v. Susamma Thomas
,  
                            (1994)   2   SCC   176   :   1994
SCC   (Cri)   335]   ,   Sarla  
                            Dixit[(1996)   3   SCC   179]   and   Abati   Bezbaruah   [Abati  
                            Bezbaruah v. Geological Survey of India
, (2003) 3 SCC  
                            148 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 746] and in para 24 of the Report  
                            held as under: (
Sarla Verma
case [Sarla Verma v. DTC,  
                            (2009) 6 SCC 121 : (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 770 : (2009) 2  
                            SCC (Cri) 1002], SCC p. 134)

                            "24. ... In view of the imponderables and uncertainties, we  
                            are in favour of adopting as a rule of thumb, an addition of  
                            50% of actual salary to the actual salary income of the  
                            deceased towards future prospects, where the deceased  
                            had a permanent job and was below 40 years. (Where the  
                            annual income is in the taxable range, the words "actual  
                            salary‟  should be read as actual salary less tax‟). The  
                            addition should be only 30% if the age of the deceased  
                            was 40 to 50 years. There should be no addition, where  
                            the age of the deceased is more than 50 years.
Though
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 58 of 75
                             the   evidence   may   indicate   a   different   percentage   of  
                            increase,   it   is   necessary   to   standardise   the   addition   to  
                            avoid   different   yardsticks   being   applied   or   different  
                            methods   of   calculation   being   adopted.   Where   the  
                            deceased   was   self­   employed   or   was   on   a   fixed   salary  
                            (without provision for annual increments, etc.), the courts  
                            will   usually   take   only   the   actual   income   at   the   time   of  
                            death. A departure therefrom should be made only in rare  
                            and exceptional cases involving special circumstances."
16.The   standardization   of   addition   to   income   for   future  
                            prospects  shall   help   in   achieving   certainty   in   arriving   at  
                            appropriate   compensation.   We  approve  the   method   that  
                            an addition of 50% of actual salary be made to the actual  
                            salary income of the deceased towards future prospects  
                            where the deceased had a permanent job and was below  
                            40 years and the addition should be only 30% if the age of  
                            the deceased was 40 to 50 years and no addition should  
                            be made where the age of the deceased is more than 50  
                            years. Where the annual income is in the taxable range,  
                            the actual salary shall mean actual salary less tax. In the  
                            cases where the deceased was self­employed or was on a  
                            fixed salary without provision for annual increments, the  
                            actual income at the time of death without any addition to  
                            income   for   future   prospects   will   be   appropriate.   A  
                            departure from the above principle can only be justified in  
                            extraordinary circumstances and very exceptional cases."


In   the   instant   case   the   deceased   was   working   as   a   Director   with   two 

companies and PW1 had stated about the future prospects of the deceased. 

As such the petitioners would be entitled to addition of 30% of the income 

towards future prospects as the deceased was more than 40 years old.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                   Page No. 59 of 75
 Accordingly   the   loss   of   dependency   as   per   the   annual   income   i.e.   Rs.

4,00,000/­ is calculated as under :
Rs.4,00,000/­ + Rs.1,20,000/­ (30% future prospects) = Rs.5,20,000/­ - Rs.

1,73,333   approximately   (i.e.   1/3rd   towards   personal   expenses)   =   Rs.

3,46,667/­ X 14 (multiplier) = Rs.48,53,338/­ rounded off to Rs.48,53,000/­.
50.      The petitioners are also entitled to compensation for loss of love and 

affection, loss of estate and funeral expenses. However no amount is being 

awarded   towards  loss   of   consortium   in   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the 

case   wherein  the  husband   of the  deceased  is respondent  No.4   and  it  has 

been held that he had contributed to the happening of the accident.
The total compensation is determined as under:
Loss of dependency                :   Rs.48,53,000/­
                  Love and affection                :   Rs.1,00,000/­
                  Loss of Estate                    :   Rs.10,000/­
                  Funeral expenses                  :   Rs.10,000/­

                                       Total        :   Rs.49,73,000/­
Thus, the total compensation would amount to Rs.49,73,000/­.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 60 of 75
 RELIEF
51.      The  petitioners are  awarded  a  sum of Rs.49,73,000/­  (Rs.Forty  Nine 

Lacs   Seventy   Three   Thousand   only)  with   interest   at   the   rate   of   7.5%   per 

annum from the date of filing the claim petition till its realization, including, 

interim award, if any already passed in favour of the petitioners and against the 

respondents. The petitioners Ritik and Rahil would be entitled to 50% share 

each   in   the   awarded   amount.  The   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners   has 

relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Govind Yadav  v. 

New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
2012 ACJ 28 where it was observed that the 

insurance   companies   with   whom   the   vehicles   involved   in   the   accident   are 

insured usually have battery of lawyers on their panel and they contest the 

claim   petitions   by  raising   all   possible   technical   objections   for   ensuring   that 

their clients are either completely absolved or their liabilities minimized and 

this results in prolonging the proceedings before the Tribunal. It is true that in 

the   instant case  the  accident had  taken   place   in   2006  and  even  the   claim 

petition   was   filed   in   2006   when   the   petitioners   were   still   minors   and   the 

proceedings have continued for nearly 9 years owing to various reasons and 

the petitioners have also become major and have even done their graduation 

but it cannot be said that the delays were entirely on account of the insurance 

company.
52.      For safeguarding the compensation amount from being frittered away 

by the claimants, directions have been given by Hon'ble Supreme Court for
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                             Page No. 61 of 75
 preserving   the   award   amount   in   the   case   of
Jai   Prakash  Vs.  National 

Insurance  Co.  Ltd.  and Others
(2010) 2  Supreme  Court Cases 607. In 

view of the directions contained in the above judgment the award amount is 

to be disbursed as follows:
a) 20% of the share of the petitioners be released to them by transferring it 

into their savings account and remaining amount out of their share be kept in 

FDRs in UCO Bank, Patiala House Court, New Delhi in the following manner:
1.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of one year.
2.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of two years.
3.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of three years.
4.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of four years.
5.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of five years.
6.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of six years.
7.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of seven years.
8.       Fixed deposit in respect of 10% for a period of eight years.
b) The respondents No.2, 3 and 5 are directed to deposit the amount of their 

share directly by way of crossed cheques in terms of the above order in UCO 

Bank,   Patiala   House   Court,   New   Delhi   in   the   name   of   UCO   Bank,   Patiala 

House Court, New Delhi A/c Ritik Bajaj and Rahil Bajaj within 30 days of the 

passing of the award.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 62 of 75
c) Cheques be deposited within thirty days herefrom under intimation to the 

petitioners. In case of default, the respondents No.2, 3 and 5 shall be liable to 

pay further interest @ 12% per annum for the period of delay.
d) On the deposit of the award amount, the Branch Manager of UCO Bank, 

Patiala House Court, New Delhi is directed to prepare Fixed Deposit Receipts 

as ordered above and the balance amount be released.
e) The interest on the fixed deposits shall be paid monthly by automatic credit 

of interest in the saving accounts of the petitioners.
f)     The   withdrawal   from   the   aforesaid   account   shall   be   permitted   to   the 

petitioners after due verification and the bank shall issue photo identity cards 

to the petitioners to facilitate their identity.
g) No cheque book shall be issued to the petitioners without the permission of 

the court.
h) The original fixed deposit receipts shall be retained by the bank in safe 

custody.  However,  the  original  pass books shall  be  given to the petitioners 

along   with   the   photocopy   of   the   fixed   deposit   receipts.   Upon   the   expiry   of 

period of FDR the bank shall automatically credit the maturity amount in the 

saving account of the beneficiary.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                              Page No. 63 of 75
i) The original fixed deposit receipts shall be handed over to the petitioners on 

the expiry of the period of the fixed deposit receipts.
j) No loan, advance, or withdrawal shall be allowed on the said FDRs without 

the permission of the court.
k) On the request of the petitioners, the bank shall transfer the saving account 

to any other branch/bank, according to the convenience of the petitioners.
l) The petitioners shall furnish all the relevant documents for opening of the 

saving   bank   account   and   Fixed   Deposit   to   Senior   Manager   of   UCO   Bank, 

Patiala House Court, New Delhi.
53.      The   petitioners   shall   file   two   sets   of   photographs   along   with   their 

specimen signatures, out of which one set to be sent to the Nodal Officer, 

UCO Bank, Patiala House Court, New Delhi along with copy of the award by 

Nazir and the second set be retained to the court for further reference. The 

photographs be stamped and sent to the bank. The petitioners shall also file 

the proof of residence and furnish the details of the bank account with the 

Nazir within a week. The petitioners shall file their complete address as well as 

address of their counsel for sending the notice of deposit of the award amount.
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                            Page No. 64 of 75
 APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY:
54.      The learned counsel for the petitioners had argued that it being a case 

of composite negligence the petitioners were at liberty to recover the amount 

of the award from any of the respondents. The learned counsel has placed 

reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Rajasthan in
Nani and 

others v. Soma Lal and others
2007 ACJ 1163 where it was observed that in 

case   of   composite   negligence,   the   claimants   are   entitled   to   recover   full 

compensation   from   any   of   the   joint   tort   feasors.   The   law   on   composite 

negligence   is   well   settled.   However   under
Section   168
of   the   MV   Act   the 

Tribunal has to specify the amount payable by each of the parties.
55.      The   respondent  No.1   is  the   alleged   owner  of  the   Maruti   car  bearing 

No.UP­16A­7841, the respondent No.2 is stated to be the present owner of the 

Maruti car and the respondent No.3 is the driver of the Maruti car. It is the case 

of the respondent No.1 that she had sold the Maruti car to the respondent No.2 

whereas the same is denied by the respondent No.2 and it is stated by him 

that the car came to him for only one day. The respondent No.3 has contended 

that he had taken the vehicle only that day. As regards the respondent No.3, it 

is not in dispute that he was driving the Maruti car at the time of the accident. 

During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent   No.1 

R3W1 stated that the Maruti car which he was driving belonged to Shri Sanjay 

Kumar and he (R3W1) was working as driver with him and he (R3W1) had
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 65 of 75
 taken   vehicle   from   him   only   for   that   day.   During   cross­examination   by   the 

learned counsel for the respondent No.4 R3W1 stated that he had gone to 

Shri Sanjay Kumar only for one day and Shri Sanjay Kumar had given him Rs.

100/­ for one day. Thus R3W1 stated that the Maruti car which he was driving 

belonged to Shri Sanjay Kumar and he (R3W1) was working as driver with him 

and he (R3W1) had taken vehicle from him only for that day. He stated that he 

had gone to Shri Sanjay Kumar only for one day and Shri Sanjay Kumar had 

given him Rs.100/­ for one day. However it is not the case of the respondent 

No.3 that at the time of the accident he had taken the car in his capacity as the 

driver of the respondent No.2. In fact in the written statement the respondent 

No.3 had averred that he and the respondent No.2 are friends and on the day 

of the alleged accident he had borrowed the said vehicle from the respondent 

No.2.   Even   the   respondent   No.2   had   stated   to   that   effect.   As   such   the 

respondent No.3 would be liable to pay the compensation as he was not an 

employee of the respondent No.2 but had borrowed the car and was driving 

the same at the time of the accident.
56.      In support of her contention, the respondent No.1 had appeared in the 

witness   box   as   RW1   and   deposed   that   she   was   the   owner   of   Maruti   Car 

No.UP­16A­7841 which was sold to Mr. Sanjay the respondent No.2, 4­5 years 

prior and the physical possession was also given to him. She stated that on 

the alleged date of the accident i.e. 4.2.2006 she was neither the owner nor in 

possession of the Maruti Car No.UP­16A­7841 and was in no way concerned
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 66 of 75
 with   the   vehicle.   During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

petitioners  RW1 admitted  that she  had  not informed  the  transport authority 

about the sale of the vehicle to Sanjay Kumar/respondent No.2 as per law. The 

respondent No.2 appeared in the witness box as R2W1 and stated that the 

financial liability arising out of the alleged injuries sustained in the accident 

could either be that of the respondent No.4 or the insurer of the said vehicle 

but not his. He stated that he was not the registered owner of the Martui Car 

against which the allegations about having been involved in the accident were 

made, thus rendering the entire claim petition as redundant against him. He 

stated that as such the petitioners were not entitled to the relief claimed. He 

was not cross­examined on behalf of the respondents No.3 and 4. As such the 

respondent No.2 had denied being the registered owner of the Maruti car on 

the date of the accident.
57.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

2   RW1   stated   that   the   full   name   of   her   husband   is   Nageshwaram 

Raghuraman.   She   stated   that   she   is   a   working   woman   and   working   with 

National Insurance Co. as Divisional Manager. She stated that she had been 

working in National Insurance Co. for the previous about 24 years. She did not 

know any person by the name of Sanjay directly. She stated that she had sold 

her vehicle i.e. Maruti 800 car to Sanjay through the dealer Net Cop in August, 

2004. She stated that the sale transaction in respect of her Maruti Car was 

done in Noida itself. She did not recollect what documents were prepared at
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                          Page No. 67 of 75
 that time about selling the Maruti Car volunteered because the Maruti car was 

used by her brother in law Shiv Kumar so at his instance she signed some 

documents at her residence at Noida. She stated that at that time she had 

signed one affidavit. She did not go to the place where her affidavit was got 

attested. She stated that after selling her Maruti 800 car she did not inform the 

RTO. She denied the suggestion that she did not sell her car to one Sanjay 

and that is why she did not inform the RTO.  During cross­examination by the 

learned counsel for the respondent No.5 RW1 admitted that till date she had 

not informed  RTO  regarding  the sale of vehicle  No.UP­16­7841.  Thus RW1 

admitted that she had not informed the transport authority about the sale of the 

vehicle to Sanjay Kumar/respondent No.2 as per law. She stated that she had 

been working in National Insurance Co. for the previous about 24 years. She 

stated that she did not know any person by the name of Sanjay directly and 

that she had sold her vehicle i.e. Maruti 800 car to Sanjay through the dealer 

Net Cop in August, 2004. She stated that the sale transaction in respect of her 

Maruti   Car   was   done   in   Noida   itself   though   she   did   not   recollect   what 

documents   were   prepared   at   that   time   about   selling   the   Maruti   Car   and 

volunteered   because   the   Maruti   car   was   used   by   her   brother   in   law   Shiv 

Kumar so  at his instance  she  signed  some  documents at her residence  at 

Noida. She stated that at that time she had signed one affidavit though she did 

not go  to the  place where  her affidavit  was got attested.  Subsequently  the 

respondent   No.1   had   moved   an   application   to   bring   the   affidavit   on   record 

though   the   same   was   not   put   to   the   respondent   No.2   during   cross­
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 68 of 75
 examination.
58.      During   cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners 

R2W1 stated that he was not the owner of Maruti Car No.UP 16A 7841 and the 

vehicle No.UP 16A 7841 had remained in his possession for one day and the 

car was given to him by his acquaintance i.e. one Shri Lilu. He stated that Shri 

Lilu was a driver and used to drive vehicle of travel company in Noida. He 

stated that Shri Lilu had given him the vehicle on the pretext that the said 

vehicle was for sale and if he was interested he could buy the said vehicle.  He 

stated   that   he   had   not   purchased   the   Maruti   car   No.UP   16A   7841.   During 

cross­examination   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent   No.1   R2W1 

stated that he knew Shri Lilu for about 3­4 months prior to the handing over of 

Maruti Car No.UP 16A 7841 to him. He stated that Shri Lilu had given him the 

vehicle on the same day when it met with the accident volunteered however he 

did   not   remember   the   date.   He   stated   that   Shri   Lilu   had   handed   over   the 

Maruti car No.UP 16A 7841 to him in the evening prior to the accident. He 

stated that he had not personally tested the Maruti Car No.UP 16A 7841 as he 

was not well and he gave the car to Shri Ram Kumar to drive and to test the 

same. He stated that Shri Ram Kumar was not his driver but he belonged to 

his village. He stated that the car was given by him to Shri Ram Kumar at 

about 6­7 pm i.e. after about one hour of the receipt of the car by him from 

Shri Lilu. He stated that Shri Ram Kumar had told him that he wanted to attend 

one   marriage   along   with   his   family   and   he   would   use   the   car   for   the   said
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 69 of 75
 purpose   and   by   the   same   the   car   would   also   be   tested.   He   denied   the 

suggestion that he purchased Maruti car No.UP 16A 7841 on 5.8.2004 for a 

sum of Rs.1,10,000/­ from the respondent No.1. He denied the suggestion that 

in pursuance of the purchase of Maruti Car No.UP 16A 7841 he had signed 

one  affidavit on 5.8.2004  and he had  also paid a  sum of Rs.One Lac Ten 

Thousand to the respondent No.1. During cross­examination by the learned 

counsel for the respondent No.5 he denied the suggestion that he had filed a 

false affidavit. Thus R2W1 reiterated that he was not the owner of Maruti Car 

No.UP   16A   7841   and   the   vehicle   No.UP   16A   7841   had   remained   in   his 

possession for one day and the car was given to him by his acquaintance i.e. 

one Shri Lilu on the pretext that the said vehicle was for sale and if he was 

interested he could buy the said vehicle.  He stated that he had not purchased 

the Maruti car No.UP 16A 7841. He stated that Shri Lilu had given him the 

vehicle on the same day when it met with the accident volunteered however he 

did not remember the date. As such the respondent No.2 had stated about the 

car being given to him only for one day by one Lilu but the said Lilu has not 

been produced in the witness box. It is significant that the respondent No.2 

had contended that he had the car for only one day but in that one day he had 

also   given   the   car   to   the   respondent   No.3   who   he   stated   belonged   to   his 

village for going for a marriage which does not appear plausible. A suggestion 

was put to him that he purchased Maruti car No.UP 16A 7841 on 5.8.2004 for 

a sum of Rs.1,10,000/­ from the respondent No.1 which he denied as also that 

in pursuance of the purchase of Maruti Car No.UP 16A 7841 he had signed
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                             Page No. 70 of 75
 one  affidavit on 5.8.2004  and he had  also paid a  sum of Rs.One Lac Ten 

Thousand to the respondent No.1.
59.      It is thus seen that according to the respondent No.1 she had sold the 

car to the respondent No.2 which the respondent No.2 denied. It cannot be 

disputed that the respondent No.1 was the registered owner of the Maruti car 

on   the   date   of   the   accident   and   a   perusal   of   the   record   shows   that   the 

petitioners along with the criminal record had filed copy of the notice which 

was issued by the IO to the respondent No.1 to produce the vehicle and the 

driver   and   thereafter   notice   was   issued   to   the   respondent   No.2   who   had 

replied that on 9.2.2006 his Maruti car was being driven by the respondent No.
3.   While   the   certified   copies   of   the   said   documents   are   not   on   record   the 

respondent No.2 had not mentioned that the Maruti car did not belong to him. 

Moreover the respondent No.3 had also stated about the car belonging to the 

respondent No.2. Further a perusal of the record shows that a copy of the sale 

agreement and of letters of Netcorps Multibrand Motor Plaza dated 19.7.2004 

were also placed on record at the initial stage though they have not been got 

proved. In these circumstances while the respondent No.1 was the registered 

owner of the offending vehicle on the date of the accident the respondent No.2 

was in possession of the vehicle and he had further handed over the vehicle to 

the respondent No.3. Even if the contention of the respondent No.2 were to be 

accepted it is clear that the respondent No.1 had not authorized the use of the 

vehicle by the respondent No.3 and by his own admission the car had been
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                               Page No. 71 of 75
 handed   over   to   the   respondent   No.3   by   the   respondent   No.2.   As   such   no 

liability can be fixed on the respondent No.1. However the respondents No.2 

and   3   would   be   equally   liable   to   pay   40%   of   the   awarded   amount   to   the 

petitioners as the negligence of the Maruti car bearing No.UP­16A­7841 has 

been apportioned as 40%.
60.      Regarding the remaining 60% of the awarded amount the respondent 

No.4   is   the   owner   of   the   Toyota   Prado   bearing   No.DL­5CB­3456   and   the 

respondent No.5 is the insurer of the said vehicle. It is the contention of the 

respondent No.5 that it is not liable to pay any compensation to the petitioners 

as they are not covered in the definition of third party. In support of its case the 

respondent No.5 had produced R5W1 in the witness box who stated that the 

liability of the respondent insurance company was to indemnify the insured 

towards   the   third   party.   She   stated   that   the   deceased   was   the   wife   of   the 

respondent No.4, deceased was not third party and the insurance company 

was not liable to indemnify the insured. She stated that the charge sheet was 

filed only against the driver of vehicle No.UP­16A­7841 respondent No.3/ Ram 

Kumar s/o Shri Babu Jatav. She relied upon the policy and the copy of the 

standard   form   of   the   private   car   policy   and   copy   of   Indian   Motor   Tariff   is 

Ex.R5W1/A. She was not cross­examined on behalf of the respondents No.1 

and   2.  During   cross­examination   by  the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioners 

R5W1 stated that she had been working with Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. 

for the previous 5 years and from the previous 8 months she had been with the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                                Page No. 72 of 75
 legal department. She stated that she knew what was third party insurance. 

She stated that except the legal heirs, the insured and the driver the others 

were covered in third party. She knew who was the deceased in the matter 

and the deceased was not a third party as stated by her in her affidavit. She 

denied the suggestion that the deceased in the instant case was a third party. 

She stated that she had gone through the charge sheet in the matter. She 

denied the suggestion that apart from the owner everybody was a third party. 

Thus R5W1   stated  that she  knew  what  was  third  party  insurance  and  that 

except the legal heirs, the insured and the driver the others were covered in 

third party and the deceased was not a third party. She denied the suggestion 

that apart from the owner everybody was a third party.
61.      During cross­examination by the learned counsel for the respondent No.

5 R4W1 stated that he was not aware whether the Maruti vehicle which was 

involved in the accident was insured or not. He stated that his vehicle was 

insured   with   M/s   Oriental   Ins.   Co.   Ltd.   He   had   not   brought   the   original 

insurance policy on that day. He denied the suggestion that the terms and 

conditions appended to the insurance policy Ex.R4W2/R1 were not supplied 

along with the insurance policy and the same were fabricated documents. He 

denied the suggestion that he had filed a false affidavit in order to help the 

petitioners instead of the insurance company being the insured of the vehicle. 

Thus R4W1 stated that he was not aware whether the Maruti vehicle which 

was involved in the accident was insured or not. He stated that his vehicle was
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                           Page No. 73 of 75
 insured with M/s Oriental Ins. Co. Ltd. He denied the suggestion that the terms 

and   conditions   appended   to   the   insurance   policy   Ex.R4W2/R1   were   not 

supplied   along   with   the   insurance   policy   and   the   same   were   fabricated 

documents.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied on the judgment 

of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Jai Prakash v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. 

and others
2010 ACJ 455 on what is third party but a perusal of para 24 of
the 

said   judgment
shows  that   it  was  the   change   proposed   that  'third   party'   be 

defined to cover any accident victim (that is any third party, other than the 

owner).
The law regarding occupant of a car is well settled and it has been 

held by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in
Yashpal Luthra & Anr.   v. United 

India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Another
MAC. APP. No.176/2009 decided on 

9.12.2009 that the occupants of a car would be covered under comprehensive 

policy and in fact in the said case the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. had admitted 

its liability in respect of a pillion rider on a two wheeler and occupants in a 

private car under comprehensive/ package policy. The policy in respect of the 

Toyota   Prado   also   falls   in   this   category.   As   such   the  respondent   No.5   i.e. 

Oriental  Insurance  Co. Ltd. being the insurance company in  respect of the 

Toyota   Prado   bearing   No.DL­5CB­3456   would   be   liable   to   pay   the 

compensation   on   behalf   of   the   respondent   No.4   in   respect   of   60%   of   the 

awarded amount.
62.      The   respondents   No.2   and   3   are   directed   to   deposit   40%   of   the 

awarded amount and the respondent No.5  is directed to deposit 60% of the
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                             Page No. 74 of 75
 awarded amount within 30 days with interest at the rate of 7.5% from the date 

of filing of the  claim petition till its realization  in UCO Bank, Patiala  House 

Courts, New Delhi failing which they would be liable to pay interest at the rate 

of 12% per annum for the period of delay.
63.      Nazir to report in case the cheques are not deposited within 30 days of 

the passing of the award/judgment. Nazir is directed to note the particulars of 

the award amount in the register today itself. The respondents No.2, 3 and 5 

shall deposit the award amount along with interest upto the date of notice of 

deposit to the claimants with a copy to their counsel and the compliance report 

shall be filed in the court along with proof of deposit of award amount, the 

notice of deposit and the calculation of interest on 11.5.2015.



An attested copy of the award be given to the parties (free of cost) and a copy 

be also sent to the Nodal Officer, UCO Bank, Patiala House.


File be consigned to Record Room.
Announced in open court
on this 9th day of February, 2015                        (GEETANJLI GOEL)
                                                             PO: MACT­2
                                                                  New Delhi
Suit No.38/14
Ritik Bajaj Vs.  Savitri Raghu Raman                                    Page No. 75 of 75
