Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 62 of 2021
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/80607818/

[Cites
20
, Cited by
1
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Prem Chand And Ors vs State Of H.P And Anr on 1 March, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                  Cr. MMO No.62 of 2021




                                                                        .
Reserved on: 26.2.2021.
Date of Decision: 1.3.2021.
Prem Chand and ors.                                                  ...Petitioners

                                         Versus





    State of H.P and anr.                                               ...Respondents


    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 NO

    For the petitioners: Mr. Anil Kumar, Advocate.
For the respondents: Mr. Ram Lal Thakur, Asstt. A.G with Mr. Rajat Chauhan,
                         Law Officer for respondent No.1-State

                            Mr. Arsh Rattan, Advocate, for respondent No.2-




                            complainant.
FIR No. Dated          Police Station    Sections
        105/2020 16.8.2020     Jhandutta, Distt. 451, 147, 149, 323,
IPC
and
                               Bilaspur
S.3(1)
and
3(2)(i)
of the SC&ST





                                                 (POA) Act.

    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
The petitioners No.1 to 7, who were arraigned as accused, on the basis of
    complaint made by the complainant-respondent No.2, on whose statement the Police
    registered the FIR, have come up before this Court under
Section 482
, Code of
    Criminal Procedure, 1973, for quashing the proceedings because the complainant has
    compromised the matter with all the accused persons-petitioners.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
2
2.    Learned counsel for the petitioners on instructions prays that the matter stands
    compounded in terms of the compromise deed dated 31.8.2020, Annexure P/2. Ld.
    Counsel for the complainant also admits the compromise.
.
3.    The facts relevant to decide the present petition are that on 16th August, 2020,
    the concerned Police Station received a complaint from 2 nd respondent Shri Kashmir
    Singh about petitioners No.1 to 7 inflicting beatings upon him and using derogatory





    language in violation of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of
    Atrocities) Act, 1989. On such complaint, the police registered the FIR mentioned
    above. All the accused have filed this quashing petition on the grounds that they





    have compromised the matter with the complainant. They have also annexed a copy
    of the said compromise deed, Annexure P/2.
4.    Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District Magistrate as a

    routine procedure. However, the High Court's inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Cr.PC, to intervene in such kind of matter, and it is not the requirement of law
    that the cancellation has to be approved only through the District Magistrate.
    Inherent Jurisdiction of the High Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be


    exercised, depending upon the facts and circumstances. The parties are likely to live
    together for a lifetime, and intervention would create a cordial environment for
    peaceful relations between them.
ANALYSIS:
5.     On 26.2.2021 the complainant Kashmir Singh (respondent No.2) was present
    in person in the Court with his counsel Shri Arsh Rattan, Advocate. He stated that he





    had compromised the matter with the petitioners, including petitioner No.3, Nanak
    Ram, who unfortunately has expired during the pendency of the case. He had
    forgiven them earlier and today again in the Court and compromise deed Ex.P-2, was
    also executed on 31.08.2020, which was placed on record. Now, he wanted that FIR
    No.105 of 2020, dated 09.08.2020, registered under
Sections 451
,
323
147
,
149
of
    IPC and Section 3(1) and 3 (2) (i) of SC and ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989,
    Police Station Jhandutta, District Bilaspur, be quashed so that peace is restored. He
    further stated that he is making this statement in his full conscious state of mind and
    without any pressure of any kind. His statement was taken on record.
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
3
6.     Mr. Arsh Rattan, learned counsel for the complainant-respondent No.2 has
    also stated that the complainant is under no pressure or threat and had given the
    statement on his own free will.
.
7.     Learned counsel for the parties have stated that the accused and the
    complainant are neighbours and the incident occurred due to some land dispute,
    which is now settled.
8.     The accused/petitioners No.1, 2 and 5 to 7 were present in the Court and they
    again asked forgiveness from the complainant-respondent No.2, who in the Court has
    forgiven all of them.
9.    The following aspects would be relevant to conclude this petition: -
a)    On 26.2.2021, this Court had recorded the statement of Shri Kashmir
                Singh, complainant-respondent No.2, wherein he testified about the

                compromise with the accused-petitioners, who have prayed for quashing

                of FIR.
b)    The complainant has resolved all disputes with the accused.
c)    The victim and the accused have amicably settled the matter between



                them in terms of the compromise deed (Annexure P/2). The parties do
                not dispute this compromise deed.
d)    Accused were the first offenders.





          e)    The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will, and the purpose of
criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to work for bringing
                peace and happiness in society.
f)    Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to maintain the stand
                they have taken in this compromise, which is expected to result in the
                accused's acquittal.
10.   Given the stand of complainant-respondent No.2, no fruitful purpose would be
    served by dis-allowing this petition.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
11.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the propriety
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
4
of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need not
    necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds,
                .... This argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as




                                                                          .
merely because an accused has a right to plead at the time of





                framing of charges that there is no sufficient material for such
                framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal
                Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even
                at an earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the Magistrate





                takes cognizance of the offence and summons the accused to
                appear to contend that the very issuance of the order of taking
                cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said
                to have been made out on the allegations made in the complaint
                petition. It has been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the interest of
                justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue even
                where the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out
                any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of
                court, and therefore, there cannot be any dispute that in such

                case power under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
12.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full
    Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court observed that the High Court need not wait for


    completion of investigation and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
13.   The law is almost settled by larger benches judgements of Supreme Court that
    the offences, those are not listed as compoundable, under
Section 320
CrPC, can also





    be compounded, and the procedure to follow would be by quashing the FIR, and
    consequent proceedings.
a)    In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three-member
          Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,
6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of
               the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a
               proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any
               Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily,
               criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person must
               be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
               would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an
               interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to
               lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of
               this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
               categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
5
should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be
     cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take the
     view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings
     against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the




                                                                .
process of the Court or that the quashing of the impugned





     proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal
     proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have
     been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears
     that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of





     the said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in
     quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the
     requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this
     category. Cases may also arise where the allegations in the First
     Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at





     their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute
     the offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating
     evidence arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the complaint
     or the First Information Report to decide whether the offence
     alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate

     for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to

     allow the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the
     accused person. A third category of cases in which the inherent
     jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may
     also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations
     made against the accused person do constitute an offence


     alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support
     of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to
     prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is
     important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where




     there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
     manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made





     and cases where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation
     may or may not support the accusation in question. In exercising
     its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High Court would not
     embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question





     is reliable or not. That is the function of the trial magistrate, and
     ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the High
     Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable
     appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the
     accused would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature
     and scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S.
     561-A in the matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that
     is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re:
Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra
     Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar
     Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954 Punj 193),
     NripendraBhusan Roy v. GobinaBandhu Majumdar, AIR 1924
     Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. SivaramaSubramania,
     ILR 47 Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39).
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
6
b)    In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao Chandrojirao
    Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court




                                                                    .
holds: -
7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at
          the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by
          the court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made





          prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take
          into consideration any special features which appear in a
          particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the
          interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue. This is so
          on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique
          purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an





          ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is
          likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to
          continue, the court may while taking into consideration the
          special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it

          may be at a preliminary stage.
c)    A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian Singh v. State
    of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on quashing on account of


    compromise/compounding, in the following terms:
[53].
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language suggests,
          saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by




          virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the process
          of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It begins





          with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which means that the
          provision is an overriding provision. These words leave no
          manner of doubt that none of the provisions of the Code limits
          or restricts the inherent power. The guideline for exercise of





          such power is provided in
Section 482
itself i.e., to prevent
          abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends
          of justice. As has been repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers
          no new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards existing
          inherent powers possessed by High Court necessary to prevent
          abuse of the process of any Court or to secure the ends of
          justice. It is equally well settled that the power is not to be
          resorted to if there is specific provision in the Code for the
          redress of the grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be
          exercised very sparingly and it should not be exercised as
          against the express bar of law engrafted in any other provision
          of the Code.
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
7
[57]. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground
     of settlement between an offender and victim is not the same
     thing as compounding of offence. They are different and not
     interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of




                                                               .
offences given to a court under
Section 320
is materially





     different from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High
     Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of
     offences, power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the
     provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is guided





     solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the
     formation of opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal
     offence or criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided
     by the material on record as to whether the ends of justice would
     justify such exercise of power although the ultimate





     consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
[58]. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having
     regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and victim
     has been settled although offences are not compoundable, it does

     so as in its opinion, continuation of criminal proceedings will be

     an exercise in futility and justice in the case demands that the
     dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace is
     restored; securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding
     factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful effect on
     the public and consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers


     and threatens well-being of society and it is not safe to leave the
     crime- doer only because he and the victim have settled the
     dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation,
     yet certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with or




     without permission of the Court. In respect of serious offences
     like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of mental





     depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of moral
     turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption
     Act
or the offences committed by public servants while working
     in that capacity, the settlement between offender and victim can





     have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which
     overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour having
     arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership
     or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
     matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family
     dispute, where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender
     and victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
     irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made
     compoundable, the High Court may within the framework of its
     inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal
     complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that on the face of such
     settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of offender being
     convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice
     shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated. The above
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
8
list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will depend on
         its own facts and no hard and fast category can be prescribed."
.
d)   In
Parbatbhai Aahir v State of Gujarat
, (2017) 9 SCC 641, a three





    Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for
    quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on
         the subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
         16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High
         Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to
         secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer new





         powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in
         the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to

         quash a First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the
         ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the

         offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of
         jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
         compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by
         the provisions of
section 320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,


         1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if
         the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or




         complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under
         Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
         justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
         ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends





         of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
         Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the
         offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately
         on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
         elaboration of principles can be formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while
         dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High
         Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
         offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental
         depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
         appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the
         victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
9
speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon
                society. The decision to continue with the trial in such cases is
                founded on the overriding element of public interest in
                punishing persons for serious offences;
.
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be
                criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant
                element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so
                far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
                commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
                transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
                situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the





                dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
                proceeding if in view of the compromise between the disputants,
                the possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of

                a criminal proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice;
and

                16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
                propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving
                the financial and economic well-being of the state have


                implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute
                between private disputants. The High Court would be justified in
                declining to quash where the offender is involved in an activity
                akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The




                consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or
                economic system will weigh in the balance.
14.   In the present case, the offences are not compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. Be that as it may, in the peculiar facts and circumstances, this Court is inclined





    to invoke the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC to quash the FIR and all
    subsequent proceedings.
15.   This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter. Given the entirety of the case and
    judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the continuation of these
    proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever.
16.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh
,
    2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under: -
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
10
[47]. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is
                  concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the
                  order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was
                  already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave




                                                                           .
Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting their





                  petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to
                  these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In
                  any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of
                  cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
17.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p 642,
    Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of Justice arises propitiously
    when parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship





    or reunion.
18.   Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit case where the inherent
    jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure

    is invoked to quash the proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is

    quashed and all the consequential proceedings, are also quashed and set aside. The
    bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All pending application(s), if any, stand
    closed.
Given above, the present petition stands allowed.
Anoop Chitkara,
                                                                                Judge.
1.3.2021 (mamta)
::: Downloaded on - 02/03/2021 20:15:40 :::HCHP
