Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 351.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/83400155/

[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Madras High Court
S.Sukumar vs S.K.Kumar on 12 October, 2018
Author:
P.Rajamanickam
Bench:
P.Rajamanickam
1

                                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS

                                             RESERVED ON: 09.10.2018

                                         PRONOUNCED ON : 12.10.2018

                                                         CORAM

                                   THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE P.RAJAMANICKAM

                                  Crl.O.P.Nos.22306, 22307 and 22308 of 2016
                                                      and
                                    Crl.M.P.Nos.10372, 10374, 10376 of 2016
                                   and Crl.M.P.Nos.6093, 6094, 6095 of 2017

                      S.Sukumar                                            ... Petitioner
                                                           Vs.

                      S.K.Kumar                                            ... Respondent

                      PRAYER: Criminal Original Petitions have been filed under
Section 482
of
                      Cr.P.C., to call for the records relating to C.C.Nos.1108 of 2016 and 1109
                      of 2016 on the file of the learned Fast Track Court No.III, Metropolitan
                      Magistrate, Saidapet, Chennai and C.C.No.1246 of 2016 on the file of the
                      learned XVII Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet, Chennai and quash the
                      same as against the petitioner.



                                  For Petitioner        : Mr.V.Karthick, Senior Counsel
                                                         for M/s.S.Anil Sandeep and V.Annaraja
                                  For Respondent        :Mr.N.R.Elango, Senior Counsel
                                                         for Mr.Yogesh Kannadasan


                                                        ORDER
These Criminal Original Petitions have been filed by the

                      accused under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings against him

                      in C.C.Nos.1108 of 2016 and 1109 of 2016 on the file of the Fast Track

http://www.judis.nic.in
2
Court No.3, Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet, Chennai and C.C.No.1246

                      of 2016 on the file of the XVII          Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet,

                      Chennai.
2. The respondent herein has filed private complaints stating

                      that the petitioner's son Mr.S.S.Rahul was engaged for marriage with

                      Ms.K.Aishwarya, the daughter of the respondent. The engagement was

                      done at Hotel Leela Palace, Chennai on 22.03.2015 and the marriage was

                      fixed on 20.05.2015 to be held at Codissia Hall, Avinashi Road,

                      Coimbatore.    Thereafter,   unfortunately,   differences   arose   between

                      Mr.S.S.Rahul and Ms.K.Aishwarya and the marriage had to be called off

                      on the intervention and consent of both side parents and relatives.

                      Subsequently, on 13.05.2015 a compromise agreement was executed

                      between the petitioner and the respondent. As per the said compromise

                      agreement, the petitioner herein has to pay a sum of Rs.5 Crores towards

                      the marriage expenses done by the respondent herein. Accordingly, the

                      petitioner herein has paid a sum of Rs.25,00,000/- as cash and

                      Rs.50,00,000/- through demand drafts. The petitioner has agreed to pay

                      the balance amount of Rs.4,25,00,000/- within two months i.e., on or

                      before 12.05.2015 and issued eight cheques each for Rs.50,00,000/- and

                      one cheque for Rs.25,00,000/- in favour of the respondent herein.

                      Further a sale agreement was also executed between the petitioner and

                      the respondent on the same date stating that the petitioner has to pay the

http://www.judis.nic.in
3
aforesaid balance amount of Rs.4,25,00,000/- within two months, failing

                      which, the petitioner shall execute a sale deed in respect of his property in

                      favour of the person, as the respondent directs. Since the petitioner did

                      not pay the amount within the time fixed in the compromise agreement,

                      the respondent herein has filed the aforesaid cases against the petitioner

                      herein under
Sections 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act and 420
IPC
.
3.   Mr.V.Karthick,   learned   Senior   Counsel   for   Mr.S.Anil

                      Sandeep appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the aforesaid

                      compromise agreement and sale agreement were obtained by exercising

                      coercion and fraud and hence, the petitioner has lodged a complaint

                      before the police on 29.06.2015 and based on the same, a case has been

                      registered in Crime No.449 of 2015 under Sections 420, 120-B, 384, 341,

                      506(ii) r/w 34 of
IPC
, on the file of the Central Crime Branch at Chennai

                      and the same is pending for investigation. He further submitted that the

                      petitioner herein has also filed a suit in O.S.No.4242 of 2015 on the file of

                      the III Assistant City Civil Court at Chennai to declare the aforesaid

                      compromise agreement and sale agreement have been obtained by fraud

                      and coercion and hence, they are null and void and for permanent

                      injunction to restrain the respondent herein from claiming any right based

                      on the aforesaid documents and the said suit is still pending. He further

                      submitted that in the compromise agreement itself, it is categorically

                      averred that the aforesaid cheques were issued only for security purpose

http://www.judis.nic.in
4
and in such a case, the respondent should not have filed a private

                      complaints by using the said cheques.     He further submitted that in the

                      aforesaid sale agreement also, it is specifically stated that if within the

                      period of two months, the amount is not paid by the petitioner herein, the

                      petitioner has to execute a sale deed in favour of the person as the

                      respondent directs and therefore, the respondent is not entitled to file a

                      private complaints based on the aforesaid cheques.
4. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner in support of

                      the aforesaid contentions, relied upon the following decisions:-
1.
Harshendra Kumar D. Vs. Rebatilata Koley and

                      Others
(2011) 3 SCC 351.
2.
Vijay Vs. Laxman and Another
(2013) 2 SCC (Cri)

                      237 = (2013) 3 SCC 86.
3. Balaji Seafoods Exports (India) Ltd. Rep. by its

                      Director, Chalapathy and Another Vs. Mac Industries Ltd., 1999

                      (1) MWN (Cr.) 7.
5. The learned Senior Counsel for the respondent has

                      submitted that the petitioner herein has stated in his petition that on

                      13.05.2015, his relative Mr.Nallayyan was also present along with him.

                      He further submitted that the said Mr.Nallayyan is an Advocate practising

                      at Madurai and as such that the petitioner would have obtained legal

http://www.judis.nic.in
5
advice from the said Mr.Nallayyan. But, the petitioner has not lodged the

                      complaint immediately. He lodged a police complaint only on 29.06.2015

                      i.e., nearly after one and half month. He further submitted that the

                      petitioner herein has filed a suit in O.S.No.4242 of 2015, but, no interim

                      injunction was granted. He further submitted that since the petitioner has

                      raised a plea of fraud, coercion etc., the burden is upon him to prove the

                      aforesaid facts. He further submitted that whether the cheque was given

                      as security or not, or whether there was an outstanding liability or not is a

                      question of fact which could have been determined only by the trial Court

                      after recording evidence of the parties. He further submitted that since

                      the petitioner herein has admitted the issuance of cheques, presumption

                      of a legally enforceable debt in favour of the holder of the cheque arises

                      and it is for the accused to rebut the said presumption.         He further

                      submitted that the petitioner herein after receipt of statutory notice has

                      not sent any reply and that itself shows that he has not disputed the

                      contents of the said notice.   He further submitted that the disputed facts

                      cannot be decided by this Court in the petition filed under
Section 482
of

                      Cr.P.C. and therefore, he prayed to dismiss the above petitions.          In

                      support of his contentions, he relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble

                      Supreme    Court   in   Sampelly    Satyanarayana       Rao    Vs.   Indian

                      Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (2016) 10 SCC
458.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6
6. It is an admitted fact that the petitioner's son Mr.S.S.Rahul

                      was engaged for marriage with the respondent's daughter namely

                      Ms.K.Aishwarya, and the engagement was done at Hotel Leela Palace,

                      Chennai on 22.03.2015 and the marriage was fixed on 20.05.2015 to be

                      held at Codissia Hall, Avinashi Road, Coimbatore. It is also an admitted

                      fact that, subsequently, the said marriage was called off and a

                      compromise     agreement       and   a   sale     agreement        were    executed    on

                      13.05.2015.    It is also an admitted fact that, in pursuance of the said

                      compromise agreement, the petitioner herein has paid a sum of

                      Rs.25,00,000/- as cash and Rs.50,00,000/- through demand drafts to the

                      respondent herein and for the balance amount of Rs.4.25 crores, the

                      petitioner herein has issued nine cheques (eight cheques each for

                      Rs.50,00,000/- and one cheque for Rs.25,00,000/-).
7.   According    to   the       petitioner,   the    said    compromise

                      agreement, the sale agreement and the cheques were obtained by the

                      respondent herein by exercising, coercion, fraud, cheating etc.,                      and

                      hence, he lodged a complaint before the Central Crime Branch at Chennai

                      on 29.06.2015 against the respondent herein and his associates and

                      based on the same, a case was registered in Crime No.449 of 2015 under

                      Sections 420, 120-B, 384, 341, 506(ii) r/w 34 of
IPC
. His further case is

                      that he also filed a suit in O.S.No.4242 of 2015 on the file of the III

                      Assistant City Civil Court, to declare the aforesaid agreements are null and

http://www.judis.nic.in
7
void and for permanent injunction not to enforce them.
8. At this juncture, it would be relevant to refer to
Section

                      102
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1892 which reads thus:-
''102. On whom burden of proof lies.- The burden
                               of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who
                               would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession,
                               and which, as A asserts, was left to A by the Will of C, B's
                               father.
If no evidence were given on either side, B would be
                               entitled to retain his possession.
Therefore, the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.
The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says
                               that it was obtained by fraud, which A denies.
If no evidence were given on either side, A would
                               succeed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud is not
                               proved.
Therefore, the burden of proof is on B.''
9. From the reading of the aforesaid Illustration (b), it is clear

                      that the burden is upon the person to prove that the document was

                      obtained by fraud. In this case the petitioner has admitted the execution

                      of the compromise agreement, sale agreement and issuance of cheques,

                      but he says that those documents were obtained by fraud and therefore,

                      the burden is upon him to prove that those documents were obtained by

http://www.judis.nic.in
8
fraud. So, merely on the basis of the averments made by the petitioner,

                      this Court cannot quash the proceedings against the petitioner.
10.
In
Harshendra Kumar D. Vs. Rebatilata Koley and

                      Others
(supra), a private complaint has been filed under
Sections 138
and
141
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, based on the dishonour

                      of the cheques against the Director of the Company, who had resigned

                      prior to the alleged date of offence. The said resignation was accepted by

                      the company and notified to the Registrar of Companies in a prescribed

                      form (Form 32). On the date of alleged offence, the said person was

                      neither Director of the Company nor had anything to do with affairs of the

                      company. Under the said circumstances, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has

                      observed that the materials relied upon by the accused are in the nature

                      of public documents and they are beyond suspicion or doubt and they can

                      be looked into by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.     But, in this case the petitioner has admitted the

                      execution of the compromise agreement and sale agreement. Further he

                      has admitted the issuance of cheques. But, according to him, those

                      documents were obtained by coercion, fraud and cheating. As already

                      pointed out that as per the Illustration (b), attached to
Section 102
of the

                      Evidence Act, the burden is upon the person, who pleaded fraud.

                      Therefore, the aforesaid decision will not apply to the facts of this case.
11.
In
Vijay Vs. Laxman and Another
(supra), the accused

http://www.judis.nic.in
9
was convicted by the trial Court for the offence under
Section 138
of the

                      Negotiable Instruments Act, against which he filed an appeal before the

                      Sessions Court. The said appeal was dismissed, against which a revision

                      was filed before the High Court and the same was allowed and the

                      judgments of the Courts below were set-aside. Aggrieved by the same,

                      the complainant has filed an appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court by

                      special leave. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, considering the evidence

                      adduced before the trial Court, has held that the complainant has

                      miserably failed to prove his case that the cheque was issued towards

                      discharge of the lawful debt. But, in this case, the accused has filed the

                      present petitions under
Sections 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the complaints,

                      which were filed against him under
Section 138
of the Negotiable

                      Instruments Act. As already pointed out that the petitioner has taken a

                      plea that the documents were obtained by exercising coercion, fraud etc.,

                      and the said facts have to be proved by the petitioner by adducing

                      evidence before the trial Court. Therefore, the aforesaid decision cannot

                      be applied at this stage.
12. In Balaji Seafoods Exports (India) Ltd. Rep. by its

                      Director, Chalapathy and Another Vs. Mac Industries Ltd., (supra),

                      on the date when the cheque was handed over, there was no legally

                      enforceable debt or other liability. An undated cheque for Rs.35,00,000/-

                      was handed over as a security for the purpose of the contract. It was not

http://www.judis.nic.in
10
handed over with the intention of making it as an instrument of immediate

                      negotiation to discharge a subsisting liability or debt. Under the said

                      circumstances, this Court has held that since the undated cheque was

                      given only as a security, provisions of
Section 138
of the Negotiable

                      Instruments Act are not at all attracted and accordingly, the complaint

                      was quashed. In this case, the petitioner has not issued undated cheque

                      but, he has issued cheques by putting dates. Further, the liability has been

                      mentioned in the compromise agreement itself. The petitioner has also

                      admitted the execution of the said agreement. However, according to him

                      the said document was obtained by coercion, fraud, etc., As already

                      pointed out, those facts have to be established by the petitioner adducing

                      evidence before the trial Court. Therefore, the aforesaid decision also will

                      not help the petitioner.
13.
In
Sampelly     Satyanarayana        Rao     Vs.      Indian

                      Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited
(supra), the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court in paragraph Nos.12 to 16 has observed as follows:-
“12. The Crucial question to determine applicability of
Section 138
of the Act is whether the cheque represents
                             discharge of existing enforceable debt or liability or whether it
                             represents advance payment without there being subsisting
                             debt or liability. While approving the views of different High
                             Courts noted earlier, this is the underlying principle as can be
                             discerned from discussion of the said cases in the judgment
                             of this Court.
http://www.judis.nic.in
11
13. In Balaji Seafoods, the High Court noted that the
                          cheque was not handed over with the intention of discharging
                          the subsisting liability or debt. There is, thus, no similarity in
                          the facts of that case simply because
in that case
also loan
                          was advanced. It was noticed specifically therein – as was
                          the admitted case of the parties – that the cheque was issued
                          as “security” for the advance and was not intended to be in
                          discharge of the liability, as in the present case.
14.
In
HMT Watches Ltd. versus M.A. Abida
, relied
                          upon on behalf of the respondent, this Court dealt with the
                          contention that the proceedings under
Section 138
were liable
                          to be quashed as the cheques were given as “security” as per
                          defence of the accused. Negativing the contention, this Court
                          held :- (SCC pp.779-80, paras 10-12)
                                 “10. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties,
                          we are of the view that the accused (Respondent 1)
                          challenged the proceedings of criminal complaint cases before
                          the High Court, taking factual defences. Whether the cheques
                          were given as security or not, or whether there was
                          outstanding liability or not is a question of fact which could
                          have been determined only by the trial court after recording
                          evidence of the parties. In our opinion, the High Court should
                          not have expressed its view on the disputed questions of fact
                          in a petition under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
                          Procedure, to come to a conclusion that the offence is not
                          made out. The High Court has erred in law in going into the
                          factual aspects of the matter which were not admitted
                          between the parties. The High Court further erred in
                          observing that
Section 138(b)
of the NI Act stood uncomplied
                          with, even though Respondent 1 (accused) had admitted that
                          he replied to the notice issued by the complainant.
Also, the
http://www.judis.nic.in
12
fact, as to whether the signatory of demand notice was
                          authorised by the complainant company or not, could not have
                          been examined by the High Court in its jurisdiction under
                          Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure when such
                          plea was controverted by the complainant before it.
11.
In
Suryalakshmi Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Rajvir
                          Industries   Ltd.
,    this   Court     has   made       the   following
                          observations explaining the parameters of jurisdiction of the
                          High Court in exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482
of
                          the Code of Criminal Procedure: (SCC pp. 685-87, paras 17 &
22)

                                 “17. The parameters of jurisdiction of the High Court in
                          exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Code of
                          Criminal Procedure is now well settled. Although it is of wide
                          amplitude, a great deal of caution is also required in its
                          exercise. What is required is application of the well- known
                          legal principles involved in the matter.
***
22. Ordinarily, a defence of an accused although
                          appears to be plausible should not be taken into consideration
                          for exercise of the said jurisdiction. Yet again, the High Court
                          at that stage would not ordinarily enter into a disputed
                          question of fact. It, however, does not mean that documents of
                          unimpeachable        character   should      not   be     taken    into
                          consideration at any cost for the purpose of finding out as to
                          whether continuance of the criminal proceedings would
                          amount to an abuse of process of court or that the complaint
                          petition is filed for causing mere harassment to the accused.
                          While we are not oblivious of the fact that although a large
                          number of disputes should ordinarily be determined only by
                          the civil courts, but criminal cases are filed only for achieving
                          the ultimate goal, namely, to force the accused to pay the
http://www.judis.nic.in
13
amount due to the complainant immediately. The courts on the
                          one hand should not encourage such a practice; but, on the
                          other, cannot also travel beyond its jurisdiction to interfere
                          with the proceeding which is otherwise genuine. The courts
                          cannot also lose sight of the fact that in certain matters, both
                          civil   proceedings   and    criminal   proceedings   would   be
                          maintainable.”
12.
In
Rallis India Ltd. v. Poduru Vidya Bhushan
, this
                          Court expressed its views on this point as under: (SCC p. 93,
                          para 12)

                                       “12. At the threshold, the High Court should not
                          have interfered with the cognizance of the complaints having
                          been taken by the trial court. The High Court could not have
                          discharged the respondents of the said liability at the
                          threshold. Unless the parties are given opportunity to lead
                          evidence, it is not possible to come to a definite conclusion as
                          to what was the date when the earlier partnership was
                          dissolved and since what date the respondents ceased to be
                          the partners of the firm.”
15. We are in respectful agreement with the above
                          observations. In the present case, reference to the complaint
                          (a copy of which is Annexure P-7) shows that as per the case
                          of the complainant, the cheques which were subject matter of
                          the said complaint were towards the partial repayment of the
                          dues under the loan agreement (Para 5 of the complaint).
16. As is clear from the above observations of this
                          Court, it is well settled that while dealing with a quashing
                          petition, the Court has ordinarily to proceed on the basis of
                          averments in the complaint. The defence of the accused
                          cannot be considered at this stage. The court considering the
                          prayer for quashing does not adjudicate upon a disputed

http://www.judis.nic.in
14
question of fact.''
14. From the aforesaid decision, it is clear that whether the

                      cheques were given as security or not, or whether there was outstanding

                      liability or not is a question of fact which could have been determined only

                      by the trial Court after recording evidence of the parties. It is also clear

                      that the High Court should not have expressed its view on the disputed

                      questions of facts in a petition filed under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C ., to come

                      to the conclusion that the offence is not made out. It is also clear that,

                      while dealing with a quashing petition, the Court has to ordinarily proceed

                      on the basis of averments in the complaint. The defence of the accused

                      cannot be considered at this stage.
15. Further, in view of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme

                      Court in
Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan
, (2010) 11 SCC 441, once issuance of a

                      cheque and signature there on are admitted, presumption of a legally

                      enforceable debt in favour of the holder of the cheque arises. It is for the

                      accused to rebut the said presumption, though accused need not adduce

                      his own evidence and can rely upon the material submitted by the

                      complainant. However, mere statement of the accused may not be

                      sufficient to rebut the said presumption.    Therefore, this Court is of the

                      view that these petitions are liable to be dismissed.
16. In the result, these petitions are dismissed. It is open to

                      the petitioner to contest the matter in trial Court in accordance with law.


http://www.judis.nic.in
15
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
12.10.2018

                      vsa

                      Index : Yes/No
                      Speaking Order/Non-speaking order


                      To
1.The Fast Track Court No.III,
                        Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet,
                        Chennai.
2.The XVII Metropolitan Magistrate,
                        Saidapet, Chennai
3.The Public Prosecutor,
                        Madras High Court,
                        Chennai.
P.RAJAMANICKAM,J.
vsa
http://www.judis.nic.in
16
Pre-delivery Judgment made in
                           Crl.O.P.Nos.22306, 22307 and 22308 of 2016
                          and Crl.M.P.Nos.10372, 10374, 10376 of 2016
                              and Crl.M.P.Nos.6093, 6094, 6095 of 2017




                                                           12.10.2018




http://www.judis.nic.in
