Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 283, 1989 (2) Bom CR 209, (2011) 2 C Cr LR (Cal) 755
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/86576300/

[Cites
23
, Cited by
8
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Ainul Haque vs The State Of West Bengal & Anr on 7 July, 2015
Author:
R. K. Bag
Bench:
R. K. Bag
Form No. J(1)
                  IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                 CRIMINAL REVISIONAL JURISDICTION
                          APPELLATE SIDE

Present:
Hon'ble Justice R. K. Bag.


                            CRR 1152 of 2015

                             Ainul Haque
                                  V.
                    The State of West Bengal & Anr.


For the Petitioners          : Mr. Deep Chaim Kabir,
                               Mr. Arnab Saha,

For the State                : Mr. Ayan Basu,
                               Mr. Sanjoy Bardhan,

Heard on                     : 26.06.2015.

Judgement on                 : 07.07.2015


R. K. Bag, J.
The petitioner has challenged the order dated February 2, 2015

passed      by   Learned   Judge,   Special   Court   under
NDPS   Act
,

Berhampore, Murshidabad in NDPS Case No.270 of 2014 by filing

this revisional application under Section 401 read with
Section 482
of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2.   The backdrop of filing the revisional application is as follows: Md.

     Hafiz Alam, Sub-Inspector of Police, Jalangi Police Station filed one

     written complaint before the Officer-in-charge of Jalangi Police

     Station disclosing an offence under
Section 21(c)
of the Narcotic

     Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter the
NDPS

     Act
). The police started Jalangi Police Station Case No.834 of 2014

     dated 18.09.2014 on the basis of the said written complaint.       The

     contents of the written complaint treated as FIR disclose that the

     accused Enamul Haque was transporting 5,000 ml. of codeine

     mixture by one motor cycle bearing no.WB58X-4487, when he was

     caught red-handed and the contraband articles and motor cycle were

     seized from his possession.      The police submitted charge-sheet

     against the accused Enamul Haque on the allegation of committing

     offence under
Section 21(c)
of the NDPS Act. The present petitioner

     filed an application before the Court of Learned Judge, Special Court

     under
NDPS Act
, Berhampore, Murshidabad for return of the seized

     motor cycle bearing no.WB58X-4487 on the ground that the

     petitioner is the registered owner of the said motor cycle and that the

     petitioner had no knowledge about use of the said motor cycle by the

     accused person for carrying narcotic drug. Learned Judge of the trial
      court rejected the application of the petitioner for return of the seized

     motor cycle on the ground that the petitioner has failed to prove that

     the seized motor cycle was used by the accused person without the

     knowledge or connivance of the petitioner or his agent and that the

     petitioner had taken all reasonable precautions against the use of the

     said motor cycle by the accused person for carrying the contraband

     articles. The said order dated February 2, 2015 passed by Learned

     Judge of the Special Court is under challenge in the instant revision.
3.   By referring to the provisions of
Section 60
and
Section 63
of the

     NDPS Act, Mr. Kabir, Learned Counsel for the petitioner contends

     that the seized motor cycle is liable to confiscation for transporting

     narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, unless the owner of the

     motor cycle proves that the motor cycle was used without his

     knowledge or connivance and that the owner of the motor cycle had

     taken all reasonable precautions against such use. Mr. Kabir further

     contends that the order of confiscation of the seized motor cycle can

     be passed by the trial court on conclusion of the trial when the

     accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged.      According to Mr.

     Kabir, the confiscation of the conveyance seized for carrying narcotic

     drug or psychotropic substance cannot be done without hearing the
      person who has a right to claim the said conveyance on conclusion of

     trial and without recording of evidence by the trial court. Mr. Kabir

     argues that there is no provision in the
NDPS Act
for return of the

     seized vehicle during pendency of the inquiry or trial of the criminal

     case and as such the provisions of Section 451 or
Section 457
of the

     Code of Criminal Procedure can be invoked for return of the seized

     vehicle during any inquiry or trial before the criminal court.     Mr.

     Kabir has vehemently urged this court to consider that in the absence

     of any bar under the
NDPS Act
the interim custody of the seized

     vehicle can be given to the registered owner of the vehicle by invoking

     the provisions of Section 451 or
Section 457
of the Code of Criminal

     Procedure, 1973. Mr. Kabir has relied on the decisions reported in

     (2002) 10 SCC 283, 1989 (2) Bom CR 209, (2011) 2 C Cr LR (Cal) 755

     and (2006) 2 CHN 198 in support of his above contention.
4.   Mr. Ayan Basu, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the opposite

     party State submits that the interim custody of the seized motor cycle

     can be given to the registered owner of the motor cycle under Section

     451 or
Section 457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure on fulfilment of

     the conditions laid down under
Section 60(3)
of the NDPS Act.

     According to Mr. Basu, for obtaining interim custody of the seized
      motor cycle, the petitioner will have to establish that the seized motor

     cycle was used by the accused person for transporting contraband

     articles without his knowledge or connivance and that the petitioner

     took reasonable precautions against such use.
5.   Admittedly, on September 18, 2014 Jalangi Police Station Case

     No.834 of 2014 was started against the accused Enamul Haque on

     the allegation of transporting 5,000 ml. of codeine mixture by motor

     cycle bearing no.WB58X-4487 and the said contraband articles were

     recovered from the possession of the said accused person. It appears

     from the copy of certificate of registration (Annexure P2 to the

     revisional application) that the present petitioner is the registered

     owner of the seized motor cycle bearing no.WB58X-4487. There is no

     specific provision in the
NDPS Act
for return of the seized articles

     during inquiry or trial of the criminal case. However,
Section 60(3)
of

     the NDPS Act casts an obligation on the Court to confiscate the

     animal or conveyance used for carrying narcotic drug or psychotropic

     substance, which is as follows:
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants,
                     articles         and          conveyances           to
                     confiscation.....................................................
                     (3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any
                     narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled
                     substance], or any article liable to confiscation under
                    sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) shall be liable to
                    confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or
                    conveyance proves that it was so used without the
                    knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his
                    agent, if any, and the person-in-charge of the animal
                    or conveyance and that each of them had taken all
                    reasonable precautions against such use."
6.   It is also relevant to quote the provisions of
Section 63
of the NDPS

     Act which are as follows:
"
Section 63
. Procedure in making confiscations.-
(1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the
                    accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the
                    court shall decide whether any article or thing seized
                    under this Act is liable to confiscation under
Section
                    60
or
Section 61
or
Section 62
and, if it decides that
                    the article is so liable, it may order confiscation
                    accordingly.
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act
                    appears to be liable to confiscation under
Section 60
or
Section 61
or
Section 62
, but the person who
                    committed the offence in connection therewith is not
                    known or cannot be found, the court may inquire into
                    and decide such liability, and may order confiscation
                    accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or
                    thing shall be made until the expiry of one month
                    from the date of seizure, or without hearing any
                    person who may claim any right thereto and the
                    evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his
                    claim:
Provided further that if any such article or thing,
                    other than a narcotic drug, psychotropic substance,
                    [controlled substance,] the opium poppy, coca plant
                    or cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural
                    decay, or if the court is of opinion that its sale would
                     be for the benefit of its owner, it may at any time
                    direct it to be sold; and the provisions of this sub-
                    Section shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply
                    to the net proceeds of the sale."
7.   On perusal of the above provisions of
Section 60(3)
and
Section 63
of

     the NDPS Act, I find that the seized vehicle can be confiscated by the

     trial court on conclusion of the trial when the accused is convicted or

     acquitted or discharged. The Court must give opportunity of hearing

     to the person who may claim any right to the seized vehicle before

     confiscation of the seized vehicle. However, the seized vehicle is not

     liable to be confiscated if the owner of the seized vehicle can prove

     that the vehicle was used by the accused person without his

     knowledge or connivance and that he had taken all reasonable

     precautions against such use of the seized vehicle by the accused

     person. The above provisions can be invoked by the trial court at the

     time of passing the order whether seized vehicle is liable to

     confiscation on conclusion of trial and after conducting an inquiry to

     ascertain whether seized vehicle is to be returned to the registered

     owner or the same is liable to confiscation to the State. There is no

     specific bar under the provisions of the
NDPS Act
for return of any

     seized vehicle used for transporting narcotic drug or psychotropic
      substance as an interim custody pending final disposal of the

     Criminal Case. In the absence of any specific bar under the
NDPS

     Act
the court can invoke the general provisions of Section 451 of
Section 457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure for return of the seized

     article or vehicle pending final decision of the criminal case. The only

     obligation on the part of the court returning the seized vehicle to the

     registered owner is that the registered owner of the vehicle must

     produce the same before the court on conclusion of trial, so that the

     court can decide whether the said vehicle is liable to be confiscated or

     returned to the rightful claimant.
8.
In "
Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai V. State of Gujarat
" reported in (2002)

     10 SCC 283 the Supreme Court has directed the criminal court to

     exercise the power under
Section 451
of the Code of Criminal

     Procedure for return of the seized articles on some conditions pending

     final decision of the criminal case. With regard to the return of the

     seized vehicle during pendency of the criminal case the Supreme

     Court has observed as follows in paragraph 17 of the said judgement:
"17. In our view, whatever be the situation, it is of no
                     use to keep such seized vehicles at the police stations
                     for a long period. It is for the Magistrate to pass
                     appropriate orders immediately by taking appropriate
                     bond and guarantee as well as security for return of
                      the said vehicles, if required at any point of time.
                     This can be done pending hearing of applications for
                     return of such vehicles."
9.
In "
B. S. Rawant V. Shaikh Abdul Karim
" reported in 1989(2) Bom CR

     209 Learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court held that the

     provisions of Section 451 or
Section 457
of the Code of Criminal

     Procedure are not inconsistent with the provisions of the
NDPS Act
and as such the seized article or the seized vehicle may be returned

     to the rightful claimant as an interim custody on condition that the

     said seized vehicle or seized article may be produced before the trial

     court for taking final decision whether the said article or vehicle is

     liable to be confiscated or to be returned to the rightful claimant. It is

     held by the Bombay High Court in
the said decision
that the vehicle

     seized for transporting narcotic drug or psychotropic substance can

     be returned to the registered owner as an interim custody on

     condition of production of the said vehicle before the trial court at the

     appropriate stage of the proceeding under Section 451 or
Section 457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
10.
In "
Tridip Mitra V. State of West Bengal
" reported in 2006(2) CHN 198

     Learned Single Judge of our High Court also laid down that during

     pendency of the trial Learned Judge of the Special Court under
NDPS
 Act
has jurisdiction under Section 451 and
Section 457
of the Code of

Criminal Procedure to pass necessary order for return of the seized

vehicle as an interim custody. It is relevant to quote paragraph 16 of

the said judgement:
"16. The decision of the Supreme Court in
               Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai and decision of the
               Bombay High Court mentioned above clearly reveals
               that, provisions of
Sections 41
,
42
,
43
,
51
,
53
,
55
,
60
and
63
of the NDPS Act do not exclude operation of
               Sections 451 and 457(1) of the Code. The decision of
               this Court in
Asis Bose V. State of West Bengal
(
supra) and Sri Jiban Aich V. State of West Bengal
(supra) concerning
Forest Act
reveals that vehicle
               used in transporting forest produce should not be
               released normally but can be released imposing
               certain conditions which will have deterrent effect on
               the owner and putting different conditions including
               condition that the said vehicle henceforth shall not be
               used in indulging similar type of offence in future.
Besides that, the general provisions
laid down by
the
               Supreme Court in
Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai
(supra)
               cannot be ignored as it was observed that the vehicles
               should not be kept in Court compound or thana
               compound for indefinite period till the conclusion of
               trial to allow the vehicles lose its value open to sky,
               sun and rain. The Supreme Court and this Court
               clearly laid down the consideration of the Court is
               production of the vehicle at the time of trial and also
               during confiscation proceeding if any confiscation
               proceeding is started at all and for securing that the
               said vehicle is not used in similar type of offence in
               future. If Government fiscal policy of fetching money
               by auction of vehicles after confiscation proceeding is
               considered then also it is desirable that the vehicles
               should be in good condition. A vehicle if kept at
                     thana or Court compound open to sky for indefinite
                    period would become scrap material within a year or
                    two for want of maintenance.     A scrap material
                    cannot fetch such money which a good conditioned
                    vehicle would fetch."
11.
In "
Rabi Ranjan Ojha V. The State of West Bengal
" reported in (2011)

    2 C Cr LR (Cal) 755 Learned Single Judge of our High Court

    interfered in the order of refusal to return the seized vehicle passed

    by Learned Judge of the Special Court. In this case the vehicle was

    seized for carrying narcotic drug, but the said seized vehicle was

    returned to the registered owner on furnishing bank guarantee of

    Rs.5,00,000/- on condition that the registered owner will produce the

    vehicle as and when called for by the court and the registered owner

    will not change the nature and character of the vehicle without the

    permission of the trial court.
12.
In view of the above proposition of law
laid down by
the Supreme

    Court, Bombay High Court and our High Court, I do not find any

    merit in the submission made on behalf of the opposite party State

    that the seized motor cycle can be returned to the registered owner as

    an interim custody only on fulfilment of the conditions laid down

    under
Section 60(3)
of the NDPS Act. In my opinion, the seized motor

    cycle can be returned to the registered owner on furnishing bank
    guarantee and on conditions that the registered owner will produce

   the motor cycle before the trial court as and when called for and the

   owner will not change the nature and character of the said vehicle

   during pendency of the criminal case before the trial court.
13. As a result, the order dated February 2, 2015 passed by Learned

   Judge   of   the   Special   Court   under
NDPS   Act
,    Berhampore,

   Murshidabad in NDPS Case No.270 of 2014 is hereby set aside. The

   seized motor cycle bearing no.WB58X-4487 is returned to the

   petitioner on furnishing bank guarantee of Rs.1,50,000/- before the

   trial court and on conditions that the petitioner shall not alienate the

   motor cycle or change the nature and character of the motor cycle

   during the pendency of the criminal case and that the petitioner will

   produce the motor cycle before the trial court as and when called for

   and that the petitioner must produce the motor cycle before the trial

   court on conclusion of trial to decide whether the           motor cycle is

   liable to be confiscated or the same will be returned to the petitioner.

   The Criminal revision is, thus, disposed of.
Let a copy of this judgement and order be sent down to the trial court

   forthwith for favour of information and necessary action.
 The urgent photostat certified copy of the judgement and order, if

applied for, be given to the parties on priority basis after compliance

with all necessary formalities.
(R. K. Bag, J.)
