Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 54 of 1948
Citation: citations: AIR 2012 JHARKHAND 124, 2012 (3) AIR JHAR R 569, (2012) 3 JCR 298 (JHA), 2012 (118) AIC (SOC) 18 (JHA)
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/8713942/

[Cites
41
, Cited by
8
]
Jharkhand High Court
M/S Anjaney Ferro Alloys Ltd. vs State Of Jharkhand & Ors on 3 April, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 JHARKHAND 124, 2012 (3) AIR JHAR R 569, (2012) 3 JCR 298 (JHA), 2012 (118) AIC (SOC) 18 (JHA)
Author:
Prakash Tatia
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Jaya Roy
1

              IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI
                          W.P.(T) No. 2890 of 2011
           (M/s Anjaney Ferro Alloys Ltd Vrs State of Jharkhand & Ors.)
                                  With
                      W.P.(T) No. 6163 of 2006
           (M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd Vrs State of Jharkhand & Ors.)
                                     With
                         W.P.(T) No.667 of 2007
           (M/s Shivan Iron & Steel Co. Vrs State of Jharkhand & Ors.)
                                     With
                        W.P.(T) No. 2847 of 2008
           (M/s Tata Steel Ltd. Vrs. State of Jharkhand & Ors.)
                                            ----
         CORAM:        HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
                      HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE JAYA ROY
                                         ----
         For the Petitioners :Mr. M.S.Mittal, Sr. Advocte,
                              A.R.Choudhary,A.K.Yadav & N.K.Pasari,Advs.
         For the State       :Mr. Rajesh Shanker,Government Advocate
         For the D.V.C.      : Mr. S.B.Gadodia, Sr. Advocate    ----

         Reportable                            Dated : 3rd April, 2012

 Prakash Tatia,C.J. :          Heard the counsels for the parties in the Writ

         Petition (T) No. 2890 of 2011, 6163 of 2006, 667 of 2007 as well

         as in W.P.(T) No. 2847 of 2008. In these cases, the issues, the

         facts and question of laws are common, and therefore, they have

         been considered together and are being decided by this common

         judgment. However, so far as the W.P.(T) No.658 of 2007, 646 of

         2007, 645 of 2007, 656 of 2007 and W.P.(T) No. 650 of 2007 are

         the matters, wherein the counsels for the parties have submitted

         that these matters may be decided after disposal of the petitions

         referred above because the decision in above matters will have

         material bearing on their petitions and/or some of the petitions

         may also stand covered by the judgment which is going to be

         rendered in the writ petition No.2890 of 2011, 6163 of 2006, 667

         of 2007 and 598 of 2007 in spite of having some more points

         raised in these petitions.

         2.           We take the facts of the case of W.P.(T) No. 6163 of

         2006( M/s Atibir Hi- Tech Pvt. Ltd) because of the reason that the
                                 2

said writ petition was allowed by the Division Bench of this Court

by the judgment dated 11.1.2007.         But, the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in Civil Appeal No.3450 of 2008 in the case of this writ

petitioner- Atibir Hi-Tech Pvt. Ltd. sent back the matter to this

Court for deciding in accordance with the directions issued by the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order dated 30.4.2008.

3.          In W.P.(T) No.6163 of 2006 M/s Atibir Hi- Tech Pvt.

Ltd., challenged the order dated 3.3.2006 issued by the Deputy

Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Giridih Circle, Giridih,

whereby    the   petitioner's   application   Dated   26.2.2006   for

cancellation of registration certificate issued under Rule 4 of the

Bihar Electricity Duty Rules, 1949, and for refund of the amount

paid by way of electricity duty was rejected. The said Deputy

Commissioner of Commercial Taxes also directed the writ

petitioner to make the payment of the electricity duty together with

the surcharge.

4.          The learned Division Bench of this Court considered

the definition of the 'consumer' and the 'licensee' as given in the

relevant   of
Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948
, which has been

adopted by the Jharkhand Stated vide notification dated

22.12.2000
in exercise of power conferred by
Section 85
of the

Bihar Reorganization Act, 2000,and also considered the
Section

28
of the Indian Electricity Act. In view of the fact that the reason

of dispute was with respect to the levy of the electricity duty and

its liability upon the parties; the Division Bench also in detail

considered the
Section 3
which provides incidence of the duty

along with the
Section 4
which provides for mode and manner of

payment of duty. Thereafter, the
Section 3A
of the Act of 2003 by

which surcharge is levied was considered. The Division Bench
3
after considering the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

delivered in the case of Damodar Valley Corporation Vrs. State

of Bihar and Ors., reported in 1976 (3) SCC 710, observed that

the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already discussed that one of the

function of the D.V.C. is for generation, transmission and

distribution of the hydro-electric and thermal electrical energy.

And while answering the question in affirmative whether the

D.V.C. is liable to pay the electricity duty under the
Bihar

Electricity Duty Act, 1948
as amended by
Bihar Electricity Duty

Amendment Act
of 1964, also considered the Clause 1 and 2 of

the
Article 288
of the Constitution of India. Then, another case

was considered by the Division Bench in its judgment delivered in

the case of Tata Iron & Steel Company Vrs. State of Bihar Ors i.e.,

the judgment of the Patna High Court reported in 1993 (2) PLJR

59 M/s Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. The Tata Steel and Iron Co.Ltd.

is also one of the petitioners before us. In addition to above, also

considered the case of Bihar Alloy & Steel Limited Versus State of

Bihar and Anr., reported in 1996(1) PLJR 824, Steel Authority of

India Limited Versus State of Bihar, reported in 2000 (2) JCR 72 .

The Division Bench has relied upon the case of the M/s Bihar

Alloy & Steel Limited (Supra), but according to the learned

counsel for the parties, the said judgment of Bihar Alloy & Steel

Co. Ltd. Vrs State of Bihar & Anr. has already been reversed by

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.1491 of 1996, the

State of Jharkhand & Ors Versus Bihar Alloy & Steel & Anr. vide

order dated 18th November, 2003 and the matter was remanded to

this Court and after remand of the writ petition of the Bihar Alloys

& Steel Co. Limited & Anr, the said writ petition has already been

dismissed by the High Court for non-prosecution. Therefore, the
4
judgment of Bihar Alloy & Steel Co. Limited considered in the

judgment of this Court in W.P.(T) No. 6163 of 2006 does not exist.
5.            Be that as it may, the Division Bench of this Court

after considering all above judgments, allowed the writ petition of

M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. vide judgment dated 11.1.2007

and quashed the order dated 3.3.2006 passed by the Deputy

Commissioner of Commercial Taxes , Giridih Circle, Giridih and it

has been held, that the petitioner-company as held in other cases,

even when those companies registered them as assessee under

the Bihar Electricity Duty Rules ,1949, yet they are neither

licensee nor assessee, the petitioner M/S Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd is

also not be liable to pay the electricity duty and the surcharge

thereupon. Even after allowing the writ petition of the writ

petitioner and holding that the petitioner -company is not liable to

pay the electricity duty and the surcharge thereupon, the Division

Bench held that whatever the duty and the surcharge has been

paid by the petitioner-company shall not be refundable.
6.    Agrieved against the said judgment of this court in said writ

petition and other similar petitions, various SLPs were preferred

before the Hon'ble Supreme Court which were registered as Civil

Appeals Nos. 3451 of 2008, 3453 of 2008, 3454 of 2008 and 3456

of 2008 and all these appeals were decided by the order dated

30th April, 2008 and the matter has been remanded to this Court.
7.            In the said order dated 30.4.2008, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court took into account the contentions of the petitioner
-company -M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd. and observed that :-
"In short- the company submitted before the High Court

that it was not obliged to pay the duty directly to the State as an

'assessee'"    The   Hon'ble   Supreme    Court    after   recording
5
concession of the said petitioner-company ( only M/S Aitbir Hi-
Tech Pvt. Ltd.) that it shall not be seeking refund of the payment

already made, but it want an authoritative judgment on the

question of law, observed that:-
"The key issue which arose for determination before

the High Court was whether the company was an assessee under

the Act of 1948 read with Rules of 1949. Further in view of the fact

that the
Indian Electricity Act, 1910
was repealed by a new Act i.e.
Electricity Act, 2003
and therefore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

observed that :-
" It is important to note at this stage
                   that under
Section 2(d)
of the 1948 Act the
                   word 'licensee' is defined to mean any
                   person including a company licensed under
Part II of Indian Electricity Act, 1910
to
                   supply energy. Pre 2003, Damodar Valley
                   Corporation was not a licensee under Indain
                   Electricity Act, 1910. However, on 10.6.2003
                   the   earlier   enactment,    namely,
Indian
                   Electricity Act, 1910
stood repealed and it
                   stood replaced by the
Electricity Act, 2003
.
Under fourth Proviso to
Section 14
of the
                   said 2003 Act it has been stipulated that
                   Damodar     Valley   Corporation      shall    be
                   deemed to be a licensee under 2003 Act but
                   shall not be required to obtain a license
                   under the said Act and the provisions of
Damodar     Valley   Corporation    Act,      1948
insofar as they are not inconsistent with the
                   provisions of the Act, shall continue to
                   apply to that Corporation."
8.          The Hon'ble Supreme Court also observed that:-
"With the enactment of the
Electricity Act, 2003
, the

nature of the dispute has undergone a structural change
6
particularly in view of the fact that under the
Electricity Act, 2003
,

the entire scheme brings the concept like "Deemed Licensee". In

this connection section 185 which deals with repeal and savings is

also relevant".
Therefore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court remanded the

matter to the High Court and directed this Court to address on key

issues, for which we may quote from the order of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court :-
"However, since an important point of
                   law arises, we are of the view that the point
                   needs to be considered afresh by the High
                   Court keeping in mind the change in law in
                   view of the
Electricity Act, 2003
. We may
                   reiterate that the respondent-company has
                   fairly given up its claim for refund, and,
                   therefore, what needs to be decided is
                   whether the said company or the Damodar
                   Valley Corporation is the assessee under
                   the 1948 Act particularly in view of the
                   provisions of
Section 14
of the said 2003
                   Act;   the    effect   of   2003   Act   on    the
                   registration certificate issued earlier under
                   the
Bihar Electricity Act, 1948
and the
                   interpretation of 1948 Act, the 1949 Rules in
                   juxta position to the
Electricity Act, 2003
.
                   These questions were not raised and,
                   therefore, not gone into by the High Court,
                   however, they are of considerable public
                   importance hence we have to remit this
                   matter for consideration in accordance with
                   law"
9.          The Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted the writ

petitioner in W.P.(T) No.6163 of 2006, to amend the writ petition

with liberty to the Damodar Valley Corporation to submit additional

affidavit to the amended writ petition.
7
10.             Apart from the above order, in the matter of M/s Tata

Steel Limited Versus State of Jharkhand & Ors in Civil Appeal No.

3457 of 2008, in separate order dated 30.4.2008 Hon'ble

Supreme Court observed that two questions arose before the High

Court which are (a) Whether Department was entitled to reopen

the completed assessment under the provisions of
Bihar

Electricity Duty Act, 1948
; and (b) Whether M/s Tata Steel Limited

is the assessee under the said 1948 Act. Then Hon'ble Supreme

Court held that, whether the appellant Tata Steel Ltd. , is

assessee under the said 1948 act, the dispute is covered by

decision in Civil Appeal No. 3450/2008, Aitibir Hi-Tech Case.

Hon'ble Supreme Court specifically held that the Tata Steel Ltd.

in its original petition before the High Court had raised the dispute,

namely , that Damodar Valley Corporation alone was assessee

and that Tata Steel Ltd. could not be an assessee under the Act of

1948. Then the Hon'ble Supreme Court permitted Tata Steel to file

fresh petition to avoid any confusion. Then the Hon'ble Supreme

Court directed to hear the independent writ petition of M/s Tata

Steel Limited along with the original writ petition No. i.e., Original

Writ Petition (T) No. 6163 of 2006 filed by M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt.

Ltd. so that the matter can be heard simultaneously and disposed

of together .
11.             The other Civil Appeal No. 3458 of 2008 preferred

by the D.V.C. i.e Damodar Valley Corporation Versus M/s Tata

Steel Limited & Ors with Civil Appeals No. 3459-67/08 and SLP(C)

No. 2336/2007
State of Jharkhand Vs. Shivam Steel
were also

decided though by separate order but according to the decision

given in the M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd. case.
12.             In view of the orders passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
8
Court in Civil Appeal No. 3457/2008 the Tata Steel Limited has

preferred a fresh writ petition being writ petition No.2847 of 2008.
13.           Before these matters could have been heard and

decided, the State Government has enacted Jharkhand Electricity

Duty Amendment Act, 2011. As per the Clause III of Section 1 of

the Amendment Act of 2011, the State Government has been

given power to make various provisions of the Amendment Act,

2011, effective from the date to be notified by the State

Government.      Then, vide notification dated 28.6.2011, while

exercising powers conferred by Clause III of Section 1 of

Jharkhand Electricity Duty Amendment Act, 2011,
Section 2
and

Section 3 of the Amendment Act, 2011, have been made effective

retrospectively from 10.6.2003, the date on which the
Electricity

Act, 2003
came into force. Section 5 of the Amendment Act of

2011 has been made effective retrospectively, with effect from

15.11.2000, the date on which the State of Jharkhand was

created.
Section 4
and Section 6 of the Amendment Act 2011

have been made retrospectively effective from the date of

publication of the Amendment Act, 2011. This Enactment, came

into force subsequent to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court referred above, in M/s Atibir Hi-tech 's case, therefore, the

writ petitioners sought permission to amend the writ petition which

was allowed by this Court after hearing the parties and M/s Tata

Steel Limited in Writ petition No.2847 of 2008 challenged the

validity of the entire
Amended Act, 2011
, whereas in other writ

petitions only retrospectivity of the provisions of the Act have been

challenged.
14.           In view of the involvement of common question of

laws, the reply has been filed by the State in W.P.(T) No.2890 of
9
2011 whereas the Damodar Valley Corporation has filed its reply

in W.P. No.4847 of 2008 and the matter has been argued at

length and the relevant provisions have been referred to

substantiate the pleas taken by respective counsels for these

parties during the arguments.
15.         The learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently

submitted that the
Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948
, which has

been adopted by the State of Jharkhand has defined the

"Consumer" and the "Licensee" in
Section 2
. It has also provided

the provisions for levy of the duty upon the energy consumed or

sold under Sub-
section 1
of
Section 3
. Then, from who it has to be

recovered has been provided under
Section 4
of the said Act of

1948.   In the year 1985, by the
Finance Act
of 1985, dated

7.8.1985, Section 3A was inserted in the
State Electricity Duty Act,

1948
providing that in addition to the Electricity Duty, "there shall

be surcharge at the rate of 2 paise per unit of the energy

consumed or sold".
16.         In exercise of powers conferred by
Section 2
of
Section 10
of the Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948, the Bihar

Electricity Duty Rules, 1949 were also enacted, wherein the

"assessee" has been defined in Clause (b) of the Rule 2. With the

help of the above provisions, the learned counsel for the writ

petitioner vehemently submitted that firstly the Damodar Valley

Corporation (in short, the DVC) is not a 'Licensee' but certainly an

"assessee" under Rule 2(b) of the Rules of 1949. Since, the D.V.C

has been constituted and created under the separate and specific

Act known as the "
Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948
" and

the writ petitioners are the consumers of the Damodar Valley

Corporation and therefore, are not the 'Licensee' or 'assessee'
10
under the
Bihar Electricity Duty Act
1948 or under the Rules of

1949, and in view of this fact that the petitioners are not covered,

either under the
Electricity Duty Act, 1948
or Electricity Duty Rule,

1949 and the
Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948
have no application

to the writ petitioners.   However, the petitioner M/s Atibir Hi-tech

Pvt. Ltd. and other companies under mistaken belief or wrong

advice treated themselves to be an 'assessee' under Sub Clause
(b) of the Rule 2 of the Rules of 1949, applied for registration

under Rule 3 of the Rules of 1949 and they have been granted the

Certificate of Registration. The writ petitioners, therefore, started

paying the electricity duty but when they found that they are not

liable to pay the electricity duty to the State Government nor they

were obliged to obtain the registration certificate under the Act of

1948 and the Rules of 1949, they submitted a petition before the

competent authority for cancellation of the Certificate which

cancellation is permissible under Rule 5 of the Rules of 1949 and

otherwise also, if a person or the company, is not covered under

the Act and the Rules, he or it could not have been registered as

assessee, therefore, the Certificate is of no consequence and

cannot create liability and should have been cancelled by the

authority forthwith and if it has not been cancelled, even then it

cannot make the petitioner liable for the duty and surcharge cast

obligation upon the petitioner to submit return. It is submitted that

the Division Bench in earlier round of litigation and particularly in

the case of M/s Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd. clearly held that the

petitioner- company is not an 'assessee' and shall not require to

have a registration of the company under the Rules of 1949. The

same is the position of all other writ petitioners - companies as

they claim that they are also neither licensee nor could be
11
assessee under the act of 1948 or Rules of 1949.
17.           Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
Section 3
is the charging Section which provides that the

electricity duty shall be leviable and "required to be paid to the

State Government on the units of energy consumed or sold

excluding     the   losses   of        energy   in   transmission   and

transformation", and the exemption has been given in Sub
Section

2
of
Section 3
, wherein as per the Sub Clause (e), the Damodar

Valley Corporation has been exempted from the levy of the

electricity duty only on the units of energy consumed by the

Damodar Valley Corporation for generation, transmission and

distribution of the electricity by the D.V.C. itself. Hon'ble Supreme

Court as back as in 1976, in the D.V.C.s own case referred above

held that, other than above exemption i.e. exemption under Sub

Clause (e) of Sub
Section 2
of
Section 3
, the D.V.C. liable to pay

electricity duty obviously, in view of sub
Section 4
of
Section 4
of

the State Electricity Duty Act, 1948. Everyone who is liable to pay

duty under the act of 1948 is assessee as per Rule 2(b) of the

Rules of 1949, therefore, the D.V.C. was held to be assessee

under the Rules of 1949 (though it was not licencee).
18.           Since the Damodar Valley Corporation is not a

'licensee' and nor was required to obtain licence as the D.V.C.

was constituted and created under the
Special Act
i.e., the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948
. The Damodar Valley

Corporation     was not required to         obtain any sanction under
Section 28
of the Act of 1948, therefore, even if there is any

liability to pay the electricity duty due to the generation,

transmission and distribution of the electricity by the D.V.C.

(except for the energy consumed by the D.V.C. for above
12
purpose), then the DVC falls in the Sub Section (4) of the
Section

4
, which provides that every person including the department of

State Government, who generate energy for its own use and for

the use of its employees or partly for use or partly for sale shall

pay duty payable under
Section 3
on the units of energy

consumed by him or his employees or sale by him. Therefore, the

liability to pay the duty fall only and only upon the D.V.C. and

such duty is not recoverable from petitioners as is recoverable by

any licensee from its consumer under Sub Section ( 2) of
Section

4
. Under Sub Section (1) of
Section 4
, the initial liability to pay the

electricity duty is of licensee and a right has been given by Sub

Section (2) of the
Section 4
to the licensee to recover the said

electricity duty from the consumer, but as stated above, such

power has not been given to a person who is assessee but not the

licensee under the Act of 1948. Therefore, even if the D.V.C. is

liable to pay the electricity duty then also the writ petitioners who

are consumers of the D.V.C. will not be liable to pay the electricity

duty directly to the State Government .
19.          Learned counsel for the writ petitioner further

submitted that the Damodar Valley Corporation in W.P.(T) No.

2847 of 2008 i.e., in the writ petition of M/s Tata Steel Limited very

specifically took the stand in the pleadings that the D.V.C. is not a

Licensee within the meaning of the provisions of definition of

Licensee under
Section 2(d)
of the Bihar Electricity Duty Act of

1948.    Therefore, with the help of the said admission of the

D.V.C., it has been contended that the petitioners are not liable to

pay the electricity duty.
20.          It is also submitted that under
Section 4(1)
and
4(2)
,

there is provision for payment of the electricity duty by the
13
Licensee and the recovery of the said amount from the consumer,

but so is not provided for the surcharge and as per the
Section 3A
,

the surcharge is not a liability of the consumer in any manner and

it is to be borne by the person liable for electricity duty, therefore,

the petitioners are entitled to refund of surcharge amount which

has been paid by them.
21.          The learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently

submitted that the Amendment Act of 2011, though enacted by

the State Government but its retrospective effect is given by

exercise of delegated legislative power. The legislation, that is to

make act of 2011 or its any provision operative retrospectively has

not been given by the legislative enactment i.e., by the Act of

2011, and therefore, the notification is invalid. It is also submitted

by the learned counsel for the TATA Steel Ltd. that the

retrospective operation of the provisions of the Act of 2011 will

make a chaotic situation and will make all the things totally

unworkable and that will result into not only making of all the

electricity users in the State as "consumer" and that will be

creating petty electricity users also consumers requiring them to

obtain licence under the Rule and furnish return and face penal

consequences. Whereas only 'licensee', who are in few number

only were collecting the electricity duty from users/consumers and

were submitting the return. The penal consequences of penalty

upon the electricity users (consumers) of the State of Jharkhand

irrespective of the fact , whether they are the consumers of the

DVC or they are consumers of the any other Licensee as well as

they are the consumers of the even Jharkhand State Electricity

Board whose number is more than 15 lacs clearly indicate that

while enacting Act of 2011 no mind was applied and operation of
14
this Act is neither workable nor in public interest but will be

detrimental to public interest. It is submitted that the retrospective

effect of the above provisions will be against the public policy

which will have a grave consequence, both for public as well as

for the State. It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for

the petitioners by giving example like, the case when the law

continued for almost more than half century and the assessees

are obtaining a Certificate of Registration and submitting the

returns and obtaining the assessment orders,such law has been

sought to be changed entirely so as to include every petty

consumer of the electricity who may be even          petty consumer

residing in a hut having electricity connection for even one electric

bulb will be assessee in the definition of the "assessee" and those

all 15 lacs consumers will be required to obtain the Certificate of

Registration and will be required to furnish the return and will also

be subjected to Assessment proceedings and in case of non-

furnishing of the return, they may be penalized, therefore, it is

against the public policy also.
22.         In W.P.(T) No.2890 of 2011 copies of orders

/circulars issued in the light of the judgment given in the case of

Central Coalfields Limited Versus State of Jharkhand, decided by

the Division Bench of this Court on 8.3.2011 have been placed on

record wherein, instructions have been issued for levy and

recovery of the electricity duty from the various consumers

through the Department of Commercial Taxes of the State of

Jharkhand and those circulars / orders have been challenged on

the same pleas which we have already referred above.
23.         To counter the arguments for the counsels for the

petitioners , learned counsel for the     D.V.C., Sr. Advocate, Sri
15
S.B.Gadodia vehemently submitted that the respondents have no

reason to approach this Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution

of India seeking relief which is contrary to their contractual

obligation,   which contract, they themselves, with open eyes

entered into and signed the agreement and that too in the case of

M/s Tata Steel Company as back as about more than 30 years

ago and they were paying the duty from beginning. It is submitted

that there is no dispute that the D.V.C. has been established

under the provisions of the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act
of

1948 and the D.V.C. is not covered by the
Electricity Act
of 1910.

It is submitted that the provisions of the
D.V.C. Act
1948 are

required to be taken note of and it is clear from the
D.V.C. Act
of

1948 that the D.V.C. can have the only bulk supply consumers of

the electricity and that is clear from the
Section 18
of the D.V.C.

Act of 1948 which provides that notwithstanding to anything

contained in the
Indian Electricity Act, 1910
or any License

granted thereunder, the corporation can sell the electrical energy

to any of the consumers in the Damodar Valley where the energy

taken by the consumers at a pressure of 30,000 Volt or more of

transmitting electrical energy in the D.V.C. at a pressure of 30,000

Volt or more, generate any electrical energy at an installation

having aggregate capacity of 10,000 K.W. in any part of the

Damodar Valley etc., therefore, the D.V.C. is a Company

constituted for special purpose to supply the bulk energy and

therefore, it has been empowered under Section 20 to charge for

supply for electrical energy.
Section 20
of the D.V.C. Act of 1948

provides that the Corporation shall fix the schedule of charges for

the supply of electrical energy including rates for bulk supply and

distribution and specified the manner of recovery of surcharge
16
provided, that the corporation may contract for contractual work to

supply electric energy, impose such direction and condition

including the rate, schedule as it may be deemed necessary or

desirable to encourage the use of electrical energy.         The writ

petitioners have neither challenged the agreement or its any term

and they took the benefit under the agreement and it is in fact, the

statutory agreement in view of the
Section 20
of the D.V.C. Act

1948, therefore, the petitioners cannot claim for relief from this

Court against the statutory contract as they specifically agreed to

pay the electricity duty. Learned counsel for the D.V.C. further

submitted that
Section 3
is the charging Section and this clearly

provides the instance of duty and Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
further stipulates not only for levy of the electricity duty but

specifically provides that the said duty shall be "paid to the State

Government".      It further specifically provides that the electricity

duty shall be charges on the units of the energy consumed or

sold. Therefore, the consumers of the D.V.C are liable to pay the

electricity due by virtue of the agreement between the parties and

in view of the language used in Sub Section (1)of
Section 3
of the

Act of 1948, the D.V.C. consumers are liable to pay the duty to the

State directly.
24.          It is submitted that the electricity is 'goods' under the

definition of the
Sales of Goods Act
and yet it is of special nature.

The electricity cannot be stored and therefore, required to be

consumed forthwith. The energy infact is, first consumed then the

sale stands completed because of the plain and simple reason

that electricity cannot be stored, therefore, as soon as the energy

is generated, then it requires to be transmitted and required to be

consumed otherwise it can go waste only. Learned counsel for
17
the D.V.C. relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court

dealing with this point in detail, reported in (2002) 5 SCC in the

case of State of Andhra Pradesh Versus National Thermal Power

Corporation wherein it has been held that energy cannot be

stored. Learned counsel for the DVC also submitted that in view of

the peculiar nature of the transmission in peculiar circumstance,

that consumption of the electricity takes place first to the sale of

the electricity because the supplying company can raise the bills

after consumption of the electricity and therefore, before that they

cannot even raise the bills and        before the sale they cannot

receive the sale price. Consequently, the sale completes after

consumption, upon receipt of sale price. Therefore, when liability

is upon both then in consonance with statutory provision,

providing law of electricity duty as sell or consumption, the

consumer fall in second category and therefore, also liable to pay

electricity duty to the State Government directly.          Therefore,

according to the learned counsel for the D.V.C., if Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
is understood properly, then it is in fact the liability of

the consumer and
Section 3
has been duly assented by the His

Excellency the President of India. Not only this, that
Section 3
is

the charging Section having the assent of the President of India,

and the rates prescribed in the schedule also have been assented

by His Excellency the President of India and therefore, the

Schedule also became the part of Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
i.e.,

the charging section. A bare perusal of the Schedule clearly

reveals that the electricity duty is levied according to the nature of

consumption of the electricity and the tariff has been prescribed

duly for different uses. The DVC is generating and transmitting

the electrical energy to the consumers.
Sub-
Section 1
of Section
18
3
very specifically provides that it is required to be charged

according to its use then the duty can be only fastened upon the

end users. It is true that in Sub
Section 1
of
section 3
it has been

mentioned that the electricity duty shall be leviable on the units of

energy consumed or sold. But, it is emphatically submitted that the

consumption is the relevant and important factor in the light of the

charging provision
Section 3
read with Schedule. The
Section 4
is

not the charging section and therefore, no assent of the President

of India is required for the
Section 4
to become operational as per

the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court given in the case of
Damodar Valley Corporation Vs. State of Bihar
, reported in (1976) 3

SCC 710.
In the said
Damodar Valley Corporation
case, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court clearly held that the charging Section is
Section 3
and
Section 3
only and the charging section cannot be

amended, altered or modified by any other Section as has been

sought in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners

by stating that
Section 4
changed the entire concept of charge of

electricity duty making it liable on only Licensee under
Section

4(1)
. However, learned counsel for the D.V.C has submitted that

it never admitted itself to be a Licensee under the Act of 1948 and

the Rules of 1949 nor admitting so today.
However, in view of the

judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in the
Damodar Valley

Corporation
case (Supra), the D.V.C. is liable to pay the electricity

duty on the units of electricity which is not exempted under Sub

Clause (d) of Sub
Section 2
of
Section 3
of the Act of 1948.
25.         After arguing at length on various points, learned

counsel for the D.V.C. drew our attention to the order passed by

the Supreme Court in pursuance of which the matters have been

sent to the court and according to the learned counsel for the
19
D.V.C. the only question referred to this Court by the Supreme

Court is to find out who is the 'Assessee', who, the writ petitioner's

companies or the D.V.C. is the 'Assessees' under the definition of

the Rules of 1949?
26.          One another core or important issue involved in this

writ petition which is raised by the learned counsel for the

petitioners is that whether in any circumstance, the State can

straight way demand the electricity duty from the writ petitioners

who are the consumers of the D.V.C. It is submitted that the

challenge to the Amendment Act 2011 was also necessitated

because of the reason that by the Amendment Act of 2011, the

radical changes have been made in the definition so as to include

each and every consumer of the electricity in the State of

Jharkhand in the definition of the consumer which was not

included in the definition before the Amendment Act 2011 and

only the 'Licensee' was the consumer in the definition of the Act of

1948.    This    change     which     has    been     made     effective,

retrospectively, may make all including the writ petitioner liable to

pay the electricity duty to the State. Therefore, validity of Act of

2011 and making it operational from retrospective effect was

necessarily required to be examined while deciding these

petitions. The learned counsel for the D.V.C. very vehemently

submitted that the Tata Steel Company and particularly West

Bokaro Colliery itself admitted in its earlier petition that it is

providing electricity to its employees and it is selling electricity so it

comes in the purview of the
Section 4
and liable for the payment

of the electricity duty to the State. It is also submitted that the

D.V.C.'s consumers -writ petitioners are also the bulk supply

energy consumers and therefore, also they are liable to pay the
20
electricity to the State.
27.          Learned counsel for the State also submitted that in

view of the clear language of Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
of the Act

of 1948, the electricity duty is payable on sale as well as upon

consumption of the electricity. Learned counsel for the State also

submitted that even if, the petitioners as such are the consumers

of the D.V.C. but are liable to pay the duty under the provisions of

the
Electricity Act
because the consumers are also liable to pay

the electricity duty. The learned counsel for the State has also

relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the

case of Damodar Valley Corporation and empathetically submitted

that in view of
the said judgment
this issue is no more res-integra

that, whether the Damodar Valley Corporation is liable for the

electricity duty or not ? Therefore, the only question which has

been referred to this Court is to determine that who is and who

can be the assessee in the facts and circumstances of the case.
28.          Learned Counsel for the State has tried to justify the

Act of 2011 as well as making it operational retrospectively.

Learned counsel for the State relied upon the various judgments

and particularly in case of Zile Singh Versus State of Haryana

And Others, reported in, 2004 (8) SCC 1, and submitted that the

amendment of the Act of 2011 as well as the notification is

curative in nature and therefore, its operation cannot be treated at

par for making any enactment retrospectively operative.        It is

submitted that the definitions were already there and there were

some ambiguity which have been clarified. It is submitted that the

amendment have been made so as to make the provisions of the

electricity duty Act, 1948 in conformity with the Electricity Act

2003, therefore, the State has to include the D.V.C. specifically in
21
the definition of the 'Licensee' to include the D.V.C.
29.          The learned counsel or the State also relied upon the

judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court delivered in the case of 1987

(6) SCC 42, wherein it has been held that even the tax can be

imposed retrospectively and learned counsel for the State has

also relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in

(1995) SCC 338.
30.          Learned counsel for the State vehemently submitted

that the scope of the litigation is very narrow and in the counter of

the writ petitioner, it took the stand that substantially the issue has

been already decided by the Division Bench of this Court in earlier

round of litigation in the judgment delivered in the case of M/s

Atibir Hi-tech Pvt. Ltd. which has been considered by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in the case of said company in Civil Appeal

No.3450 of 2008.
31.          We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and perused the facts of the case. Sub

Clause (d) of
Section 2
of the Act of 1948 is as under:-
"(d) 'licensee' means any person,
                   including a company or a local authority
                   licensed    under
Part   II   of   the   Indian
                   Electricity Act, 1910
(IX of 1910) to supply
                   energy, or any persons including a company
                   or a local authority who has obtained
                   sanction under
section 28
of the Act to
                   engage in the business of supplying energy
                   and includes the Bihar Electricity Board
                   constituted under
Section 5
of the Electricity
                   (supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948)."
It is unambiguously clear from the above definition ,

that the 'Licensee' under the definition as provided in Sub Clause
22
(d) of
Section 2
, is any person including a company or a legal

authority who is required to take license under Part III of the India

Electricity Act 1910 and who supply energy to any person

including the company or a legal authority which has obtained

sanction under
Section 28
of the Act to engage in the business of

supplying energy and includes the Bihar Electricity Board

constituted under
Section 5
of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
To examine this issue, who is the licensee, before

amendment of the Act of 2011, we need to look into the

unamended definition of the Licensee. Admittedly the D.V.C. is not

a company who was required to take License under the
Electricity

Act, 1910
nor it obtained sanction under
Section 28
of the Act. It

has been constituted and created under its own Act i. e., the
Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948
. In D.V.C's case (1976) 3

SCC 710 Hon'ble Supreme Court already decided that the D.V.C.

is not the licensee under the State Act of 1948. However, that

issue is not very much relevant for deciding the issue referred to

this Court by the Supreme Court, that whether D.V.C. is an

assessee or not under the 1948 Act which will be apparent from

the reasons hereinbelow mentioned and particularly in view of the

fact that in this case the dispute between the parties are not with

respect to the quantification of the duty or distribution of liability

among them but the question is only with respect to,upon who this

duty can be levied and recovered ? Therefore, the
Section 3
is

relevant.
Section 3
is a charging Section and this question cannot

be in dispute in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the

Hon'ble   Supreme      Court   given    in   the
Damodar     Valley

Corporation
's case as back as in 1976 reported in (1976) 3

SCC,710. In this case the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already
23
considered the effect of the Clause 1 and 2 of the
Article 288
and

the requirement of obtaining the assent of the President of India

and found that it is required only for
Section 3
of the Act of 1948

which is a charging Section and after considering the Sub Clause
(e) of Sub-
section 2
of
Section 3
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held

that the
Section 3
deals with the instances of duty and makes it

clear that the duty has to be paid on the units of energy consumed

or sold at the rate or rates specified in the Schedule. The Hon'ble

Supreme Court has further held that
Section 3
has made clear

that the duty is to be levied and paid to the State Government. It is

not the case of any of the parties that the State Government

cannot levy and recover the duty upon the units of electricity, sold

or consumed and rightly it has not been disputed by any of the

parties in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court and the

Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that Section 4 of Principle Act

merely provides for manner and mode of payment of the duty and

then held for
Section 4
the assent of the President of India was

not at all necessary. Therefore,
Section 3
and
4
both are valid

enactment and their validity has not been challenged by the

petitioners and so have been done rightly in view of the judgment

of the Supreme Court also.
32.         Now, in the light of the above legal position we have to

examine arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the D.V.C.

who empathetically submitted that by giving any interpretation of
Section 4
affecting the effect of
Section 3
would be rendering the

one statutory provision contrary to the another statutory provision.

However, we are in agreement with the submissions of the learned

counsel for the D.V.C., so far that
Section 3
is the charging Section

and Schedule also is a part and parcel of the Sub
Section 1
of
24
Section 3
and , it is also validly enacted law but what has been

done by Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
is only that it has provided that

the units of energy consumed or sold shall be having the liability of

the electricity duty. It specifically nowhere provided that inspite of

the fact that two persons i.e., seller and consumer, have been

included in Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
for the purpose of charging

electricity duty and it has not been provided who shall be liable to

pay the electricity duty to State as primarily responsible.         The

charging Section cannot be read to destroy the meaning of another

Section in the Statute itself when that section in the Statute is legal

and valid and which appears to be supplementary to first section.

The liability is upon the consumption as well as upon the sale but

chargeable from either of them, and therefore, the word 'or' has

been used in between the two, "on the units of energy consumed or

sold". Now,
Section 4
or any of the part of
Section 4
whether runs

contrary to
Section 3
or effects the liability or the duty of payment of

the electricity duty? In our opinion none of the provisions made in

and under
Section 4
effect the
Section 3
as it only provides

procedure for recovery of the liability created by
Section 3
and

therefore, it is supplementary to
Section 3
. The Sub
Section 1
of
Section 4
says that every licensee shall pay the electricity duty and

Sub
Section 2
of
Section 4
authorizes the licensee to recover the

amount of the electricity duty paid by the licensee. Therefore,
Section 4
has prescribed the procedure for recovery of the

electricity duty and made licensee liable to pay electricity duty to the

State. Therefore, two things are clear; that the D.V.C. is licensee

and by virtue of Sub-
Section 1
of
Section 4
is liable to pay the

electricity duty to the State, though with a right to recover it from the

consumer and another is that as per definition of 'assessee', Rule 2
25
(b) of the Rules of 1949, D.V.C. is Assessee and consumers of

D.V.C. are not the Assessees.
However, there is an written contract between the

parties i.e., between D.V.C. and its consumer, wherein it has been

specifically provided that the electricity duty shall be paid by the

petitioners to the D.V.C. Learned counsel for the respondent-D.V.C

was fully justified in submitting that in view of the agreement the

petitioners are liable to pay the electricity duty. The submission of

the learned counsel for the petitioner that when in Sub
Section 4
of
Section 4
of the Act of 1948, licensee's right to recover the

electricity duty from its consumer has not             been provided

specifically or by implication as has been provided in Sub
Section 2
of
Section 4
of the Act of 1948 therefore, the petitioner are not liable

to pay the electricity duty merely because consumers of D.V.C.

signed the agreement which according to learned counsel is

contrary to law, in view of the fact that right to recover electricity

duty from it's consumer is given to only licensee under
Section 4 (1)
(a) and such right is not given to any other person merely, who is

assessee but not licensee. We do not find any force in such

argument.    The fact situation in that all the petitions, in written

statutory contract with D.V.C., agreed to pay the Electricity duty to

the D.V.C. In one of the case of M/s Tata Steel, there is an

agreement which is old more than 30 years, but that length of

period, even if is ignored even then once consumers of D.V.C.

agreed to pay the electricity duty to the D.V.C. then, that

agreement cannot be said to be illegal or void in any manner

because the Act nowhere prohibited the shifting of burden upon the

consumer by the supplier of electricity energy. Therefore, the

contract to pay electricity duty to D.V.C. is not hit by any law.
26
Furthermore the condition of payment of electricity duty by the

D.V.C.'s consumers has not been challenged by anybody at any

time and is also not under challenge in these petitions. Learned

counsel for the petitioners very rightly submitted that they are not

challenging the agreement or its any part, their contention is only

that they are not covered under and governed by the Act of 1948

and the Rules of 1949 and therefore, they are not liable to pay the

electricity duty. If this argument is considered ignoring the

agreement, this argument may be valid but so far as the liability of

petitioners who are party to legal and statutory agreement are

bound by the terms and conditions of the agreement and therefore,

the D.V.C. has        right to recover the electricity duty from its

consumers under the terms of the agreement. At this juncture, it

will not be irrelevant to mention here that the D.V.C. is liable to pay

the electricity duty under the Rules of 1949 inspite of the fact that it

is not license and it is governed by
D.V.C. Act
whereunder it can

prescribe what charges will be borne by the D.V.C. consumers,

therefore, the D.V.C. statutory has fixed this liability upon its

consumers. The writ petitioners were regularly paying the electricity

duty to the D.V.C and did not question the right of the D.V.C. under

statutory agreement between he parties. In these writ petitions

substantially, the petitioners have come before this Court because

the State straightway sought to recover the electricity duty from the

writ petitioners who are the consumers of the D.V.C. and that was

the cause of action. In view of the fact situation, in fact, this ground,

legally not sustainable and the petitioner factually cannot raise this

issue.
33.      It is also submitted that petitioners obtained certificate of

registration under the Rules of 1949 for their registration as
27
Assesse; which is void from inception. The Hon'ble Supreme Court,

therefore, has made it clear that the core issue in these matters is

that who is the assessee. Therefore, we have to examine that

whether the petitioners who have obtained the Certificate of

Registration under the Rules of 1949 can be said to be assessee

and because of their obtaining the Certificate, whether they are

precluded and estopped from saying that they are not the assessee

and whether they are liable to pay the electricity duty to the State

Government directly or the State Authorities through its Commercial

Tax Department who is the in-charge for recovery of electricity duty.
Facts of the Writ Petition No. W.P.(T) No. 3525 of 2005,

Central Coal Fields Limited Versus State of Jharkhand are relevant.

In that writ petition, the petitioner challenged the demand of

surcharge levied under
Section 3(A)
of the Electricity Duty Act of

1948. In the writ petition No. W.P.(T) No.5325 of 2005, the

petitioner's own case was that, the petitioner was using the

electricity purchased from the D.V.C for it's own use as well as for

sale also, which is not the fact situation in present case and counsel

for the petitioner's contentions is that these matters are only of

those units on which the petitioners are consuming the electricity

purchased from the D.V.C for their own use. Therefore, the

judgment given in the W.P.(T) No.5325 of 2005 has no application.
34.    This controversy is because, a few orders have been issued

by the Commercial Taxes Department directing writ petitioners to

pay the electricity duty to the State under the impression that in

view of   order dated 8.3.2011 passed in the
Central Coalfields

Limited Vs. State of Jharkhand
, delivered in W.P.(T) No. 5325 of

2005 , the State authorities are required to demand the electricity

duty from the writ petitioners.
28
35.         Learned counsel for the State in fact could not show us

any provision of law under which the petitioners could have been

treated to be the assessee under the Act of 1948 and the Rules of

1949. We considered the definition of the "assessee" which has not

been given in the Act of 1948 and which has been given in the

Rules of 1949.     As per the Sub Clause (b) of
Section 2
,           the

"Assessee" means a licensee or any other persons who is liable to

pay the duty under the Act of 1948". The liability to pay the

electricity duty is not applicable to person who is not liable to pay

duty under the Act of 1948 and is liable for the said duty under

contract with the assessee under different Act. The liability to pay

the duty under the Act can be found out from the
Section 3
and
Section 4
which we have discussed. For sub-
section 1
of
section 3
,

we have already observed that,           that only provided that the

electricity duty shall be upon the units of energy consumed or sold ,

therefore the electricity duty is attached to the energy units.
Section

3
in absence of
Section 4
, may have created confusion that who is

primarily liable to pay the electricity duty to the State. It appears the

charging Section, i.e.,
Section 3
, provided for charging of the

electricity duty and the mode and the manner of payment and

liability between seller and he consumer(electricity user) has been

provided in
Section 4
. According to sub
section 1
initial liability to

pay the electricity duty is upon the licensee and the licensee has

been given right to recover the amount from the consumers.

Therefore, there is no dispute with respect to the case where the

licensee has supplied electricity to consumer . The disputes centers

around sub
Section 4
of Section (4) wherein the language of which

is as under :
"4.   Payment of Duty -(1)......
29
(2)....
(3)....
(4) Every person including any department of the
             State Government, other than a licensee, who
             generates energy for his own use or for the use of
             his employees, or partly for such use and partly for
             sale, shall pay every month at the time and in the
             manner prescribed the proper duty payable under
Section 3
, on the units of energy consumed by him
             or his employees or sold by him."
36.         Sub
section 4
provides that the electricity duty shall be

on "every person" (1) who generates energy for its own use or (2)

for the use of its employees or (3) partly for such use and partly for

sale. In case in hand, we are dealing with the petitioners' those

units cases where the petitioners are purchasing the electricity from

the D.V.C. for their own use, not for its (i) employees or (ii) partly for

use of its employees and partly for sale. We are also not

considering the cases of petitioners who are generating electricity.

Therefore, the cases in hand are not covered under Sub-Section (4)

of
Section 4
. Sub
Section 4(a)
creates liability to pay the electricity

duty upon "every (such) person" other than licensee who (1) obtains

bulk supply of energy, whether from licensee or other person (1) for

sale or (2) partly for his own use and partly for sale. The petitioner,

though are if presumed        to purchasing electricity in bulk (bulk

energy is not defined) even then they are not selling energy or its

any part, therefore, the petitioners are not liable to pay electricity

duty under sub
section 4(a)
of
section 4
of the Electricity Duty Act,

1948. As per definition of "Assessee" given in Clause (a) of Rule 2

of Rules of 1949, assessee means the licensee or any other person

who is liable to pay electricity duty under the Act. Therefore, the

D.V.C who is liable to pay the electricity due under the Act is

"Assessee" as defined in the Rules of 1949 but the petitioners,

though liable to pay the electricity duty but not to the State nor
30
under the Act of 1948 or Rules of 1949, are not the assessee for

the purpose of above Act and Rule.
37.          It is also submitted that the number of consumers of

D.V.C. are very few, only less than 200 as compared to the

consumers of other electricity generation companies or licensees or

assessees.     The writ petitioners are in fact consumers of bulk

supply of energy. It is also submitted that the TATA Steel Ltd. in its

reply admitted that it is supplying energy to its employees whereas,

the contention of M/S TATA Steel Co. Ltd. is that it has its other

units where they are licensee and they are paying electricity duty

and for the unit for which reference has been given by the learned

counsel or the D.V.C, the TATA Steel Ltd. itself has its own

generation of electricity and electricity generated by them, they are

using for their employees and they are not purchasing any part of

the electricity to the D.V.C. for that unit. In present case, the mater

is of TATA Steel company which is neither generating electricity nor

selling the electricity after obtaining it from D.V.C. However, we are

of considered opinion in Section 3 and Section 4 there is distinction

that these Sections will have different application for bulk supply

users and for other users, therefore, this argument does not make

the position different then what has been held by us.
38.          In view of the above discussions , even if it is provided

by sub
section 3
that the duty is leviable upon the energy consumed

and the writ petitioners are consumers of the units of the energy

supplied by the D.V.C even then the state has no right to recover

directly the electricity duty from the writ petitioners and when the

D.V.C is liable to pay the electricity duty under sub
section 1
of
section 3
and it has been so held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

the year 1976 in the D.V.C's case itself then in that situation the
31
State can recover electricity duty only from D..V.C. and the State

authorities have no authority under the Act of 1948 and rules 1949

to demand the electricity duty from the consumers of the

D.V.C. directly and consequentially the consumers of D.V.C.

are not the Assessees in the definition of 'Assessee' and the

D.V.C. is assessee under Rule 2(b) of Rules of 1949.
39.         It is also appear from bare reading of the definitions of

the licensee as given under sub- clause (d) of
Section 2
that the

then Bihar Electricity Board and now the Jharkhand State Electricity

Board is licensee. Sub
Section 1
of
Section 3
cannot be read to

mean that the liability is simultaneous upon the consumer and the

seller of the electricity unit, if so, will be held then that will result

into holding that the every consumer of the electricity even of the

State Electricity Board is directly liable to pay the electricity duty to

the State Government applying same principle, that the energy

cannot be stored and first it is consumed then the transaction of

sale stands complete. Otherwise also, if it is held that all consumers

are liable to pay electricity duty to the State Government directly

then the consequence will be grave as all consumers who are lakhs

in number will have to obtain registration and will be subjected to

agreement under the Rules which will make the procedure

unworkable for no reason.
40.
Now, the Act
of 2003 is very relevant and require to be

considered because of the reason that the Supreme Court has

directed this Court to examine the effect of the Act of 2003.
41.         We have already held that under the
Bihar Electricity

Act, 1948
and the Rules of 1949, in the definition of the "licensee"

the D.V.C. was not included. However, in the Electricity Act of 2003,

the D.V.C. has been made "licensee" by deeming provisions as
32
provided in the fourth proviso to Section 14. The fourth proviso of

Section 14 is relevant. Fourth proviso to
Section 14
of the Act of

2003 is as under : -
"Provided also that the Damodar Valley
                  Corporation, established under Sub-Section
                  (1) of
Section 3
of the Damodar Valley
                  Corporation Act, 1948 (14 of 1948), shall be
                  deemed to be a licensee under this Act but
                  shall not be required to obtain a license under
                  this Act and the provisions of the
Damodar
                  Valley Corporation Act, 1948
(14 of 1948),
                  insofar as they are not inconsistent with the
                  provisions of this Act, shall continue to apply
                  to that Corporation."
42.        With the help of this proviso, learned counsel for the

petitioner vehemently submitted that this deeming clause cannot be

extended to any other Act like Act of d1948, which is clear from the

language used in the Act of 2003 itself, which clearly says that the

D.V.C. shall be deemed to be a Licensee under this Act.

Therefore, the D.V.C. is a Licensee under the
Electricity Act, 2003
and not under the Act of 1948 or in the Rules of 1949.
43.        The arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners

has not impressed us in view of the fact that what has been

provided by the fourth proviso of Section 14 is that the D.V.C. shall

be deemed to be a Licensee under the Act of 2003 and further, has

been provided that it shall not be required to obtain the License

under the Act of 2003
In the Act
of 1948, every licensee, who

obtained the license under the
Indian Electricity Act
of 1910, has

been declared licensee under Clause (d) of
Section 2
of the Act of

1948. Act of 1910 has been repealed by
Section 183
of the Act of

2003. Admittedly, the D.V.C was not licensee under the Act of 1910

and therefore, was held to be not licensee under the Act of 1948.

Act of 2003 took place of Act of 1910. There is no Act of 1910 with

coming in the force of the Act of 2003, yet there is reference of Act
33
of 1910 in
Section 2 (b)
of the Act of 1948.
Section 8
of General

Clauses Act 1897 taken case of such situation.
Section 8
of the

General Clauses Act of 1897 is as under :
"8. Construction of references to
                   repealed enactments. - (1) Where this Act, or
                   any Central Act or Regulation made after the
                   commencement of this Act, repeals and re-
                   enacts, with or without modification, any provision
                   of a former enactment, then references in any
                   other enactment or in any instrument to the
                   provision so repealed shall, unless a different
                   intention appears, be construed as references to
                   the provision so re-enacted.
(2) Where before the Fifteenth day of
                   August, 1947, any Act of Parliament of the United
                   Kingdom repealed and re-enacted, with or
                   without modification, any provision of a former
                   enactment, then reference in any Central Act or
                   in any Regulation or instrument to the provision
                   so repealed shall, unless a different intention
                   appears, be construed as references to the
                   provision so re-enacted."
In view of the
Section 8
of the Act 1897, where one reference

of the Act 1910 is given in the Act of 1948, it shall be deemed to the

reference to the provisions re-enacted. Therefore, in the definition Clause

4(b) in place of "
Indian Electricity Act
1910",
Electricity Act
2003 is

required to be read. Therefore, by 4th proviso to Section 14, the D.V.C is

licensee now, under the Act of 2003, consequently, the D.V.C who was

recovering the Electricity Duty from it's consumer, after coming into force

of 4th proviso to
Section 14
of the Act of 2003 can recover the Electricity

Duty from it's consumers as licensee.
Once in Indian Electricity Act,

2003
, the D.V.C. has been made deemed licensee, it is "licensee" for all

purposes and only exception is that it need not to obtain licence under the

Act of 2003 by virtue of fourth proviso to
Section 4
. The D.V.C. also got

the right to transmit or distribute or can undertake trading in electricity for

which the D.V.C. is authorized under the
D.V.C. Act
also. D.V.C. being

licensee under the Act of 2003, it fall in the definition of licensee under
Section 2(d)
of the Act of 1948. Section 2(d) of the State Act of 1948 and
34
with the repeal of the Act of 1910 and coming into force of the Act of

2003, licensee under the Act of 2003 became licensee under the Act of

1948.
44. The petitioners' other contention was that the petitioners are not

liable for the Surcharge.
45. In our opinion, the Surcharge is leviable under
Section 3A
and it is

leviable upon every licensee "or any other person other than the

licensee, who is liable to pay duty under
Section 4
".Sub-section (2) of
Section 3A
clearly provides notwithstanding anything to the contrary

contained in the Act of 1948, no licensee or any other person, who is

liable to pay surcharge shall be entitled to collect the amount of

surcharge as such from the consumer. Therefore, the consumers have

been excluded from the liability to pay surcharge under
Section 3A
,

therefore, it is held that the writ petitioners are not liable to pay

surcharge even to Damodar Valley Corporation. Since
Section 3A
is

very specific and it provides that notwithstanding anything

contained in the Act of 1948, no licensee or person who is

required to pay surcharge shall be entitled to collect the

amount of surcharge from the consumer, therefore, it is held

that the DVC is not entitled to demand and collect surcharge

from its consumers.
46.        Now we, after holding so, may now consider the challenge to

the Act of 2011 and its retrospective operation. On the question of validity

of the retrospective operation of the Amendment Act of 2011, learned

counsel for the petitioners submitted that sub
Section 3
of the
Section 1
has empowered the State Government for fixing the different dates for

coming into force of different provisions of the Act and therefore, intention

of the legislature was very clear that these dates will be future dates,

otherwise the legislature itself could have provided in the Amendment
35
Act, 2011 itself that the amendments will come into force with immediate

effect or retrospectively. Learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon

the judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in 2004(8) SCC 1,

1987(64) SCC 42, and 1995 SCC 338. Further contention of learned

counsel for the writ petitioners was that the notification has been issued

in delegated legislative power and it is not the notification issued by the

legislature itself. The provision of any Act cannot be made retrospectively

operative by delegation of power. Learned counsel for the petitioners

also submitted that if these provisions are made operative from the back

date, it will result into penal consequences and in fact will make the

entire settled position changed as well as will result into such a chaotic

situation which will be even beyond the control            of   the State

Government.
47.    We have examined the Act of 2011 as well Act of 1948 and the

Rules of 1949. Radical changes have been made in the Act of 1948 by

the Amendment Act of 2011. A comparative chart submitted by the

counsel for the petitioners is very useful :-
Challenge to Jharkhand Electricity Duty(Amendment) Act,2011
48. During pendency of these writ petitions, after the order of

remand passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 30th April,

2008, the State Government enacted Jharkhand Electricity

(Amendment) Act, 2011and thereafter, by notification dated

28th June, 2011 made the following sections operative with

retrospective effect.
Sections 2 and 3 of the Amendment Act have been made

retrospective from 10th June, 2003;
Section 5
effective from

15th November, 2000 and
Sections 4
&
6
to be effective from

the date of publication of the Act of 2011. Therefore, in
36
substance
Section 2
,
3
,
4
,
5
and
6
have been made operative

retrospectively.
49.   By this amendment, definition of the consumer given

under the Act of 1948 has been amended . In sub-sections (1),

(2),(3),(4) and (4a), the words " or any other person, who is

liable to pay electricity duty" has been added. There are

amendments also but for the purposes of deciding the

controversy between the parties, these amendments in
Section

4
are relevant because of the reason that all the petitioners are

admittedly obtaining the electricity from the respondent-

Damodar Valley Corporation and their contention is that they

are not the licencees, assessees or even consumers of the State

Government under the
Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948
.
50.   We have already held that the writ petitioners who are

obtaining the electricity from the DVC for their own use and

who are not covered by sub-section(4) and sub-section(4a) are

neither licensee nor assessee nor consumer under the Act of

1948, but because of this Amendment of 2011 and because of

making the above provisions operative retrospectively , all the

consumers in the State of Jharkhand, irrespective of source

from where they are getting the electricity, are liable to pay

electricity duty. This position is not only disputed by the State

Government, but it has been admitted specifically that because

of the amendment referred above, all consumers have been

directly made liable to pay electricity duty to the State

Government. The State, who has not filed the detailed reply and

relied upon the reply filed by the applications for amendment of

the   writ   petitions   to    challenge   the   Act   of   2011   and

retrospectivity of the above provisions, submitted that as per
37
Section 3
of the Act of 1948, both seller and consumer are

liable to pay the electricity duty because the language of sub-

section(1) of
Section 3
is very clear, which has levied the

electricity duty on the units of energy consumed or sold. It is

submitted that
Section 3
is charging Section and its validity has

been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and, therefore,

liability of the seller and consumer of electricity is simultaneous

upon both. By amendment, the State has only provided that the

State may recover the electricity duty directly from the

consumers instead of recovering the electricity duty from the

licensee or person who generates energy for his own use or for

the use of his employees or partly for such use or partly for sale

and realise from those persons who obtains electricity for sale ,

partly for his own use or partly for sale, bulk supply of energy

generated by a licensee or other person . It is submitted that so

far as the power of the State Government in enacting the law

for the electricity duty is concerned, that is not under challenge.

It is submitted that sub-clause(iii) of Section 1 of the

Amendment Act of 2011, empowers the State Government to

notify the effective dates of the coming into operation of the

Sections of the Act of 2011. Therefore, the state government

has made these provisions operative retrospectively.
51.      It will be worthwhile to mention here that when the

matter was pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court found that the
Electricity Act
of 2003

has been enacted and that subsequent event is also required to

be examined and Hon'ble supreme Court observed that "what

needs to be decided is whether the said company or the Damodar Valley

Corporation is the assessee under the 1948 Act particularly in view of the
38
provisions of Section 14 of the said 2003 Act; the effect of 2003 Act on

the registration certificate issued earlier under the
Bihar Electricity Act,

1948
and the interpretation of 1948 Act, the 1949 Rules in juxta position

to the
Electricity Act, 2003
". Then Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that

"these questions were not raised and, therefore, not gone into by the

High Court. however, they are of considerable public importance hence

we have to remit this matter for consideration in accordance with law".

The Hon'ble Supreme Court, since has directed this Court to examine

the effect of the Act of 2003 and during consideration of issue, the State

Government has enacted the Amendment Act of 2011 and amended the
Electricity Duty Act, 1948
, which has material bearing on the issue ,

therefore, this Court allowed the amendment after hearing the parties to

avoid further litigation.
52.   The parties addressed on the question of the validity of the Act of

1948 as well as on the question of validity of the Notification dated 28 th

June, 2011 , which we are dealing with hereinafter.
53.    The petitioners since are not liable to pay electricity duty under the

Act of 1948 and Rules of 1949, therefore, the petitioners can challenge

the Act of 2011 and Notification dated 28th June, 2011 making the
Sections 2
,
3
,
4
,
5
and
6
operative retrospectively , on the ground that by

this amendment, the State has made the petitioners liable to pay

electricity duty.
54.   To understand this issue, it will be appropriate to examine the

provisions of levy of electricity duty and its recovery before amendment of

2011 and after amendment of 2011.
Section 3
has not been amended

and the electricity duty is leviable on the units of energy consumed or

sold. Therefore, as per the charging Section, the electricity duty was the

liability of the consumer as well as seller . However, to make it clear that

how the recovery of electricity duty will be effected in a situation when
39
simultaneous liability has been created to pay electricity duty by sub-

section(1) of
Section 3
of the Act of 1948 upon the seller and consumer,
Section 4
has been enacted. As per unamended
Section 4(1)
, the

licensee was liable to pay the electricity duty to the Government every

month, on the units of energy consumed by him or sold by him to the

consumer. Therefore, the consumer automatically became liable to pay

the electricity duty to the licensee and the licensee who are collecting the

electricity duty was required to pay the State Government. Since as per

Rule 11, where there is a series of transfers of the same energy, the duty

payable shall be levied only at the last point in such series of transfers

and, therefore, by Sectional 4(1), power was given to the licensee to

recover the electricity duty from the consumer. As per unamended sub-

section(4) of
Section-4
, every person including the department of the

State Government, other than a licensee, who generates energy for his

own use or for the use of his employees, or partly for such use and partly

for sale, were to pay the electricity duty every month to the State

Government and as per sub-section (4a) of
Section 4
, every person

other than a licensee who obtains, for sale or partly for his own use and

partly for sale, bulk supply of energy generated by a licensee or other

person, were made liable to pay electricity duty on the units of the energy

consumed by him or his employees or sold by him. The validity of
Section

3
as well as 4 have already been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court

and that issue we have already discussed.
55.       In sum and substance, there was a procedure by which a

Scheme was prescribed under
Section 4
of the Act of 1948 that when

the liability to pay electricity duty is simultaneous upon the seller and

consumer, then how this should be realized by the State Government.

This procedure was followed since 1948. Because of this procedure,

there were a few persons or companies were the assessees in the
40
definition of sub clause(b) of Rule 2 of the Bihar State Electricity Duty

Rules,1949. The persons, who were liable to pay electricity duty to the

Government under the Act of 1948 and because of this are assessee,

are very few in numbers, rather say negligible number as compared to

the total consumers. As per Rule 3 of the Rules of 1949, every assessee

is required to obtain registration from the concerned authority by

submitting application in form-I appended to the Rules. Such person is

granted certificate of registration. Chapter-III of the Rules of 1949

provides the payment of duty and submission of return and every

assessee is required to pay the electricity duty by submitting appropriate

Chalan in the Government treasury and he is required to submit the

return also under Rule-9 to the appropriate authority of the Circle or sub-

circle in Form III. For every assessee, assessment order is required to

be passed under Chapter-IV of the Rules of 1949 and under Rule 14, the

appeal is provided against the order of assessment. As per
Section 8
of

the Act of 1948, any licensee or other person who is liable to pay duty

under the Act of 1948 if fails to keep books of account or to submit

returns as required by
section 5
; or intentionally obstructs an Inspecting

Officer appointed under
section 6
, in the performance of his duties or the

exercise of his powers under this Act and the rules made thereunder, is

liable to be punished with a fine which may extend to one thousand

rupees. Therefore, any person, who becomes liable to pay electricity

duty under the Act of 1948 he has to follow the procedure of keeping

books of account and is bound to submit return, as required by
Section 5
and in default thereof, there is a penal provision of fine.
56.   As we have already noticed that a few of the persons or companies

were the assessees under the Act of 1948 and Rules framed therein i.e.

Rules of 1949. The above procedure which was in operation since more

than half century has been changed. Consequence thereof, is that the
41
position which was made clear and workable by
Section 4
of the

unamended Act of 1948 had been changed and because of this change

every consumer (numbers, in lacs) who were paying the electricity duty

for the unit consumed by them through the licensee or any other person,

who was liable under the Act of 1948 to pay electricity duty to the

Government will now have independent liability to pay the electricity duty

to the State Government under the Act of 1948. Because of this

amendment, in fact, absolutely arbitrary power has been given to the

State Government to raise demand of the electricity duty against either

consumer or seller of the electricity. The State failed to justify this change

made by the Amendment in sub-section(1) and sub-section(2) of
Section

4
of the Act of 1948. This also created total confusion that by the

licensee, who has been given power to recover the electricity duty from

the consumer shall continue to raise bill of the electricity duty against the

consumer and       recover it from the consumer. Therefore, another

confusion is that whether the State Government will recover the

electricity duty directly from about      fifteen lakhs consumers of the

electricity in the State of Jharkhand or will recover the electricity duty of

these persons from and through the licensee or the person who are

liable to pay electricity duty and are assessee.
57.   Learned counsel for the State could not justify the change made by

the Amendment Act, 2011. It appears that amendments have been

made without knowing the consequence .The State Government was

getting full electricity duty from all consumers in channelised         form

through a few assessees only then why amendments have been made

to create total unworkable situation is not explained as well as it also has

not been explained how the State Government will meet with this chaotic

situation which we are referring hereinbelow.
58. Because of these amendments by adding words "or any other
42
person, who is liable to pay electricity duty" , is in
Section 4
and it's sub

sections, according to the State itself all consumers became liable to pay

the electricity duty directly to the State Government under the Act of

1948 instead of paying the electricity duty to persons who sale electricity

to the petty consumers. Now after amendment, all consumers who are

about fifteen lakhs in the State of Jharkhand are required to submit

application for registration under Rule 3 of the Rules of 1949 and obtain

a certificate of registration under Rule 4 and are required to pay the

electricity duty within two calender months of the month to which duty

relates by depositing in the Government treasury along with requisite

Challan. Not only this but every petty consumer is also required to

submit a return under Rule 9 and furnish absolutely unnecessary details,

as required under Form no.III, which includes details of the units

generated, units purchased in bulk, units loss in transmission or

transformation, balance available for consumption or for sale, units of

energy on which duty is not leviable under Rule-11 for the units

consumed in metered premises or unmetered premises . Further, details

of the units sold in metered premises, unmetered premises, then every

consumer is required to claim deduction in respect of meter premises

under sub-section(2) of
Section 3
by giving statutory details and

disclosing the net units in respect of metered premised chargeable to

duty and gross amount of duty payable on net units in respect of

metered premises, chargeable to duty etc. etc.
59.    The learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently submitted that

the State cannot give effect to this amendment as it is wholly unworkable

and will create chaotic situation as well as it will be unnecessary

burdening to the public for no reason. By this amendment, the State is

not achieving anything because without any amendment the State was

getting the full electricity duty.
43
There is force in the submission of the learned counsel for the

petitioners and State could not answer why chaotic situation will not be ,

if the amendment referred above are given effect to and every person,

having been given a single bulb connection, is required to obtain

certificate of registration and obtain the assessment in every two months.

How these Officers will handle millions of returns and pass the

assessment orders is also unexplained.
60.      In addition to above, even assuming for the sake of argument

that the State has power to amend Sections retrospectively and this

power has been vested in the Government ( not in any legislative power

but in delegative power), even then making these provisions operative

retrospectively cannot be justified as this will result into penal

consequences for the public at large, who had not committed any wrong

and by retrospective operation, the act which has not been done and

which was not required by any law, will be a wrong, resulting into penal

consequences.
61.
Section 4
has been made operative retrospectively i.e. from the

date of publication of the Jharkhand Electricity Duty(Amendment)Act,

2011. The Jharkhand Electricity Duty(Amendment)Act was published in

the Gazette on 24th June, 2011, the retrospective effect was given by

Notification dated 28th June, 2011. Therefore, from     24th June, 2011,

every consumers of the electricity was required to obtain the registration

and submit return under the Rules of 1949 ; whereas
Section 2
i.e. the

definition Section under the Amendment Act, 2011 has been made

retrospective from 10th June, 2003. Therefore, from 10th June, 2003 , the

persons who are not the consumer, they have been made consumer

from 10th June, 2003. By making Section 3 of the Amendment Act

retrospectively operative, new definitions have been given to the Actual

user of power, captive generating plant, Company, Duty, Government,
44
Industrial Unit, Mines, Month, Notification, Person, Premises, Prescribed

Authority, State, Supply, Unit and they also have been made operative

from 10th June, 2003. The purpose of these retrospective operative

provisions have not been explained that what object has been sought to

be achieved by making it retrospective from the earlier date. Section 5 of

the Amendment Act has been operative retrospectively from 15th

November, 2000 and by Section -5,
Section 4
of the Act of 1948 has

been amended and by this retrospective operative, every consumers of

the electricity became liable to pay electricity duty to the State

Government under the Act of 1948 from 15th November, 2000 and from

15th November, 2000 he is required to obtain certificate of registration

under the Rules of 1949 and became liable to maintain books of account

from 15th November, 2000 because of amendment of 2011. How effect

to this amendment can be given from back date is not known to the

State Government and amendment entails penal consequence under
Section 8
of the Act of 1948.
62.    In totality, the Amendment Act of 2011 , so far making it operative

retrospectively, is without any aim and object and without any nexus with

the object which can be achieved. However, what object is to be

achieved from this Amendment Act of 2011 is not explained by the State

Government, which has been changed by the respondents and which

appears will create only chaotic situation, unworkable and will give

absolutely arbitrary power to the State Government and the licensee to

demand electricity duty from the petty consumers. Therefore, the

amendment made in
Section 4
by the Act of 2011 is declared ultravires

to the
Article 14
of the Constitution of India as by this amendment, the

State has vested itself with the arbitrary power to demand electricity duty

either from the seller or the consumer and because of the reason that

the said amendment are wholly unworkable and further it will create
45
chaotic situation, which cannot be handed even by the State

Government of obtaining millions of applications for registration under

Rules of 1949 and passing assessment order for million persons in the

State of Jharkhand. Therefore, the Amendment made in
Section 4
is

ultravires. For rest of the amendments, the petitioners could not have

any grievance because their grievance is only because of the reason

that the petitioners who were not liable to pay electricity duty to the State

Government under the Act of 1948 shall be liable to pay electricity duty

to the State Government directly as well as to the Damodar Valley

Corporation under the Act of 1948; whereas they were paying the

electricity duty to the Damodar Valley Corporation under the contract and

DVC was paying electricity duty to the State Government. Therefore, we

are not deciding legality and validity of the other provisions of the Act of

2011.
63.     At this juncture, we may observe that Damodar Valley corporation

has been included in the definition of licensee by the Amendment Act of

2011, who is already a deemed licensee under the Act of 2003 and we

have already held that DVC was not licensee under the unamended Act

of 1948, but by virtue of the inclusion of the licensees, who has obtained

license under
Part-2 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910
is required to be

read with the help of
Section 8
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 to be
Electricity Act, 2003
. Therefore, otherwise also the DVC is licensee after

the Act of 2003. The DVC has not challenged the validity of the Act or

provisions of this inclusion in the definition of licensee. Therefore, also

other provisions are not required to be dealt with.
64. In view of the above, it is held that:
(I) Damodar Valley Corporation was not             the licensee

             under the
Bihar Electricity Duty Act, 1948
and Rules

             of 1949;
46
(II)The Damodar Valley Corporation was        the assessee

  and covered under the definition of the assessee

  given in Rule 2(b) of the Rules of 1949;.
(III)The petitioner Companies are neither llicensees nor

  assesses but obtained the registration under the

  Chapter-II of the Bihar Electricity Duty Rules, 1949.
Their registration are of no use. They may have

  obtained the registration under misconception of law

  or wrong advice but that will not make them the

  assessee registered under the Rules of 1949;
(IV)The State Government has no right to recover the

  electricity duty from the writ petitioners who are

  consumers of the Damodar Valley Corporation and

  who are obtaining the electricity from DVC for their

  own use;
(V) The petitioners cannot be subjected to assessment

  and reassessment for the electricity duty. Therefore,

  any proceeding of assessment order, reassessment

  or opening of assessment, which is pending, is

  quashed. The bills or demand raised by the State

  Government against these petitioners for electricity

  duty is also quashed.
(VI)After coming into force of
Electricity Act, 2003
, the

  DVC is deemed licensee and because of the Act of

  2003, the petitioners' status has not changed to

  assessee from non-assessee.
(VII)
Section-5
of    the    Jharkhand          Electricity

  Duty(Amendment)Act, 2011 amending
Section 4
of

  the Act of 1948 is declared to be arbitrary as it gives
47
power to the State Government to choose and pick up

               either of seller or consumer of the electricity for

               payment of electricity duty and
Section 5
of the Act of

               2011 amending
Section 4
of the Act of 1948 is wholly

               unworkable and may create chaotic situation, made

               against the public interest, therefore, declared to be

               ultravires and illegal.
65.      The petitioners are not liable to pay surcharge to the

        Damodar Valley corporation.
66.      Challenge to the rest of the provisions of the Act of

        2011      is   left   open.    The   writ     petitions   are   allowed

        accordingly, in terms of the points mentioned above.

        However, none of the petitioners, if has paid electricity

        duty to the State, shall be entitled to recover it from the

        State.
No order as to cost.
(Prakash Tatia, C.J. )

        Jaya Roy,J:- I agree

                                                     ( Jaya Roy, J. )
G.Jha
