Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 56 of 1980
Citation: AIR  1965  SC  1595,   speaking   through
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/896010/

[Cites
139
, Cited by
0
]
Madras High Court
Thiru. R. Gandhi vs Union Of India on 30 March, 2004
Bench:
R.Jayasimha Babu
,
M.Karpagavinayagam
In the High Court of Judicature at Madras


Dated: 30/03/2004 


Coram 


The Honourable Mr.Justice R.Jayasimha Babu   
and 
The Honourable Mr.Justice M.Karpagavinayagam   


Writ Petition No.2198 of 2003


Thiru. R. Gandhi
President,
Madras Bar Association, 
High Court Buildings,
Chennai - 600 104.                                       Petitioner



-vs-


Union of India,
rep. by its Secretary,
Department of Company Affairs, 
'A' Wing, 5th floor,
Shastri Bhavan, R.P. Road, 
New Delhi - 110 001.                                  Respondent



        Writ  Petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India praying
for issuance of a writ of  declaration  to  declare  Section  10FB,  Sections
10FD(2)(a),  10FD  (3)(h),  10FD(3)(g),  Section  10FE, Section 10FF, Section
10FK(2), Section 10FO, Section 10FR(3), Section 10FX, Section 79(1),  Section
79(3),  Section 117B, Section 118(3), Section 144(4), Section 163(6), Section
167, Section 188(5), Section 196(4), Section 219 (4), Section 225(3), Section
284(4), Section 304 (2)(b),  Section  307  (9)  and
Section  621  A
of  the
Companies  Act  1956 as amended by the
Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002
as ultra vires the legislative competence of the Parliament and  ultra  vires
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
, 50
and
323
B of the Constitution of India.



For Petitioner :  Mr.  Arvind P.  Datar,
                        Senior Counsel for
                        Mr.  P.H.  Arvind Pandian


For Respondent :  Mr.  V.T.  Gopalan,
                        Additional Solicitor General
                        ..  ..  ..
:ORDER
L.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T.......T....J

(Order of the Court was made by R.  Jayasimha Babu, J.)

        Apprehensive  that  the  growing  Tribunalisation  of  Justice  in the
country accompanied as it is, by the executive aggrendisement of  the  powers,
inter  alia,  relating  to  composition, tenure of the Tribunals'' members and
their selection, the powers of the President, etc., will result in the gradual
erosion of judicial independence in the special areas for which the  Tribunals
are created, and will ultimately lead to Trivialisation of Justice, the Madras
Bar  Association, which is perhaps, the oldest Bar Association in the country,
has, in this petition, questioned the constitutional validity of the amendment
effected to the
Companies  Act
by
Companies  (Second  Amendment)  Act,  2002
whereby  provision  is  made for setting up of a National Company Law Tribunal
(Tribunal) as also a National Company Law Appellate  Tribunal,  and  to  which
Tribunal,


the jurisdiction exercised by the High Court for nine decades in relation  to,
inter   alia,  amalgamation  and  reconstruction  of  companies,  winding  up,
reduction of share capital, and other matters, are transferred.
2.  The jurisdiction of the High Court transferred to the Tribunal  are  those
under
Sections  100
to
104
,
107
,
203
,
243
,
318 (3)(d)
,
391
,
392
,
394
,
394A
,
395
,
424
,
425
,
426
,
427
,
433
,
434(1)(b)
,
434 (1)(c)
,
439
,
440
,
441
,
443
,
444
,
446
,
448
,
450
,
3
,
454
,
455(2)
&(3), 456, 457, 458, 458A, 59, 460, 461, 462,
463, 464,465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478,
479, 480, 481, 490, 492, 494, 497, 502, 503, 504, 506, 507, 509,  511-A,  512,
515,  517, 518 , 519, 531, 531-A, 533, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 540, 542, 543,
544, 545, 546, 547, 59, 550, 551, 553, 555, 556, 557, 558, 559, 560, 581, 582,
583, 587, 588, 589, 610, 614, 626, 632, 635 and 635-B of the Companies Act.
3.  The  Jurisdiction  and  powers  so  transferred,  inter  alia,  relate  to
reduction  of  share  capital;  rights  of  dissentient  shareholders  to have
variation cancelled;  power  to  restrain  persons  from  managing  companies;
compensation  for  loss of office to the managing/whole time director/manager;
orders relating to  compromise  or  making  arrangements  with  creditors  and
members;   power  to  enforce  compromise  and  arrangements;  provisions  for
facilitating reconstruction and amalgamation of companies; power and  duty  to
acquire  shares of shareholders dissenting from scheme or contract approved by
majority, making orders regarding the application of
Sections 421
to
423
to
receivers  and  managers;  ordering  winding  up of companies; Determining the
liability as contributories  of  present  and  past  members;  enforcement  of
obligation  of  directors  and  managers  whose  liability  is  unlimited; the
appointment of a Official liquidator; furnishing of statement  of  affairs  by
the  concerned  authorities  to  the  Court;  custody  of  company's property;
supervision of the work of the Official liquidator; Constitution,  composition
and  appointment  of  Committee of inspection; stay of winding up proceedings;
settlement  of  list  of  contributories  and  giving   directions   regarding
application of assets; the power to make calls; power to exclude creditors not
proving  in  time; adjusting the right of contributories; summoning of persons
suspected  of  having  property  of  company,  etc.;  power  to  order  public
examination  of  promoters,  directors,  etc.;  directing  dissolution  of the
company; appointment and fixation of remuneration of  liquidator;  filling  up
the  vacancy  in  the  office of the liquidator; appointment of liquidator and
Committee of inspection; fixing the liquidator's remuneration; appointment and
removal of liquidator  in  voluntary  winding  up;  power  to  deal  with  the
application  of  liquidator  for  public  examination of promoters, directors,
etc.; Determining cases of fraudulent preference and  avoidance  of  voluntary
transfer;  determining  the  effect  of floating charge; avoidance of transfer
after commencement of winding up; dealing with claims for avoidance of certain
attachments, executions, etc.  in winding up; dealing  with  the  offences  by
officers  of  companies  in liquidation; dealing with cases of misfeasance and
malfeasance and assessing the amount payable by persons guilty of  such  acts;
disposal of books and papers of the company in liquidation; enforcement of the
duty  of  liquidator  to  make returns; declaring the dissolution of a company
void; winding up of unregistered companies, giving direction  with  regard  to
the  properties  of  such  companies; enforcement of orders, and protection of
employees during investigation by Inspectors or during pendency of  proceeding
in certain cases.
4.   The powers that will be left with the High Court as and when the amending
Act is given effect to are the powers under
Sections 81 (7)
,
237 (a) (ii)
,
581
ZN (16), 581ZS (1) and 633 (3).  The jurisdiction so left with the High  Court
relate  to  hearing  appeals  with  regard  to  the  terms  and  conditions of
conversion of debentures or loans into shares when the lender exercises  right
given to it under
Section 81
; ordering investigation of the company's affairs,
hearing  appeals  by  any  member  or  creditor  or  employee aggrieved by the
transfer of assets, division, amalgamation or merger  of  producer  companies;
reconversion  of producer companies to inter-state co-operative societies; and
the power to relieve officers of Companies, acting honestly and reasonably, of
liability, in whole or in part, and on such terms as the Court may think fit.
5.  It must be noticed here that the power of the High Court  in  relation  to
matters   concerning,   inter  alia,  rectification  of  share  Registers  and
oppression and mismanagement had been transferred to  the  Company  Law  Board   
constituted  by  the  Central Government, after the amendment to the
Companies
Act
by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1988.  That Company Law Board will stand    
abolished and it's jurisdiction will  vest  in  the  new  Tribunal  after  the
amending Act of 2002 comes into force.
6.   Parts 1B and 1C of the Act dealing with the National Company Law Tribunal
and the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, comprising of
Sections  10FB
to
10FP
and
10FQ
to
10GF
read  as  under  :  PART IB NATIONAL COMPANY LAW       
TRIBUNAL 10FB.  Constitution of National Company Law  Tribunal.-  The  Central
Government  shall,  by  notification  in  the  Official  Gazette, constitute a
Tribunal to be known as the National Company  Law  Tribunal  to  exercise  and
discharge  such  powers and functions as are, or may be, conferred on it by or
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
10FC.  Composition of Tribunal.-The Tribunal shall consist of a President  and
such  number of Judicial and Technical Members not exceeding sixty-two, as the
Central  Government  deems  fit,  to  be  appointed  by  that  Government,  by
notification in the Official Gazette.
10FD.  Qualifications  for  appointment  of  President  and  Members.  (1) The
Central Government shall appoint a person who has been, or is qualified to be,
a judge of a High Court as the President of the Tribunal.  (2) A person  shall
not be qualified for appointment as Judicial Member unless he- (a) has, for at
least fifteen years, held a judicial office in the territory of India ; or (b)
has,  for  at  least ten years been an advocate of a High Court, or has partly
held judicial office and has been partly in practice  as  an  advocate  for  a
total  period  of fifteen years ; or (c) has held for at least fifteen years a
Group 'A' post or an equivalent post under the Central Government or  a  State
Government  [  including  at  least  three years of service as a Member of the
Indian Company Law Service (Legal Branch) in Senior  Administrative  Grade  in
that service] ; or (d) has held for at least fifteen years a Group 'A' post or
an  equivalent  post  under  the  Central Government (including at least three
years of service as a Member of the Indian Legal Service in Grade  I  of  that
service).   (3)  A  person shall not be qualified for appointment as Technical
Member unless he- (a) has held for at least fifteen years a Group 'A' post  or
an  equivalent  post  under  the  Central  Government  or a State Government [
including at least three years of service as a Member of  the  Indian  Company
Law Service (Accounts Branch) in Senior Administrative Grade in that service];
or (b) is, or has been, a Joint Secretary to the Government of India under the
Central  Staffing  Scheme, or held any other post under the Central Government
or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a
Joint Secretary to the Government of India, for at least five  years  and  has
adequate  knowledge  of,  and experience in, dealing with problems relating to
company law ; or (c) is, or has been, for at least fifteen years  in  practice
as a chartered accountant under the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
(38 of 194
9)  ; or (d) is, or has been, for at least fifteen years in practice as a cost
accountant under the Costs and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 19 59) ;  or
(e)  has  or  has  had,  for  at  least  fifteen years working experience as a
Secretary in whole-time practice as defined in clause (45A) of  section  2  of
this  Act  and  is  a  member of the Institute of the Companies Secretaries of
India constituted under the Company Secretaries Act, 19 80 (56 of 1980)  ;  or
(f)  is  a  person of ability, integrity and standing having special knowledge
of, and professional experience of not less than  twenty  years  in,  science,
technology,  economics, banking, industry, law, matters relating to industrial
finance, industrial  management,  industrial  reconstruction,  administration,
investment,  accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special knowledge
of, or professional experience in, which  would  be  in  the  opinion  of  the
Central  Government  useful  to  the  Tribunal  ;  or  (g)  is, or has been, a
Presiding Officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal constituted
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1 947 (14 of 1947) ; or  (h)  is  a  person
having special knowledge of, and experience of not less than fifteen years in,
the matters relating to labour.  Explanation.-For the purposes of this Part,-
(i)  "Judicial  Member" means a Member of the Tribunal appointed as such under
sub-section (2) of
section 10FD
and includes the President of the  Tribunal  ;
(ii) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Tribunal appointed as such under
sub-section (3) of
section 10FD
.
10FE.  Term of office of President and Members.  The President and every other
Member  of  the  Tribunal  shall hold office as such for a term of three years
from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall  be  eligible  for
reappointment :   Provided that no President or other Member shall hold office
as such after he has attained,-
(a) in the case of the President, the age of sixty-seven years ;  (b)  in  the
case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years :  Provided further that
the  President  or  other  Member may retain his lien with his parent cadre or
Ministry or Department, as the case may be, while holding office as such.
10FF.  Financial and administrative powers  of  Member  Administration.    The
Central  Government shall designate any Judicial Member or Technical Member as 
Member Administration who shall exercise  such  financial  and  administrative
powers  as  may  be  vested  in  him  under the rules which may be made by the
Central Government :  Provided  that  the  Member  Administration  shall  have
authority  to  delegate  such of his financial and administrative powers as he
may think fit to any other officer of the Tribunal subject  to  the  condition
that  such  officer  shall, while exercising such delegated powers continue to
act  under  the  direction,  superintendence  and  control   of   the   Member
Administration.
10FG.   Salary,  allowances  and  other  terms  and  conditions  of service of
President and other Members.-The salary and allowances  and  other  terms  and
conditions of service of the President and other Members of the Tribunal shall
be such as may be prescribed :
Provided  that  neither  the  salary  and  allowances  nor the other terms and
conditions of service of the President and other Members shall  be  varied  to
their disadvantage after their appointment.
10FH.   Vacancy in Tribunal.-(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy
in the office of the President  of  the  Tribunal  by  reason  of  his  death,
resignation  or otherwise, the seniormost Member shall act as the President of
the Tribunal until the date on which a new President, appointed in  accordance
with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2)  When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, the seniormost Member or, as the case may be, such
one of the Members of  the  Tribunal,  as  the  Central  Government,  may,  by
notification,  authorise  in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the
President until the date on which the President resumes his duties.
(3) If, for reason other than temporary absence, any  vacancy  occurs  in  the
office  of  the  President  or  a Member, the Central Government shall appoint
another person in accordance with the provisions  of  this  Act  to  fill  the
vacancy  and  the  proceedings  may  be continued before the Tribunal from the
stage at which the vacancy is filled.
10FI.  Resignation of President and Member.-The President or a Member  of  the
Tribunal  may,  by  notice  in writing under his hand addressed to the Central
Government, resign his office :  Provided  that  the  President  or  a  Member
shall,  unless  he  is  permitted  by the Central Government to relinquish his
office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three  months  from
the  date  of  receipt  of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of the  term  of  office,
whichever is the earliest.
10FJ.   Removal  and  suspension  of  President  or  Member.-(1)  The  Central
Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India,  remove  from
office the President or any Member of the Tribunal, who- (a) has been adjudged
an  insolvent  ; or (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion
of the Central Government, involves  moral  turpitude  ;  or  (c)  has  become
physically  or mentally incapable of acting as such President or Member of the
Tribunal ; or (d) has acquired such financial or other interest as  is  likely
to  affect  prejudicially  his  functions  as  such President or Member of the
Tribunal ; or (e) has so abused his position as to render his  continuance  in
office prejudicial  to public interest :  Provided that no such President or a
Member shall be removed on any of the grounds specified in clauses (b) to  (e)
without  giving  him reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges.
(2) The President or a Member of the Tribunal shall not be  removed  from  his
office  except  by  an  order  made by the Central Government on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made  by  a  Judge  of  the
Supreme  Court  in  which  such President or a Member had been informed of the
charges against him and given a  reasonable  opportunity  of  being  heard  in
respect of those charges.
(3)  The Central Government may suspend from office the President or Member of
the Tribunal in respect of whom a reference has been made to the Judge of  the
Supreme  Court  under  sub-section (2) until the Central Government has passed
orders on receipt of the report of the Judge of  the  Supreme  Court  on  such
reference.
(4)  The  Central  Government  may,  by  rules, regulate the procedure for the
investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity  of  the  President  or  a  Member
referred to in sub-section (2).
10FK.   Officers  and  employees of Tribunal.-(1) The Central Government shall
provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees  as  it  may  deem
fit.   (2)  The  officers  and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge
their  functions   under   the   general   superintendence   of   the   Member
Administration.    (3)  The  salaries  and  allowances  and  other  terms  and
conditions of service of the officers and  other  employees  of  the  Tribunal
shall be such as may be prescribed.
10FL.  Benches of Tribunal.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the
powers  of  the  Tribunal  may  be  exercised  by  Benches, constituted by the
President of the Tribunal, out of which one shall be  a  Judicial  Member  and
another  shall  be  a  Technical  Member  referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of
sub-section (3) of
section 10FD
:
Provided that it shall be competent for the Members authorised in this  behalf
to  function  as  a  Bench  consisting  of  a  single  Member and exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal in respect of such class of
cases or such matters pertaining to such class of cases, as the  President  of
the Tribunal  may,  by  general  or special order, specify :  Provided further
that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it appears  to
the Member of the Tribunal that the case or matter is of such a nature that it
ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members, the case or matter may 
be  transferred  by  the  President  of  the  Tribunal or, as the case may be,
referred to him for transfer to such Bench as the President may deem fit.  (2)
The President of the Tribunal shall, for the disposal of any case relating  to
rehabilitation,  restructuring  or winding up of the companies, constitute one
or more Special Benches consisting of three or  more  Members,  each  of  whom
shall necessarily be a Judicial Member, a Technical Member appointed under any
of  the  clauses  (a)  to (f) of sub-section (3) of
section 10FD
, and a Member
appointed under clause (g) or clause (h) of sub-section (3) of
section 10FD
:
Provided  that in case a Special Bench passes an order in respect of a company
to be wound up, the winding up proceedings of such company may be conducted by   
a Bench consisting of a single Member.
(3) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any  point  or  points,  it
shall be decided according to the majority, if there is a majority, but if the
Members  are  equally  divided,  they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and the case shall be referred by the President of  the  Tribunal
for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the
Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of
the  majority  of  Members  of the Tribunal who have heard the case, including
those who first heard it.
(4) There shall be constituted such number of Benches as may  be  notified  by
the Central Government.
(5)  In addition to the other Benches, there shall be a Principal Bench at New
Delhi presided over by the President of the Tribunal.
(6) The Principal Bench of the Tribunal  shall  have  powers  of  transfer  of
proceedings  from  any  Bench to another Bench of the Tribunal in the event of
inability of any Bench from hearing any such  proceedings  for  any  reason  :
Provided  that  no  transfer  of  any  proceedings  shall  be  made under this
sub-section except after recording the reasons for so doing in writing.
10FM.  Order of Tribunal.-(1) The Tribunal may, after giving  the  parties  to
any  proceeding  before  it,  an  opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit.  (2) The Tribunal may, at any time within two  years
from  the  date  of  the order, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent
from the record, amend any order passed by it under sub-section (1), and shall
make such amendment if the mistake is brought to its notice  by  the  parties.
(3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to
all the parties concerned.
10FN.   Power  to  review.-The  Tribunal  shall  have  power to review its own
orders.
10FO.  Delegation of powers.-The Tribunal may, by general  or  special  order,
delegate,  subject  to  such  conditions  and  limitations,  if any, as may be
specified in the order, to any Member or officer  or  other  employee  of  the
Tribunal  or  other person authorised by the Tribunal to manage any industrial
company or industrial undertaking or any operating  agency,  such  powers  and
duties under  this  Act as it may deem necessary.  (a) take possession of such
property, books of account or other documents ; and (b) cause the same  to  be
entrusted to  the  Tribunal  or  the operating agency.  (2) For the purpose of
securing  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  sub-section  (1),  the  Chief
Metropolitan  Magistrate  or  the  District Magistrate may take or cause to be
taken such steps and use or cause to  be  used  such  force  as  may,  in  his
opinion, be necessary.  (3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the
District  Magistrate  done  in  pursuance  of  this section shall be called in
question in any court or before any authority on any ground whatsoever.
10FP.  Power to seek assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and  District
Magistrate.-(1) The Tribunal or any operating agency, on being directed by the
Tribunal may, in order to take into custody or under its control all property,
effects and actionable claims to which a sick industrial company is or appears
to  be entitled, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the
District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any property, books  of  account
or any other document of such sick industrial company, be situate or be found,
to  take  possession  thereof,  and  the  Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the
District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall, on such request being made  to
him,-
(a)  take  possession  of such property, books of account or other documents ;
and (b) cause the same to be  entrusted  to  the  Tribunal  or  the  operating
agency.
(2)  For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section
(1), the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may take  or
cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may, in
his opinion, be necessary.  (3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
the  District  Magistrate done in pursuance of this section shall be called in
question in any court or before any authority on any ground whatsoever.
PART IC APPELLATE TRIBUNAL       

10FQ.  Appeal from order of Tribunal.-(1) Any person aggrieved by an order  or
decision of the Tribunal may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
(2)  No  appeal  shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order or decision
made by the Tribunal with the consent of parties.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall  be  filed  within  a  period  of
forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order or decision made by
the  Tribunal  is  received  by the appellant and it shall be in such form and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed :
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the  expiry
of  the  said  period  of  forty-five  days  from  the date aforesaid if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from not filing
the appeal in time.
(4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under  sub-section  (1),  the  Appellate
Tribunal  shall,  after  giving parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being
heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks  fit,  confirming,  modifying  or
setting aside the order appealed against.
(5)  The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
Tribunal and parties to the appeal.
(6) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall
be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall  be  made
by  it to dispose of the appeal finally within six months from the date of the
receipt of the appeal.
10FR.  Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.-(1) The Central  Government  shall,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute with effect from such date
as  may be specified therein, an Appellate Tribunal to be called the "National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal" consisting of a Chairperson and not more  than
two  Members,  to be appointed by that Government, for hearing appeals against
the orders of the Tribunal under  this  Act.    (2)  The  Chairperson  of  the
Appellate Tribunal shall be a person who has been a Judge of the Supreme Court
or the  Chief Justice of a High Court.  (3) A Member of the Appellate Tribunal
shall be a person of ability, integrity and standing having special  knowledge
of,  and  professional  experience  of  not  less  than  twenty-five years in,
science, technology, economics, banking, industry, law,  matters  relating  to
labour,  industrial finance, industrial management, industrial reconstruction,
administration, investment, accountancy, marketing or any  other  matter,  the
special  knowledge  of,  or  professional experience in which, would be in the
opinion of the Central Government useful to the Appellate Tribunal.
10FS.  Vacancy in Appellate Tribunal, etc.-(1) In the event of the  occurrence
of  any  vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal by
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the seniormost  Member  of  the
Appellate  Tribunal  shall  act  as  the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal
until the date on which a new Chairperson appointed  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2)  When the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member
or, as the case may be, such one of the Member of the Appellate  Tribunal,  as
the  Central  Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall
discharge the functions of  the  Chairperson  until  the  date  on  which  the
Chairperson resumes his duties.
(3)  If,  for  reason  other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the
office of the Chairperson or a Member, the Central  Government  shall  appoint
another  person  in  accordance  with  the  provisions of this Act to fill the
vacancy and the proceedings may be continued  before  the  Appellate  Tribunal
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
10FT.   Term of office of Chairperson and Members.-The Chairperson or a Member 
of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of three  years
from  the  date  on which he enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for
reappointment for another term of three years :  Provided that no  Chairperson
or  other  Member shall hold office as such after he has attained,- (a) in the
case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years ; (b) in  the  case  of  any
other Member, the age of sixty-seven years.
10FU.   Resignation of Chairperson and Members.-The Chairperson or a Member of  
the Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand  addressed  to
the Central  Government, resign his office :  Provided that the Chairperson or
a Member of the Appellate Tribunal  shall,  unless  he  is  permitted  by  the
Central  Government  to  relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office
until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of  such  notice  or
until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until
the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
10FV.   Removal  and  suspension  of  Chairperson  and  Members  of  Appellate
Tribunal.-(1) The Central Government  may,  in  consultation  with  the  Chief
Justice  of  India,  remove  from  office the Chairperson or any Member of the
Appellate Tribunal, who-
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent ; or (b) has been convicted of  an  offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude ; or
(c)  has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or Member of the Appellate Tribunal ; or (d) has acquired  such  financial  or
other  interest  as  is  likely  to affect prejudicially his functions as such
Chairperson or Member of the Appellate Tribunal ; or (e)  has  so  abused  his
position  as  to  render  his  continuance  in  office  prejudicial  to public
interest.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed
from his office except by an order made  by  the  Central  Government  on  the
ground  of  proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge
of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or Member had been informed  of 
the  charges  against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chairperson or a Member 
of the Appellate Tribunal in respect of whom a reference has been made to  the
Judge  of the Supreme Court under sub-section (2) until the Central Government
has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Judge of the  Supreme  Court
on such reference.
(4)  The  Central  Government  may,  by  rules, regulate the procedure for the
investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the  Chairperson  or  a  Member
referred to in sub-section (2).
10FW.   Salary,  allowances  and  other  terms  and  conditions  of service of
Chairperson and Members.-(1) The salary and allowances  and  other  terms  and
conditions  of  service  of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  (2) The salary,  allowances  and
other  terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of
the Appellate Tribunal  shall  not  be  varied  to  their  disadvantage  after
appointment.
10FX.   Selection  Committee.-(1) The Chairperson and Members of the Appellate
Tribunal and President and Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed  by  the
Central  Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting  
of- (a) Chief Justice of India or his nominee Chairperson ; (b)  Secretary  in
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Company Affairs Member ; (c) Secretary in the
Ministry of Labour Member ; (d) Secretary in the Ministry of Law  and  Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs or Legislative Department) Member ; (e) Secretary
in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Company  Affairs  ( Department of Company
Affairs) Member.
(2) The  Joint  Secretary  in  the  Ministry  or  Department  of  the  Central
Government  dealing  with  this  Act  shall  be  the Convenor of the Selection
Committee.
(3) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence
of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or removal of  the  Chairperson
and  Members  of  the  Appellate  Tribunal  and  President  and Members of the
Tribunal and six months before the superannuation or  end  of  tenure  of  the
Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal and President and Members of 
the  Tribunal,  make  a reference to the Selection Committee for filling up of
the vacancy.
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend within one month a panel of  three
names for every vacancy referred to it.
(5)  Before  recommending  any  person  for appointment as the Chairperson and
Members of the Appellate Tribunal and President and Members of  the  Tribunal,
the  Selection  Committee  shall satisfy itself that such person does not have
financial or other interest  which  is  likely  to  affect  prejudicially  his
functions as such Chairperson or Member of the Appellate Tribunal or President
or Member of the Tribunal, as the case may be.
(6)  No  appointment  of the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal
and President and Members of the  Tribunal  shall  be  invalidated  merely  by
reason  of  any  vacancy  or  any  defect in the constitution of the Selection
Committee.
10FY.  Chairperson, etc., to be  public  servants.-The  Chairperson,  Members,
officers  and  other  employees  of  the Appellate Tribunal and the President,
Members, officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be  deemed  to  be
public  servants within the meaning of
section 21
of the Indian Penal Code (45
of 1860).
10FZ.  Protection of action taken in good faith.-No suit, prosecution or other
legal proceedings shall lie against the Appellate Tribunal or its Chairperson,
Member, officer or other employee or  against  the  Tribunal,  its  President,
Member,  officer  or  other  employee or operating agency or liquidator or any
other person authorised by the Appellate  Tribunal  or  the  Tribunal  in  the
discharge of any function under


this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by any act which
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
10FZA.   Procedure  and  powers  of  Tribunal  and Appellate Tribunal.-(1) The
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the  procedure  laid
down  in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this
Act and of any rules made by the Central  Government,  the  Tribunal  and  the
Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate their own procedure.
(2)  The  Tribunal  and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested  in  a
civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a
suit in respect of the following matters, namely :-
(a)  summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on 
oath ; (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents ; (c) receiving
evidence on affidavits ; (d) subject to the provisions of
sections 123
and
124
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record
or document or copy of such record or document from any office ;  (e)  issuing
commissions  for the examination of witnesses or documents ; (f) reviewing its
decisions ; (g) dismissing a representation for  default  or  deciding  it  ex
parte  ;  (h)  setting  aside any order of dismissal of any representation for
default or any order passed by it ex parte ; and (i) any  other  matter  which
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3)  Any  order made by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced
by that Tribunal in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court  in
a  suit  pending  therein,  and  it  shall  be  lawful for the Tribunal or the
Appellate Tribunal to send in the case of its inability to execute such order,
to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,-
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered  office  of  the
company  is situate ; or (b) in the case of an order against any other person,
the person concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or  personally
works for  gain.    (4)  All  proceedings before the Tribunal or the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial  proceedings  within  the  meaning  of
sections  193
and
228
, and for the purposes of
section 196
of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), and the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall  be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195
and Chapter XXVI of
the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974).
10G.  Power to punish for contempt.-The Appellate Tribunal shall have the same
jurisdiction,  powers  and  authority  in respect of contempt of itself as the
High Court has and may exercise, for this purpose under the provisions of  the
Contempt  of Courts Act, 1971
(70 of 1971), which shall have the effect subject
to modifications that- (a) the reference therein to  a  High  Court  shall  be
construed as including a reference to the Appellate Tribunal ;
(b)  the reference to the Advocate-General in
section 15
of the said Act shall
be construed as a reference to such law officers as the Central Government may
specify in this behalf.
10GA.  Staff of Appellate Tribunal.-(1) The Central Government  shall  provide
the  Appellate Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.  (2) The officers and other employees of  the  Appellate  Tribunal  shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson
of the  Appellate  Tribunal.    (3)  The  salaries  and  allowances  and other
conditions of service of the officers and other  employees  of  the  Appellate
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
10GB.   Civil  court  not  to have jurisdiction.-(1) No civil court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding  in  respect  of  any  matter
which  the  Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine by or
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no  injunction
shall  be  granted  by  any  court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this  Act
or any other law for the time being in force.
10GC.   Vacancy  in  Tribunal  or Appellate Tribunal not to invalidate acts or
proceedings.-No act or proceeding of the Tribunal or  the  Appellate  Tribunal
shall  be  questioned or shall be invalid merely on the ground of existence of
any vacancy or defect in the establishment of the Tribunal  or  the  Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be.
10GD.   Right  to  legal  representation.-The  applicant  or the appellant may
either appear in person or authorise one  or  more  chartered  accountants  or
company  secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any officer
to present his or its case before the Tribunal or the Appellate  Tribunal,  as
the case  may  be.    Explanation.-  For  the  purposes  of this section,- (a)
"chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause  (b)
of  sub-section (1) of
section 2
of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of
1949) and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1)  of
section  6
of that Act ; (b) "company secretary" means a company secretary as
defined in clause (c) of  sub-section  (1)  of
section  2
of  the  Companies
Secretaries  Act,  1980  (56  of  1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of
practice under  sub-section  (1)  of
section  6
of  that  Act  ;  (c)  "cost
accountant"  means  a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section
(1) of
section 2
of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959)  and
who  has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of
section 6
of that Act ; (d) "legal practitioner" means  an  advocate,  a  vakil  or  any
attorney of any High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
10GE.   Limitation.-The  provisions  of the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1 963)
shall, as far as may be, apply to an appeal made to the Appellate Tribunal.
10GF.  Appeal to Supreme Court.-Any person aggrieved by any decision or  order
of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty
days  from the date of communication of the decision or order of the Appellate
Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such decision or order :
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the  said  period,
allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days.'.
6.   Tribunals  which  are  largely a twentieth century phenomenon, existed in
this country even before the Constitution was framed.   The  oldest  and  best
known Tribunal is the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal which had been functioning
from the  year  1941.  Industrial Tribunals had also been established prior to
1950.
Articles 136
and
227
of the Constitution refer to Tribunals, and  makes
their  orders subject to judicial review by the High court, and with leave, to
the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.  Numerous Tribunals have been
created subsequent to 1950 by Parliamentary  as  well  as  State  Legislation.
Their exact number however is not easily ascertainable.  The Law Commission of
India in it's 162nd Report submitted in 1998 reviewed the working of the major
tribunals in the country - the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Customs, Central
Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal and the Administrative Tribunals,
and suggested certain changes to improve their functioning.  7.  The object of
constituting  Tribunals  is to provide a simpler, speedier and more accessible
justice than ordinary Courts are  able  to  provide,  as  stated  in  Wade  on
'Administrative Law'.    Yet  another  object  of constituting Tribunals is to
create specialist Tribunals which would include specialists in the  field,  to
adjudicate more efficiently and speedily the matters requiring adjudication in
that  field,  and  thus command the confidence of all concerned in the quality
and reliability of the result of such adjudication.
8.  The first breach of the accepted principle  that  adjudication  should  be
made  by  the  Courts  created by the State was made, as noted by Wade, in the
field of collection of revenue, the oldest such  Tribunal  in  England  having
been established  in 1660.  In India also the first major Tribunal established
was in the area  of  collection  of  tax,  namely  the  Income  Tax  Appellate
Tribunal.  The Tribunals have gradually proliferated not only in India, but in
many other jurisdictions as well, including UK and Australia.
9.   "The  delivery of Justice through Tribunals other than ordinary courts of
law ...." in UK, was reviewed recently by Sir Andrew Leggatt, a  former  Judge
of the  UK  Court  of  Appeal,  who submitted his report in March 2001.  It is
noted in that report that, in UK though there are 70 different  administrative
Tribunals  which  decide  about  one  million  cases  a  year,  only 20 of the
Tribunals each decide more than 500 cases a  year.    The  Tribunals,  it  was
found, were  not independent of the departments that sponsor them.  The object
of the review was, therefore, to recommend  a  system  that  is  "independent,
coherent, professional, cost effective and user friendly".
10.   The  Leggatt  report regards 'independence' of the Tribunal as it's most
important requirement.  The Report also emphasises the need to  satisfy  users
needs:   "It  should never be forgotten that the Tribunals exist for users and
not the other way around." Tribunals would be wholly ineffective, if users did
not feel that the tribunals are  'genuinely  and  demonstrably'  independent'.
The  Leggatt  Report  observes,  "Tribunals  are  an alternative to Court, not
administrative processes.  They will keep the confidence of users only  in  so
afar  as  they  are  seen to demonstrate similar qualities of independence and
impartiality to the courts." "Demonstrating those qualities to the  individual
user in a tribunal case will require establishing that those who are to decide
the case adopt a properly impartial approach to it, and have no improper links
to  any  of  the  parties; that they have not been selected to decide the case
because they will be more likely to come to  any  particular  conclusion;  and
that they will not feel beholden to the person who appointed or selected them,
or fear adverse consequences, from the result of the case." 11.  Dependence of
Tribunals on  their sponsoring Department was found to be 'indefensible'.  The
Leggatt Report recommended the creation of a Tribunals Board as an adjunct  to
the Lord Chancellor's Department to advise on "..."qualifications for chairmen
and  members,  monitoring  the  appointment  and  re-appointment  of  members,
co-ordinating their training, investigating complaints  against  members,  and
recommending changes to the rules of procedure governing all divisions."
12.  The observations extracted from the Leggatt Report are relevant and valid
in  the Indian context as well, though there is no statute in India comparable
to the one in United Kingdom Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1992 which  replaced
the Act of 1971 which in turn had replaced the Act of 1958.
13.  Tribunals, like courts, discharge the State's inherent judicial function.
A  Constitution  Bench  of  the Supreme Court in the case of
Associated Cement
Companies Ltd.   vs.    P.N.Sharma
,  AIR  1965  SC  1595,   speaking   through
Gajendragadkar,  CJ,  while  holding  that  the  appellate authority under the
Punjab Welfare Officers Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules, 1952,  is
a Tribunal,  observed:    ".....special matters and questions are entrusted to
them for their decision and in that sense, they  share  with  the  Courts  one
common  characteristic;  both the Courts and the Tribunals are "constituted by
the State  and  are  invested  with  judicial  as  distinguished  from  purely
administrative  or  executive functions...." They are both adjudicating bodies
and they deal with and finally determine disputes between  parties  which  are
entrusted to the  jurisdiction.  ...  As in the case of Courts, so in the case
of Tribunals, it is  the  State's  inherent  judicial  power  which  has  been
transferred  and  by  virtue  of  the  said  power, it is the State's inherent
judicial function which they  discharge.    Judicial  functions  and  judicial
powers  are  one  of  the  essential  attributes  of a sovereign State, and on
considerations of policy, the  State  transfers  its  judicial  functions  and
powers mainly to the Courts established by the Constitution; but that does not
affect  the  competence  of  the State, by appropriate measures, to transfer a
part of its judicial powers and functions to Tribunals by entrusting  to  them
the  task  of  adjudicating upon special matters and disputes between parties.
It  is  really  not  possible  or  even  expedient  to  attempt  to   describe
exhaustively  the  features  which are common to the Tribunals and the Courts,
and features which are distinct and separate.  The basis and  the  fundamental
feature  which  is  common  to  both the Courts and the Tribunals is that they
discharge judicial functions and exercise  judicial  powers  which  inherently
vest in a sovereign state".
14.   In  the book on Administrative Law by M.P.Jain, an attempt has been made
to enumerate  the  features  which  distinguish  Courts  from  Tribunals,  the
relevant  passage at page 215 reads thus :- "In what respects do the Tribunals
contrast with Courts?  Some of the basic characteristics of  the  Courts  are:
they  are  bound  by  the  prescribed  rules  of procedure and evidence; their
proceedings are conducted in public; lawyers are  entitled  to  appear  before
them;  they  are  bodies of general jurisdiction; the Judge sitting in a Court
himself hears and decides a case and gives reasons for his decision; and above
all, they are independent of the executive as Judges have a tenure independent
of the executive will.  As against  this,  the  Tribunals  are  not  generally
governed  by  the  provisions  of  the procedural and the evidence laws; their
proceedings are not generally required to be conducted in public; they have  a
specialised jurisdiction; there may be statutory prohibition on the lawyers to
appear before  them  (though  very  often  it  is  not  so).   " "The material
difference between a Court and a Tribunal, however,  lies  in  the  manner  of
appointment of their members, and control over them.  .....  "
15.   That freedom from Control and potential domination of the executive, are
necessary preconditions for the independence and impartiality  of  Judges  was
pointed  out  by  the  US  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of Northern Pipeline
Construction Co., vs.  Marathon Pipeline Com.Et.Al, 458  US  50,  wherein  the
Court  quoted  with  approval what had been said by the Court in United States
vs.  Wi ll, 449 US 200, "A Judiciary free from control by  the  Executive  and
Legislature  is essential if there is a right to have claims decided by Judges
who are free from potential domination by other branches of government".   The
Federalist  No.7  9  page  491  was  also  quoted  in  that judgment, "Next to
permanency in office, nothing can contribute more to the independence  of  the
Judges than  a  fixed provision for their support...  In the general course of
human nature, a power over a man's subsistence amounts to  a  power  over  his
will."
16.   In  that  case  Justice  Brennan  speaking  for himself and three of his
colleagues, also made the following observations with regard to  the  creation
of  specialised  Tribunals:-  "The  potential  for  encroachment  upon  powers
reserved  to  the  Judicial  Branch  through  the  device   of   "specialised"
legislative  Courts  is  dramatically evidenced in the jurisdiction granted to
the Courts created by the Act before us.  The broad range  of  questions  that
can  be  brought  into  a  Bankruptcy Court because they are "related to cases
under Title 11," 28 U.S.  C.  1471 (b) at 54, is the clearest proof that  even
when  Congress acts through a "specialised" Court, and pursuant to only one of
its many  Art.I  powers,  appellants'  analysis  fails  to  provide  any  real
protection  against  the erosion of Article III jurisdiction by the unilateral
action of the political Branches.  In short, to accept appellants'  reasoning,
would  require  that  we  replace the principles delineated in our precedents,
rooted in history and the Constitution,  with  a  rule  of  broad  legislative
discretion  that  could effectively eviscerate the constitutional guarantee of
an independent Judicial Branch of the Federal Government".
17.  Article I of the US Constitution vests  all  legislative  powers  in  the
Congress.  Article  III  provides  that  :    The Judicial power of the United
States shall vest in one  Supreme  Court,  and  in  such  inferior  Courts  as
Congress may  from  time  to  time  ordain and establish.  The Judges, both of
Supreme Court and inferior  Courts,  shall  hold  their  offices  during  good
behaviour,   and  shall  at  stated  times,  receive  for  their  services,  a
compensation, which shall not  be  diminished,  during  their  continuance  in
office."
18.  In the same decision, it was observed by the Court that, " Private-rights
disputes,  on  the  other hand, lie at the core of the historically recognised
judicial power."
19.  Creation of new Bankruptcy Courts with Judges appointed for 14 year terms
and with no protection against salary  dimunition,  to  deal  with  bankruptcy
matters  that were earlier part of the jurisdiction of the US Federal District
Courts, was thus held by the US Supreme Court to infringe  the  constitutional
guarantee of an 'independent' judicial branch.
20.
Article 323-A
of our Constitution provides for creation by Parliament, by
law, of  Administrative  Tribunals.
Article  323-B
enables the appropriate
legislature by law to provides for the adjudication or trial by  Tribunals  of
any  disputes,  complaints,  or  offences  with  respect  to all or any of the
matters specified in clause (2) thereof with respect to which, the Legislature
has power to make laws.  The matters specified in clause (2) of
Article  323-B
are :    a) levy, assessment collection and enforcement of any tax; b) foreign
exchange, import and export across customs frontiers; c) industrial and labour
disputes; d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any estate  as
defined  in
Article  31A
or  of  any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural  land  or
in  any  other way; e) ceiling on urban property; f) elections to either House
of Parliament or the House or either House of the Legislature of a State,  but
excluding  the  matters  referred  to  in
Article  329
and
Article 329-A;
g)
production, procurement, supply and distribution  of  foodstuffs  (  including
edible oilseeds and oils) and such other goods as the President may, by public
notification,  declare  to  be essential goods for the purpose of this Article
and control of prices of such goods; h) rent, its regulation and  control  and
tenancy  issues  including  the  rights,  title  and interest of landlords and
tenants; i) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified
in sub-clauses (a) to (h) and fees in respect of any of those matters; j)  any
matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub- clauses (a) to (i).
Clause (h)  regarding  rent,  its regulation and control, etc.  was introduced
into that Article by the
Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993
with
effect from 15.5.1994.
21.  Both
Articles 323-A
and
Article 323-B
provide for the law to be  made  by
Parliament or other appropriate legislature, excluding the jurisdiction of all
Courts,  except  the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
Article 136
, with
respect to the subject matter of the law enacted  under  those  Articles.    A
seven  Judge  Bench  of  the  Supreme Court in the case of
L.Chandra Kumar vs.
Union of India
(1997) 3 SCC 26 1, has held that the High Court's powers  under
Article 226
and
227
cannot be so excluded.
22.   In  the  case  of  Chandra  Kumar,  it was also held that, " It is to be
remembered that, apart from the authorisation that flows from
Articles  323-A
and
323-B
,  both  Parliament  and  the State Legislatures possess legislative
competence to effect changes in the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
and the High Courts."
23.  In the case of
Union of India vs.  Delhi  High
Court  Bar  Association,
(2002)  4  SCC 275, a two Judge Bench of the Court held that the Debt Recovery
Tribunals though it may not strictly fall within the concept of  judiciary  as
envisaged  by
Article 50
, it is nevertheless an effective part of the justice
delivery system. It  was  also  held  therein  that  the  creation  of  such
Tribunals  in  the place of a Civil court to decide civil disputes relating to
Debt Recovery matters does not interfere with the independency of judiciary.
The Court held that nobody has an absolute right to demand that the  disputes
be adjudicated upon only by a civil court under the code of civil procedure.
  24.  The  Court observed at paragraphs 24 and 25 of that judgment:
"The manner in which a dispute is to be adjudicated upon  is  decided  by  the
procedural laws  which  are  enacted  from time to time.  It is because of the
enactment
of the Code of Civil Procedure
that normally  all  disputes  between
the  parties  of a civil nature would be adjudicated upon by the civil courts.
There is no absolute right in anyone to demand  that  his  dispute  is  to  be
adjudicated upon  only by a civil court.  The decision of the Delhi High Court
proceeds on the assumption that there is such a right.   As  we  have  already
observed,  it  is  by  reason of the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
that the civil courts had the right, prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  Debts
Recovery  Act,  to  decide  the  suits  for  recovery  filed  by the banks and
financial institutions.  This forum, namely, that of a civil court, now stands
replaced by a Banking Tribunal in respect of the debts due to the bank.   When
in  the  Constitution
Articles 323-A
and
323-B
contemplate establishment of a
Tribunal and that does not erode the independence of the judiciary,  there  is
no reason to presume that the Banking Tribunals and the Appellate Tribunals so
constituted  would  not be independent, or that justice would be denied to the
defendants or that the independence of the judiciary would stand eroded.  Such
Tribunals, whether they pertain to income  tax  or  sales  tax  or  excise  or
customs  or  administration, have now become an essential part of the judicial
system in this country.  Such specialised institutions may not  strictly  come
within the concept of the judiciary, as envisaged by
Article 50
, but it cannot
be  presumed  that  such  Tribunals  are  not an effective part of the justice
delivery system, like courts of law.  It will be seen that for a person to  be
appointed  as  a  Presiding  Officer  of  a  Tribunal, he should be one who is
qualified to be a District Judge and, in case of appointment of the  Presiding
Officer  of the Appellate Tribunal he is, or has been, qualified to be a Judge
of a High Court or has been a member of the Indian Legal Service who has  held
a post in Grade I for at least three years or has held office as the Presiding
Officer of  a Tribunal for at least three years.  Persons who are so appointed
as Presiding Officers of the Tribunal or of the Appellate  Tribunal  would  be
well  versed  in law to be able to decide cases independently and judiciously.
It has to be borne in mind that the decision of the Appellate Tribunal is  not
final,  in  the sense that the same can be subjected to judicial review by the
High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution."
25.  The Supreme Court in the case of
State of Karnataka vs.    Vishwabharathi
House  Building  Co-operative  Society Limited
, (2003) 2 SCC 412 has observed,
inter alia, that, "the legislative competence  of  Parliament  and  the  State
Legislatures  respectively  to provide for creation of Courts and Tribunals as
envisaged in  different  Lists  contained  in  the  Seventh  schedule  of  the
Constitution of  India  are  as  under  :   " Item 77 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule "Constitution, organization, jurisdiction and powers of  the  Supreme
Court  (including contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons
entitled to practice before the Supreme Court." Item  78  of  List  I  of  the
Seventh Schedule:  "Constitution and organization (including vacations) of the
High  Courts  except  provisions  as  to officers and servants of High Courts;
persons entitled to practise before the High Courts.; Item 79 of List I of the
Seventh Schedule:  "Extension of the jurisdiction of  a  High  Court  to,  and
exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union Territory." Item
95 of List I of the Seventh Schedule:  "Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts,
except  the  Supreme  Court,  with respect to any of the matters in this List;
admiralty jurisdiction".  Item 65  of  List  II  of  the  Seventh  Schedule  :
"Jurisdiction  and  powers of all Courts except the Supreme Court with respect
to any of the matters in this list." Item 11-A of  List  III  of  the  Seventh
Schedule:   "Administration  of  justice; constitution and organisation of all
Courts, except the Supreme Court and High Courts." Item 46 of List III of  the
Seventh Schedule:   "Jurisdiction and powers of all Courts, except the Supreme
Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List".
"A bare perusal of the aforementioned provisions does not leave any manner  of
doubt  as  regard  the  legislative  competence  of  Parliament to provide for
creation of  Special  Courts  and  Tribunals.    Administration  of   justice;
constitution  and organisation of all Courts, except the Supreme Court and the
High Courts is squarely covered by Entry 11-A of List III of the  Constitution
of India.   The  said  entry  was originally a part of Entry 3 of List II.  By
reason of the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976
and  by
Section
57(a)(vi)
thereof, it was inserted into List III as Item 11-A".
26.   The  Three  Judge  Bench  while  upholding  the constitutionality of the
Consumer Forums constituted under the
Consumer Protection Act
,  held  that  as 
such  Forums  were  only  supplemental  to the Courts and their decisions were
subject to judicial review by the High Court, the presence of  laymen  on  the
Forums did not have the effect of eroding the independence of judiciary.
27.  One has therefore necessarily to look at Schedule VII to the Constitution
to  ascertain the matters with reference to which the Tribunals may be set up.
Parliament would be competent to set up  Tribunals  with  regard  to  subjects
enumerated  in  List  I, while State legislatures would be competent to set up
Tribunals with regard to matters enumerated  in  List  II.    With  regard  to
matters  enumerated  in List III, Parliament would have the power, and in case
it has chosen not to exercise that power, the  appropriate  legislature  would
have the power to establish Tribunals.
28.   The  inexorable  logic  of this is that the Courts can be denuded of the
jurisdiction now vested in them, by creating separate or joint Tribunals  with
respect to  each of the matters in the three lists.  An example of this is the
Debt Recovery Tribunal constituted under the
Recovery of Debts  Due  to  Banks
and Financial  Institutions  Act,  1993
.    A parallel Tribunal to deal with
matters which are within the jurisdiction of the courts may also be set up  as
has  been  done  in the case of Consumer Disputes Redressal Forums constituted 
under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
and the Lok Adalats under the  amended
Legal Services Authority Act
.
29.   With  regard  to Courts, the Constitution specifically provides for high
status to the superior Courts - the Supreme Court, and the  High  Courts,  and
makes adequate  provisions to ensure their independence.  The Constitution has
also specifically provided for ' Subordinate Courts' in Chapter VI of Part  VI
in
Articles  233
to 237.  Appointment to the 'Judicial Service' whose members
man the subordinate Courts, is to be made only  after  consultation  with  the
High  Courts or in accordance with Rules made after consultation with the High
Court.  The control over subordinate courts  vests  exclusively  in  the  High
Court as provided in
Article 235:
"
Article 235:
Control  over  subordinate courts :  The control over district
courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion  of,
and the grant of leave to persons belonging to the judicial service of a State
and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in
the  High court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away
from any such person any right of appeal which  he  may  have  under  the  law
regulating  the  conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to
deal with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his  service
prescribed under such law.
30.   In  contrast,  there  is  no  provision in the constitution specifically
dealing with the Tribunals (except
Articles 136
and
227
which only provide for
appeal to the Supreme Court with leave, and judicial review of the  Tribunal's
orders  by  the  High  Courts)  and  there  are no provisions dealing with the
qualifications, tenure,  control,  and  measures  to  ensure  the  competence,
suitability,  independence,  and impartiality of the Chairperson/President and
Members of the Tribunals,  even  though  such  Tribunals  are  entrusted  with
jurisdiction  as  substitutes to the Courts, or as supplemental to that of the
Courts.
31.  The constitutional guarantee of an independent judiciary  and  separation
of  the  judiciary from legislative and executive functions can amount to very
little (subject only  to
Articles  32
,  226
and
227
),  if  Parliament,  the
legislatures, and the Executive whose powers - subject to the Constitution and
enacted  legislation,  is  co-terminus with the legislative power - were to be
regarded as having  absolute  discretion  to  decide  upon  the  constitution,
qualifications,  selection,  appointment,  tenure,  compensation,  control and
other matters pertaining to the Tribunals.
32.  The power of the Parliament and the legislature to create Tribunals  does
not  in  our  view,  extend  to  rendering such new forums an extension of the
legislative or executive branches of the Government, or as forums  controlled,
or  designed  to  be dominated, or potentially dominated by the legislative or
executive wing of the State.
33.  It is worth noticing in this context, the decision of the  Privy  Council
in the case  of
Hinds & Ors.  Vs.  The Queen
, Director of Public Prosecutions
Vs.  Jackson (1976 (1) All ER Page 353), wherein the Privy Council  considered
the constitutional validity of The Gun Court Act, 1974, which had been enacted
by the  Jamaican  Parliament.  Lord Diplock, who spoke for the majority, after
referring to the Constitutions  of  Jamaica,  Ceylon,  Canada  and  Australia,
inferred  that  there was a common drafting practice, which led by a necessary
implication, to the  establishment  of  a  Government  structure,  which  made
provision  for a legislative, executive and a judicial branch, and that it was
taken for granted that the basic principle of separation of powers would apply
to the  exercise  of  the  respective  functions  of  those  three  organs  of
Government.   All  those  Constitutions  were  compendiously  referred  to  as
following a Westminster model of draftsmanship, and in that model the  chapter
dealing  with  the  Judiciary invariably contained provisions dealing with the
method of appointment, and security of tenure of the members of the judiciary,
which were designed to assure to them a degree of independence from the  other
branches of the Government.
34.  It was observed by the learned Judge:  "What, however, is implicit in the
very  structure  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Westminster model is that the
judicial power, however be it distributed from time to  time  between  various
courts,  has  to  continue,  to  be  vested  in  the persons appointed to hold
judicial office in the manner and on  the  terms  laid  down  in  the  chapter
dealing  with  the  judiciary, even though this is not expressly stated in the
Constitution".
35.  It was further observed that where a Constitution  of  Westminster  model
speaks of a particular 'court' already in existence when the Constitution came
into  force,  it  uses  this  expression  as  collective  description of those
individual Judges who, whether sitting alone or  with  other  Judges  or  with
jury,  are  e  ntitled  to  exercise  the jurisdiction exercised by that court
before that Constitution came into force  and,  further,  in  that  case,  the
provision  in  the  Constitution  for the appointment or security of tenure of
Judges of that  court,  will  apply  to  all  individual  Judges  subsequently
appointed  to  exercise the analogous jurisdiction, whatever other name may be
given to the court in which they sit.   The  Privy  Council  in  that  context
referred to the case of Attorney General for Ontario Vs.  Attorney General for
Canada, 1925 AC 750.
36.   After  holding  that there was nothing in the Constitution of Jamaica to
prohibit Parliament by enactment of an ordinary law to create a Court under  a
new name, such as the Revenue Court, to exercise part of the jurisdiction that
was  being exercised by members of higher judiciary or by members of the lower
judiciary at the time the Constitution came into force, it was held that by so
doing, only the label was being changed, but that the duty to ensure that  any
person  appointed  to be a member of the new court "should be appointed in the
same manner and entitled to the same security of tenure as the holder  of  the
judicial  office  named in Chapter 7 of the Constitution which entitled him to
exercise the jurisdiction at the time when the Constitution came  into  force,
was a duty which the Parliament had to scrupulously observe".
37.  The Privy Council quoted with approval the words used by Viscount Simonds
in Attorney  General of Australia Vs.  R & Boilermakers' Society of Australia,
1957 (2) All ER 52 that, "it would make  a  mockery  of  the  Constitution  if
Parliament  could  transfer the jurisdiction previously exercisable by holders
of the judicial office named in Chapter VII of the Constitution, to holders of
new judicial offices to which some different name was attached, and to provide
that persons holding the new judicial offices should not be appointed  in  the
manner  and  on  the terms prescribed under Chapter VII for the appointment of
the members of the judicature", and observed, "If this were  the  case,  there
would  be nothing to prevent the Parliament from transferring the whole of the
judicial power of Jamaica (with two minor exceptions  referred  to  below)  to
bodies  composed  of  persons who not being members of "the judicature", would
not be entitled to the protection of Chapter VII at all."
38.   That  even  the  label  "Supreme  Court",  could  be  rendered  a  false
description, if such broad legislative power was to be recognised, was pointed
out:   "If  as  contended  by  the  Attorney  General, the words italicised in
Section 97 (1)
entitle Parliament by an ordinary  law  to  strip  the  Supreme
Court  of  all  jurisdiction  in  civil  and  criminal  cases  other than that
expressly conferred on it by
Section 25
and
Section 366
and
Section  44
,  what
would  be  left  would  be a court of such limited jurisdiction that the label
'Supreme Court' would be a false description; so too if all  its  jurisdiction
(with  those  two  exceptions)  were  exercisable concurrently by other courts
composed of members of the lower judiciary."
39.  The most significant reason for imposing a check on the legislative power
to create new adjudicatory forums, and man them with persons who do not  enjoy
the  independence  assured to the Judges, was stated by Lord Diplock, in these
words :  "But more important, for this is the substance  of  the  matter,  the
individual citizen could be deprived of the safeguard, which the makers of the
Constitution  regarded  as  necessary, of having important questions affecting
his civil or criminal responsibilities determined by a court,  however  named,
composed of Judges whose independence from all local pressure by Parliament or 
by  the  executive  was  guaranteed by a security of tenure more absolute than
that provided by the Constitution for Judges of inferior courts."
40.  In the United States  of  America  which  has  the  oldest  live  written
constitution,  in  which are entrenched provisions separating the legislative,
executive and judicial powers, the constitution was viewed by the  US  Supreme
Court,  as  the  result of the framers regarding the "checks and balances that
they had built into the tripartite  Federal  Government  as  a  self-executing
safeguard  against  the  encroachment  or  aggrandizement of one branch at the
expen se of the other, Buckly Vs.  Valeo,  424  US  Page  1."  The  object  of
ensuring  these  checks  and  balances was stated by the court in the Marathon
case, (458 U.
S.  50
), was "to  guarantee  that  the  process  of  adjudication
itself be  made impartial".  The court quoted Hamilton in the Federalist No.78
wherein was stated "periodical appointment however regulated or by  whomsoever
made,  would  in  someway  or  the  other  be  fatal  to the courts' necessary
independence.  If the power  of  making  them  was  committed  either  to  the
executive or Legislature, there would be danger of an improper complaisance to
the branch, which possessed it ........"
41.   Despite  the  differences in the written constitutions of India and USA,
and the unwritten constitution of UK, a common cherished constitutional  value
in  all  these  countries whose legal systems are rooted in the common law, is
the independence and impartiality of those entrusted with the exercise of  the
State's inherent judicial power.
42.   The  decisions  of the larger Bench of the Supreme Court in the cases of
Keshavananda Bharati  vs.    State  of  Kerala
,  AIR  1973  SC  1461  and  the
Constitution Bench in the case of
Minerva Mills Ltd.  vs.  Union of India
, AIR
1986  SC  2030,  have held, inter alia, that an independent judiciary and it's
power of judicial review are among the basic features of the Constitution.
43.  The Constitution Bench in the case of
S.P.Sampath Kumar  vs.    Union  of
India
,  (1987)  1  SCC 124, speaking through Bhagwathi, CJ, has held that, "It
can no longer be disputed that total insulation  of  the  judiciary  from  all
forms  of  interference  from  the co-ordinate branches of the Government is a
basic essential feature  of  the  Constitution,  the  same  independence  from
possibility  of  Executive  pressure  or influence must also be ensured to the
Chairman, vice Chairman and Members of  the  Administrative  Tribunals.....The
Constitution  makers  have made anxious provision to secure total independence
of the judiciary from executive pressure or influence."
44.  A seven Judge Bench in the case
L.Chandra Kumar  vs.    Union  of  India
,
(1997)  3  SCC  261,  has  laid  down  that the "Power of Judicial review over
legislative action vested in the High Courts under
Article 2 26
, and  in  this
Court  under
Article  32
of  the  Constitution  is an integral and essential
feature of the Constitution constituting a part of the basic structure ......"
and that "...  the power vested  in  the  High  Courts  to  exercise  judicial
superintendence  over  the  decisions of all Courts and Tribunals within their
respective  jurisdictions  is  also  part  of  the  basic  structure  of   the
constitution.   This is because a situation where the High Courts are divested
of all other judicial functions apart from  constitutional  interpretation  is
equally to be avoided."
45.  The Constitutional guarantee of a free and independent judiciary, and the
constitutional  scheme  of  separation  of  powers can be easily and seriously
undermined, if the legislatures were to divest the  regular  Courts  of  their
jurisdiction in all matters, entrust the same to newly created Tribunals which
can appropriately be labelled, borrowing the language of the US Supreme Court,
as  'Legislative Courts', and assert that such forums not being regular Courts
and their


Members not being Members of the 'Judicial service' of the State, they are not
entitled to protection similar to the constitutional  protection  afforded  to
the Courts.
46.   If  the Constitutional Scheme and intent are to be preserved, it must be
held that the 'total insulation of the judiciary' referred to in the  case  of
Sampath  Kumar is not just for the 'judiciary ' comprising of Judges appointed
to the regular Courts.  The 'judiciary' in this context must be understood  as
taking  within  it's  fold,  all  courts  and Tribunals and other adjudicatory
bodies, whatever be  the  label  assigned  to  them.    The  independence  and
impartiality  which  are  essential  for  the  proper exercise of the judicial
power, are to be secured not only for the Courts but also  for  Tribunals  and
their  members,  who, though they do not belong to the 'Judicial Service'; are
entrusted with judicial powers.
47.  Any other view, in the  evocative  language  of  Justice  Brennen,  would
"effectively   eviscerate  the  constitutional  guarantee  of  an  independent
Judicial Branch."
48.  Safeguards  which  ensure  independence  and  impartiality  are  not  for
promoting  personal  prestige  of  the  functionary  but  for  preserving  and
protecting the rights of the citizens  and  others  who  are  subject  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal,  and for ensuring that such Tribunals will be
able to command the confidence of the  public.    As  said  by  Lord  Denning,
'Justice is rooted in confidence'.
49.  Before proceeding further we must notice the submission made on behalf of
the respondent that legislation even if found to be arbitrary cannot be struck
down on that ground.  Our attention was invited to the decision of the Supreme
Court in  the  case of
State of Bihar vs.  Bihar Distillery Ltd.
, (1997) 3 SCC
453, wherein it was inter alia observed that, "The general averment  that  the
Act  is  arbitrary  is  too vague to merit any acceptance, apart from the fact
that an act  of  legislature  cannot  be  struck  down  merely  saying  it  is
arbitrary.."
50.   The Court
in that case
reiterated the law that had been
laid down in
the
case of
State of UP vs.  Mcdowell & Co.
, (1996) 3 SCC 709  by  a  three  Judge
Bench.   In that it was observed, "The power of Parliament or for that matter,
the State Legislatures is restricted in two ways.  A law made by Parliament or
the legislature can be struck down by courts on two grounds  and  two  grounds
alone,  viz.,  (1) lack of legislative competence, and (2) violation of any of
the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution  or  of  any
other constitutional provision.    There  is  no  third ground." .....  "It is
enough for us to say that by whatever name it is characterised, the ground  of
invalidation  must  fall  within the four corners of the two grounds mentioned
above.  In other words, say, if an enactment is challenged as violative of the
equality clause/equal protection clause enshrined therein, "Similarly,  if  an
enactment  is  challenged  as  violative  of  any  of  the  fundamental rights
guaranteed by clauses (a) to (g) of
Article 19(1)
, it can be struck down  only
if it is found not saved by any of the clauses (2) to (6) of
Article 19
and so
on.   No  enactment  can be struck down by just saying that is is arbitrary or
unreasonable.  Some or other constitutional infirmity has to be  found  before
invalidating an Act."
51.    In  the  foot  note  in  that  judgment  referring  to  the  expression
'arbitrary', it is stated  thus  -  "An  expression  used  widely  and  rather
indiscriminately an  expression of inherently imprecise import.  The extensive
use of this expression in India reminds one of what Frankfurther, J., said  in
Hattie Mae Tiller  v.  Atlantic Coast Line Railroad Co., 87 L Ed 610 :  318 US
54 (1943).  "The phrase begins life as a literary expression; its

felicity leads to its lazy repetition and repetition soon establishes it as  a
legal  formula,  undiscriminatingly  used  to  express different and sometimes
contradictory ideas", said the learned Judge."
52.
In the case of
Public Services Tribunal Association vs.  State of  Andhra
Preadesh
,  (2003) 4 SCC 104 a two Judge Bench reiterated what had been said in 
the case of State of Bihar.
53.  The following passage from the case of
R.K.Garg  vs.    Union  of  India
,
(1981)  4 SCC 675 was quoted with approval in the case of Attorney General for
India vs.  Amratlal Prajivandas
, (1994) 5 SCC 54, as setting  out  "principles
relevant  in  judging  the validity and relevant in the matter of interpreting
the provisions of such economic measures.." The  economic  measures  that  was 
being  considered  in  the  case  of Attorney General of India was validity of
SAFEMA.  In the case of Garg, Bhagwati, J., observed, "There may be  crudities
and  inequities  in  complicated experimental economic legislation but on that
account alone it cannot be struck down as invalid." ....."There  may  even  be
possibilities  of  abuse  but  that  too  cannot  of  itself  be  a ground for
invalidating the legislation because it is not possible for any legislature to
anticipate as if by some divine prescience,  distortions  and  abuses  of  its
legislation  which  may be made by those subject to its provisions and provide
against such distortions and abuses." ....  "The court must therefore  adjudge
the  constitutionality of such legislation by the generality of its provisions
and not by its crudities or inequities or by the possibilities of abuse of any
of its provisions.  If any crudities, inequities or by  the  possibilities  of
abuse  come  to  light,  the legislature can always step in and enact suitable
amendatory legislation.  That is the essence of pragmatic approach which  must
guide and inspire the legislature in dealing with complex economic issues."
54.   We  are  here  concerned  with  statutory provisions which are allegedly
violative of the  basic  constitutional  guarantee  of  free  and  independent
judiciary and therefore beyond the legislative competence of Parliament.
55.   We  shall  now  examine the petitioner's challenge to the constitutional
validity of the  impugned  provisions  of  the
Companies  Act
.    56.     The
Parliament's  power  to  create  National  Company  Law  Tribunal and National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal is clearly traceable to Entries 43  and  44  of
List I, which read as under :
" 43.    Incorporation,  regulation  and  winding  up  of trading Corporations
including banking, insurance and  financial  corporations  but  not  including
co-operative societies.   44.    Incorporation,  regulation  and winding up of
corporations, whether trading or not, with objects not confined to one  State,
but not including universities".
57.    Parliament   is  thus  competent  to  enact  law  with  regard  to  the
incorporation, regulation  and  winding  up  of  Companies.    The  power   of
regulation  would  include  the  power to set up an adjudicatory machinery for
resolving the matters litigated upon, and which concern  the  working  of  the
companies in  all  their  facets.  The Law Commission, as noted by the Supreme
Court in the case of Chandra Kumar,  had  also  recommended  the  creation  of
specialist Tribunals  in  places  of  generalist Courts.  Creation of National
Company Law Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals and vesting in  those  Tribunals
the  powers  exercised by the High Court with regard to company matters cannot
be said to be unconstitutional.
58.  However several of the provisions in Parts 1B and 1C of the Companies Act
which deal with these Tribunals are inconsistent with the basic feature of the
Constitution  regarding  separation  of  the  judicial  power  from  that   of
legislative  and  executive powers, as also with the independent and impartial
exercise of the judicial power.
59.
Sections 10FE
and
10FT
prescribe  the  tenure  of  the  office  of  the
President  and  Members  of the Tribunal and the Appellate Authority, as three
years with eligibility for reappointment.  At the end of that  term  of  three
years  there  is no provision for automatic reappointment subject to their not
having incurred any disqualification or being found guilty of any  misconduct.
All  that  is  provided  for  is that they would be eligible for reappointment
which would only mean that they are not  disqualified  from  being  considered
again  without  any  assurance  that  they  would  be  once again selected for
appointment.
60.  The short tenure of the Members undermines their independent functioning,
as such persons will have to depend upon  the  executive  government  and  the
selection  committee in which four out of five members are serving officers of
the Government, for their continuance in office.  The  scope  for  influencing
their functioning  is  large.   Sensitive matters involving ownership, control
and functioning of Corporations  involving  heavy  stakes  will  come  up  for
adjudication before the Tribunal.  Considering the manner in which business in
India  functions,  the likelihood of attempts being made to bring pressure and
influence through political and executive branches on the Member is very real.
The real possibility of their not being reappointed after such a short tenure,
will  disable  them  from  functioning  as  truly  independent  and  impartial
adjudicators.   The  quality  of  justice  rendered  by  such Members will not
inspire much confidence among those who come before them.    It  is  not  only
necessary  that they function as truly independent and impartial adjudicators,
but also should be perceived as such.
61.  This short tenure will also prove a disincentive for well  qualified  and
able persons possessing the necessary qualifications, from offering themselves
for  consideration  for appointment to the Tribunal, as professionals who have
built up a good practice after several years  of  hard  work  cannot,  in  the
normal  course  be  expected  to  give  up  their  profession/practice  for an
appointment of extremely limited duration  with  no  assurance  of  a  career.
Constituting  a  Tribunal  in  a  manner  which would keep able persons out is
hardly the proper way of setting up an adjudicatory forum entrusted  with  the
responsibilities  of  determining the very valuable rights of persons who come
before it.
62.  This also makes room for persons within the Executive  branch  to  secure
appointment  as  Members specially in the light of the proviso to
section 10FE
which provides  that  they  will  continue  to  retain  their  lien  on  their
substantive post.
63.  Such officers though given the nomenclature of the Member of the Tribunal
but  who have no commitment to a career as a Member of the Tribunal and regard
it merely as an opportunity to do a different kind of work, with the knowledge
that they would come back to  their  substantive  post  and  look  for  career
advancement  in  their  respective  substantive  cadres,  would  be  even more
susceptible to executive and  ministerial  influence  which  they  would  find
difficult to resist.  A


Tribunal  composed  of  such  persons  cannot  be  regarded  as  one  which is
independent and impartial, and which can discharge State's  inherent  judicial
powers in the manner in which it should be discharged.
64.   Even  a term of five years was regarded by the Supreme Court in the case
of Sampath Kumar, as a "disincentive for well qualified people to  accept  the
offer to  join the Tribunal".  The Court
in that case
further observed, "There
may be competent people belonging to younger age groups who  would  have  more  
than five years to reach the prevailing age of retirement.  The fact that such
people would be required to go out on completing the five year period but long
before  the  superannuation age is reached is bound to operate as a deterrent.
........A five year period is not a long one.  Ordinarily some time  would  be
taken  for  most  of  the members to get used to the service jurisprudence and
when the period is only five years, many would have to go out by the time they
are fully acquainted with the law and have good grip over the job.  To require
retirement at the end of five years is thus neither convenient to  the  person
selected for the job nor expedient to the scheme.  ........membership in other
high-powered  Tribunals like the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal or the Tribunal
under the
Customs Act
can be referred to."
65.  In those two Tribunals, namely Income  Tax  Appellate  Tribunal  and  the
Customs  and  Excise Appellate Tribunal, the appointment once made is upto the
age of retirement.
66.  In the Tribunal constituted under the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks  and
Financial Institutions  Act,  1993
the  term  of  office  is five years.  The
appointees are or were District Judges.    Similar  terms  of  five  years  is
provided  for  persons  appointed  as Members of the Consumer Forums under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
.
67.  It is only in the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 2002
and in the
Competition
Act
,  both  enactments being of the year 2002, the term of office is specified
as three years, even after the seven Judge Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  had
indicated  in 1997 in the case of Sampath Kumar that even a five year term was
not sufficient, as some time would be taken by most of the members to get used
to the jurisprudence of the branch for which the Tribunal is constituted,  and
many  would  have  to come out by the time they are fully acquainted with that
branch of law.
68.  The Law Commission in it's 162nd Report has recommended that in the cases  
of Members of Administrative Tribunals their initial term should be ten  years
and renewable  for  a  further period of five years.  In UK the Leggatt Report
which reviewed the functioning of the Tribunals in UK, the recommendation  was
that  the  term  of  Members  of  the  Tribunal  be  atleast seven years, with
provision for automatic renewal subject to the person not  having  been  found
guilty of misconduct or the like.
69.   Limiting  the term of office to a period of three years lends support to
the apprehension of the petitioner that the executive is gradually  trying  to
make deeper  and  deeper  inroads into the independence of the judiciary.  The
executive appears to have entertained an opinion, that the Supreme  Court  not
having  interfered  with  and  not  having  invalidated  the provisions of the
Administrative Tribunals Act
, and other Acts by  which  other  Tribunals  have
been constituted, in which a five year tenure is provided, it would be open to
the  Executive  and  the Parliament to reduce that period of five years to any
other number of years of its choice.
70.  At this rate Parliament could enact a  law  setting  up  a  new  Tribunal
and/or modify existing law concerning presently functioning Tribunals limiting
the  term  of  office  of  the members to two years, or one year or even less,
thereby placing appointees perennially at the  mercy  of  the  Executive,  and
making  them  implicitly  carry out the wishes of Executive, and allow a great
deal of room for executive domination over the manner in  which  they  perform
their functions.
71.  This  is  a danger, which the Court must recognise and guard against.  If
the limits are not properly set at this stage, the executive  would  find  the
temptation  much  too  great  to resist, to take more and more out of the area
reserved for the judiciary, which area has been carved out for  the  judiciary
by the makers of the Constitution solely with a view to ensure the independent
and  impartial  functioning of the persons with appropriate qualifications and
charged with the exercise of judicial functions.  72.  Limiting the tenure  of
the  Members  of  this  Tribunal  to  three  years  would  be  detrimental  to
competence, independence, and impartiality of the new Tribunals.
73.  The provision for retaining the lien is a provision which undermines  the
independence of the Tribunal.  It would be reasonable to provide some time for
the  officer who chooses to come to the Tribunal within which he would make up
his mind, as to whether he would like to remain in the Tribunal or go back  to
his service.    Equally  it is desirable for the appointing authority to watch
the performance of the newly appointed Member for a reasonable period of time.
Allowing the Member to retain the lien for an indefinite period is  clearly  a
provision  which  cannot  be  regarded as constitutional, having regard to the
functions which the Tribunal is required to perform.
74.  Unless the term of office is fixed as atleast five years with a provision
for renewal, except in cases of incapacity, misconduct and the like,  and  the
period  for which lien may be retained is fixed at not more than one year, the
constitution of the Tribunal cannot be regarded as  satisfying  the  essential
requirements   of  an  independent  and  impartial  body  exercising  judicial
functions of the State.
75.
Section 10FD
deals with the qualifications, appointment of President  and
Members  of  the National Company Law Tribunal, while
Sections 10FR
deals with 
qualification for appointment as  Chairperson  and  Members  of  the  National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal.
76.
Section  10FD(1)
provides  that the President shall be a person who has
been or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court.    This  excludes  sitting
Judges of the High court.
77.   Under
Article  217(2)
the qualification for appointment as a Judge of a
High Court is that the person be a citizen of India, and has at least for  ten
years either held a judicial office in India or has been an advocate of a High
Court or of two or more such Courts in succession.
78.   In  contrast  to
Section 10FD(1)
Section 10FR (2)
which deals with Chair
person of the Appellate Tribunal requires that the Chairperson be a person who
has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court.
79.  The Supreme Court, in the  case  of  Sampath  Kumar  had  held  that  for
appointment  to  the  post  of vice Chairman of the Administrative Tribunals a
person qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a  High  Court  could  also  be
considered.  What was said there has inappropriately been extended here to the
post  of  a  President  who  heads  the  entire Tribunal which consists of the
President and 62 other members.  It is in  the  fitness  of  things  that  the
person  who  heads  this  important  Tribunal be a person who has considerable
experience in discharging high judicial functions as a Judge of a High  Court.
A  wider  vision,  the  ability  to  see  things  in context and in the proper
perspective, the ability to be innovate wherever necessary, and other  similar
qualities are almost as important as expertise in the subject.
80.   Even  as, for the position of a chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal it
is only persons who have actually held the office either as  a  Judge  of  the
Supreme  Court,  or as Chief Justice of a High Court who can be considered, so
also for the post of a President of the Tribunal it would  be  appropriate  to
confine  the  choice to persons who had held the position of a Judge of a High
Court for a minimum period of five years.
81.  In the second proviso to
Section  10FE
it  is  provided  that  a  person
appointed  as  a  President  as  also  a Member, "....may retain lien with his
parent cadre or Ministry or Department while holding office as such".  This is
surprising and raises doubts as to whether reference to a person qualified  to
be  a  Judge  of  a  High court is, for the purpose of enabling persons in the
Indian Legal Service or the Indian Company Law Service (Legal Branch) who  had
been  advocates for ten years before joining such service, to be considered as
being eligible to be appointed as President  of  the  Tribunal.    This  is  a
disturbing provision.    Even the high office of the President of the Tribunal
is being allowed to be held by a person from the executive branch by regarding
him as being qualified for appointment for the post of a Judge of a High Court
on account of his having been an advocate for ten years or more prior  to  his
joining the  service.    The  reference  to President must be deleted from the
proviso in
Section 10FE
.  For Members, as already held,  the  lien  should  be
limited to one year.
82.  The qualifications prescribed for a Judicial Member in
Section 10FD(2)
in
sub-clauses (a) to (d) are qualifications to which no serious objection can be
taken.  The  qualifications  required  are  :   holding judicial office for 15
years; or practice as an advocate of a High Court for ten  years;  or  atleast
three  years  of  service  in  the  Senior  Administrative Grade of the Indian
Company Law Service (Legal Branch), or three years of Service in  Grade  I  of
the Indian Legal Service.
83.
In  the  case  of
Chandra  Kumar  vs.    UOI
,  it  was  observed  by the
Constitution Bench:  "It must be remembered  that  the  setting  up  of  these
Tribunals  is  founded  on  the premise that specialist bodies comprising both
trained administrators and those with judicial experience would by  virtue  of
their  specialised  knowledge,  be  better  equipped  to  dispense  speedy and
efficient justice.  It was expected that a judicious mix  of  judicial  member
and those  with  grassroot  experience would best serve this purpose.  To hold
that the Tribunal should consist only of judicial  members  would  attack  the
primary basis of the theory pursuant to which they have been constituted."
84.   Presence of persons without judicial background on the Tribunal was thus
found to be permissible, if such persons possess specialised  knowledge  which
was relevant  to  the  specialised  nature  of  the  Tribunal.  The grass root
experience in the field was regarded as a positive  qualification  for  a  non
judicial member.
85.
Section 10FD(3)
which sets out the qualifications required for Technical
Members, refers in sub-clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), and  (e)  respectively,  to
persons  who  are  in  the Indian Company Law Service (Accounts Branch) in the
Senior Administ rade; persons who had held the rank of a  Joint  Secretary  to
the  Government of India and have adequate knowledge and experience in dealing
with problems relating to company law; those with  15  years  of  practice  as
Charted  Accountant;  with  15  years  of practice as Cost Accountants; and to
persons with 15 years working experience as  Company  Secretary  in  wholetime 
practice.   No  serious  exception  can  be  taken  to  the  qualifications so
prescribed for a Technical Member in sub clauses (a) to (3) of 10FD(3).
86.  10FD(3)(f) is a matter of serious concern.  It reads as under :  "10FD(3)
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Technical Member unless he-
(f) is a person of ability, integrity and standing  having  special  knowledge
of,  and  professional  experience  of not less than twenty years in, science,
technology, economics, banking, industry, law, matters relating to  industrial
finance,  industrial  management,  industrial  reconstruction, administration,
investment, accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special  knowledge
of,  or  professional  experience  in,  which  would  be in the opinion of the
Central Government useful to the Tribunal "
87.  It is difficult to see how knowledge of science, technology  or  industry
can make  for  expertise  in  the  specialised  branch  of company law.  It is
equally difficult to see the link  between  qualifications  and  expertise  in
Economics,  Banking,  Industrial  finance,  Industrial  Management, Industrial
Reconstruction, administration, and investment, and marketing  with  expertise
in company law.
88.   The object of creating specialist Tribunals is not to provide a sinecure
to persons who may be specialised in unrelated branches of knowledge, and vest
precious judicial power in them in an area in which they are not competent.
89.  So far as Law and Accountancy are concerned, they are  relevant  in  this
specialist  Tribunal  but for which provision has already been made in
Section
10FD(2)
and
Sections 10FD(3)(c)
and (d).
90.  The justification offered by  the  State  is  that  a  similar  provision
existed  in  the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
and
since the work relating to revival and rehabilitation of  sick  industries  is
entrusted  to  this  new Tribunal, under the new
Part VIA of the Companies Act
comprising
sections 424A
to
424L
, and titled "Revival  and  Rehabilitation  of
Sick  Industrial Companies" a Member possessing the qualification provided for
in that Act, is required to be appointed to this new Tribunal.
91.  Section 4(2) of the Sick Industries Special  Provision  Act  reads  thus:
"The  Chairman and other members of the Board shall be persons who are or have 
been or are qualified to be High Court Judges or persons of ability, integrity
and standing, who have special knowledge and professional  experience  of  not
less  than  15 years in Science, Technology, economics, Banking industry, Law,
Labour  matters,  Industrial  Finance,   Industrial   Management,   Industrial
Reconstruction,  Administration,  Investment,  Accountancy,  Marketing  or any
other matter, the special knowledge of or professional experience in which  in
the opinion of the Central Government be useful to the Board."
92.
Sections  5(2)
and  (3)  of  that  Act which deal with the Chairman and
Members of the Tribunal read thus :
S.5(2)
The Chairman shall be a person who is  or  has  been  a  Judge  of  the
Supreme  Court or who is or has been a Judge of a High Court for not less than
five years;
S.5(3)
a member of the Appellate Authority shall be a  person  who
is  or  has  been a Judge of a High Court or has been an officer not below the
rank of a Secretary to the Government of India, or who is or has been a Member
of the Board for not less ree years.
93.
Section 10FD (3)(f)
is practically a reproduction of
Section 4 (3)
of the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)  Act,  1985,  except  that  the
period of experience in the specified field is twenty years instead of fifteen
years.
94.  It is evident that the Legislative draftsperson has not paid attention to
the  Scheme  of
Section 10
FD when he/she decided to bodily lift
Section 4(3)
from  the  Sick  Industries  Act,  make  a  minor  modification  therein   and
incorporate the same as sub-clause (f) of
Section 1
0FD(3).
95.   Knowledge of/and experience in Science, Technology, Industry, etc., does
not equip one to deal with questions of company law  with  regard  to  matters
like  oppression  and  mismanagement, matters relating to allotment of shares,
amalgamation  and  restructuring  of  companies,  or  the  priorities  in  the
distribution of assets in the course of winding up, and such matters.
96.   Any  appointee under
Section 10FD (3) (f)
therefore can have a role only
in matters concerning revival and rehabilitation of sick industrial  companies
and not in relation to any other matters.
97.
Section 10FD(3)(g)
is incongruous.  The qualifications prescribed therein
for appointment as a Technical Member is the holding or having held the office
of  Presiding  Officer  of  a  Labour  Court,  Tribunal  or  National Tribunal
constituted under the
Industrial Disputes Act
.  Persons who  hold  such  posts
are  District  Judges and for the National Tribunal, former Judges of the High
Court, Their training and expertise is in law and in adjudication of disputes.
If their expert knowledge of Labour law is what is sought to  be  utilised,  a
minimum  period  of  three  to five years experience as such Presiding Officer
should be prescribed.  Persons who satisfy the  qualifications  prescribed  in
Section  10FD(f)
would  be  persons who would also satisfy the qualifications
prescribed under
Sections 10F(2)(a)
.  It would be more appropriate to  include
this qualification in
Section 10FD(2)
and in the later provisions dealing with
'Benches of the Tribunal' in
Section 10FL
, provide that 'Judicial Member' with
this  qualification  shall  be  a  member  of the special Bench referred to in
Section 10FL(2)
for cases relating to rehabilitation, restructuring or winding
up of companies.
98.
Section 10FD(3)(h)
reads as  under:    ..."is  a  person  having  special
knowledge  of  and  experience  of  not less than fifteen years in the matters
relating to labour." This provision not only suffers from vagueness in so  far
as  it  merely  mentions 'matters relating to labour', without specifying what
those matters are, and the capacity in which the persons must have dealt  with
those  matters, this provision would enable a person who has some knowledge of
labour as an academic, or as an official in the Ministry of  Labour  or  as  a
Trade  Union  Leader  or  as Labour Welfare Officer or as Manager in the Human
Resources Department of a Company, to become a Technical Member of the Company      
Law Tribunal.  As a Technical Member such a person would be eligible to sit on
all Benches of the  Tribunal  and  adjudicate  matters  arising  for  decision
relating  to management, amalgamation, winding up of Companies, about which he 
is likely to know nothing.
99.  The Proviso to
Section 10FL(2)
is  quite  startling.    It  reads  thus:
"Provided that in case a Special Bench passes an order in respect of a company
to be wound up, the winding up proceedings of such company may be conducted by   
a Bench consisting of a single Member."
100.   The Special Bench referred to therein comprises of a Judicial Member, a
Technical Member appointed under
Section 10FD(3)(a)
to (f),  and  a  Technical
Member appointed  under  class (g) or (h).  Such Special Bench/es is/are to be
constituted by the President of the Tribunal for  the  disposal  of  any  case
relating to rehabilitation, restructuring, or winding up of the Companies.
101.   That  Single  Member  though  not referred to as one who had sat on the
Special Bench that passed the winding up order, can  very  well  be  a  Labour
Member appointed  as  a  Technical  Member under
Section 10FD
(3 )(h).  This is
making a mockery of a specialist tribunal by entrusting to  a  person  who  is
wholly  ignorant  of  company law the power to decide complicated questions of
law, as also questions of fact after assessing the  evidence  without  knowing
legal principles to be applied for assessing the evidence.
102.   A  Constitution  Bench  of  the  Supreme  Court in the case of
National
Textile Workers Union vs.  Ramakrishnan
, (1983) 53 CC 184 :  AIR 19 83 SC  75,
by a majority, held that workers of the Company winding up of which is sought,
are  entitled  to appear at the hearing of the winding up petition, whether to
support or oppose it, so long as no winding up order was made  by  the  Court.
The  Court  did not hold that right of the workmen to be heard extended beyond
and after the winding up order had been made.
By reason of10FD(3)(h) and 10FL
proviso a trade unionist is now a potential Judge for deciding as  to  whether
Company  should  be  wound  up, and in case a winding up order is made, be the
sole Judge of all further proceedings in winding up.
103.  The State's justification is  that  clause  (h)  only  sets  out  as  an
independent  provision  a qualification which was required of a member of BIFR
and that such Member's presence in the Tribunal is required  as  the  Tribunal
now has to deal with revival and rehabilitation of sick industrial companies.
104.   It  is  only stating the obvious that the Company is the most important
form of business organisation not only in India but all  over  the  world  and
that  questions  relating  to  the  formation, management, control, changes in
management,  allotment  of  shares,  acquisition  of  controlling   interests,
question  of  mismanagement  and oppression, amalgamation and restructuring of 
companies, etc., are matters which have large economic consequences for  those 
directly  concerned  and  many  a  time  on the working of the markets and the
economy as a whole.  Such decisions cannot be left to a person who has  little
or  no  knowledge  of company law and entrusting these vital functions to such
persons cannot be permitted.
105.
Section 10FD (3)(h)
as also
sections 10FL (2)
proviso must therefore  be
suitably amended so as to spell out with certainty the qualification which the
person  to  be  appointed  under clause (h) should possess and confine his/her
participation only to the Bench dealing with  revival  and  rehabilitation  of
sick  companies  and  exclude his functioning as a single Member Bench for any
matter.
106.
Section 10FF
empowers the Central government,  acting  on  it's  own  to
designate any Judicial or Technical Member to be Member Administration in whom 
are  to be vested financial and administrative powers, and which powers he may
in turn confer to any other officer of the Tribunal.
Section 10FK(2)
provides
that, "the officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge  their
functions under the general superintendence of Member Administration.  This is
an  innovation  aimed  at and in fact undermining the authority and control of
the head of a Judicial Tribunal and asserting the executive's control over the
staff and other officials of the Tribunal, bypassing the President.  These are
pernicious provisions designed  to  make  the  President  subservient  to  the
executive.   The  President  would  have  to depend upon the sweet will of the
Member Administration, the  chosen  one  of  the  Executive,  in  all  matters
concerning  finance  and administration, which are vital for the effective and
orderly functioning of the Tribunal.  Even for minor matters like  secretarial
assistance, transport and the like, the President is required to submit to the
dictates  of  Member  Administration  through  whom the executive control over
finance and administration is being asserted through these provisions.
107.  The choice of the Member Administration is not even to be made with  the
prior consent  of the President or Chair Person.  It is left to the sweet will
of the Central Government to pick and choose among the 62 Members that  it  is
empowered to appoint under
Section 10FC
.  The working of the Tribunal will run
to  rough  weather  in case of conflict in the view point of the President and
the Member Administration.  This power which has been  given  to  the  Central
Government  is  wholly pernicious and will undermine the authority of the head
of the Tribunal to ensure the effective and smooth functioning of the  affairs
of a Judicial Tribunal.
108.
Section 10FF
and
10FK(2)
should therefore be suitably amended to provide
that  a Member may be designated as Member Administration only in consultation 
with the President, and further provide that the  Member  Administration  will
discharge  his  functions  in  relation  to  finance and administration of the
Tribunal under the overall control and supervision of the President.
109.  There are also other inconsistencies in  the  manner  in  which  several
provisions concerning  the Tribunal have been provided.
Section 10FD(2)(a)
as
also 10FD (2)(b) specifies a period of fifteen years as the period  for  which
one  must  have  held  judicial  office  while
Section  10FD (2)(b)
refers to
requirement of only ten years as an advocate of a High Court.    It  seems  to
place  the ten years as an advocate of a High Court on a higher footing than a
person who has held judicial office for a term of 15 years.  It  is  difficult
to appreciate the reasons that prompted the draftsman to make a distinction of
this nature.  This clearly is a matter which requires attention.
110.
Section  10FR
provides  for the Constitution of an Appellate Tribunal.
Sub-section (1) provides that the Tribunal shall consist of a chairperson  and
not more  than two members.  While 10FR(2) which provides that the chairperson
shall be a person who has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or  Chief  Justice
of  a  High  Court  is  unobjectionable,  sub-section (3) which deals with the
appointment of a Member, uses the  same  language  as  in
Section  10FD(3)(f)
except that  the length of experience required is twenty five years.  What has
been observed by us in relation to
Section 10FD(3)(f)
is equally applicable to
Section 10FR(3)
.  Subjects other than law and accountancy  mentioned  in  that
provision cannot be regarded as enabling persons with knowledge and experience
in  those  fields,  to  be regarded as specialists in company law competent to
deal with, in appeal, decisions  rendered  by  the  Tribunal  in  relation  to
company  law matters; such persons may only sit in on cases concerning revival
or rehabilitation of sick companies.
111.  Even under the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
,
the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial  Reconstruction  did  not
have  as  it's  Member  persons,  from  the subject areas mentioned in
Section
10FR(3)
.  Only one, who is or has been a Judge of the High Court; or  who  has
been  a Secretary to the Government of India, or been a Member of the BIFR was
eligible for appointment as Member.  The legislative draftsperson has  without
any rationale, incorporated in
Section 10FR(3)
a provision which had been made
for the BIFR.    112.
Section 10FR (3)
must therefore be suitably amended to
delete  the  reference  to  all  subjects  other  than  law  and  accountancy.
Incorporating  a  provision  similar to that in
Section 5(3)
of the SICA would
also be in order.
113.  The impression that one is left  with  after  examining  the  provisions
concerning  the  National  Company  Law Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal is
that these provisions have been drafted in haste and  have  not  received  the
kind of  attention  that  they should have.  If they are the result of careful
deliberation it only makes matters worse.  The creation of  a  new  substitute
judicial  forum  which is to carry out the work which is now being carried out
by 21 different High Courts in the country which work has  been  done  in  the
High  Court  for  over nine decades, is to be done with great care so that the
new Tribunal will be efficient and effective alternate institutional forum  to
the High Courts and the Company Law Board.
114.   Added to this is the haste with which the appointments to the posts has
have been attempted.  We have been told  that  the  salaries  payable  to  the
President,  the Chair Person and other Members has not been fixed by the Rules
till date.  Neve the selection  process  has  been  set  in  motion  with  the
candidates  being in dark as to what kind of compensation they will receive if
they were to be appointed to these posts.  This is designed to deter the  most
suitable  candidates  from  offering  themselves for appointment and is a step
which ought not to have been taken.
115.  According to the petitioner, the salaries proposed to  be  paid  to  the
Members  is  not to be uniform, but dependent upon the substantive rank if any
held by the appointee in the post over which  he  has  a  lien  in  Government
service.  This  allegation  is not denied.  On the other hand justification is
sought to be offered by asserting that Membership of Tribunal for  purpose  of
salary  has  to  be  equated  to the substantive post over which the appointee
holds a lien.  This ' executive'  approach  is  impossible  to  justify  in  a
judicial Tribunal.   No Member of the Tribunal, when all Members possess equal
powers and have to shoulder equal responsibilities, may  look  down  upon  his
colleague as  belonging  to  a  lower  cadre and drawing a lower salary.  This
attitude of the executive is further evidence of the attempt to  '  executise'
the   judicial  tribunal,  and  lends  further  support  to  the  petitioner's
apprehensions.
116.   The  selection  process,  we  are  told,  has  been  initiated  without
advertising  the  posts in the newspaper and giving wide publicity even though
the field of selection as set out  in  the  several  provisions  of  10FD  and
10FR(3) is  very  wide.    We  have  been  informed  by the learned Additional
Solicitor General that letters had been sent to Bar Council  by  the  Ministry
with a  request to put up the details on their Notice Boards.  Counsel for the
Bar Council at our instance, after ascertaining the  facts,  has  informed  us
that  that  is  exactly what the Bar Council did - putting it up on the Notice
Board in the Bar Council's office, and that they have not  in  turn  sent  any
communication to  the  Advocates/Bar  Associations in the State.  Petitioner's
learned senior counsel stated at the Bar, that in other States also the

Advocates' Associations had not been informed, and that most of the  Advocates
are  unaware  that the Government was filling up the posts in the Tribunal for
which they were eligible to apply.
117.  Government sought to justify it's action by claiming that the steps they
have taken are the steps which they had been advised to  take.    No  reliable
record has  been produced before us to show the nature of alleged advice.  The
record said to have been made by an officer of the  Government  regarding  the
advice  given  must  be  based  on  a  misunderstanding,  as we do not find it
possible to accept that there could have been any directive not  to  advertise
these  posts, when vacancies in the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal whose status
and powers are no less than that of this Tribunal are regularly advertised.
118.  The importance of advertising the posts of Members is obvious.    A  new
specialist Tribunal is being created for the first time.  That Tribunal is now
being  entrusted  with the judicial work which is now being carried out by the
High Court.  It is imperative that those who are eligible be made aware of the
creation of these posts so that if they so choose, they can  offer  themselves
as candidates.   It would be extremely short sighted for the recruiting agency
to withhold information regarding  the  availability  of  vacancies  from  the
knowledge from those who are able, interested, qualified and are eligible, and
make available the information only to a handful of persons.
119.  The posts of chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal which is to be filled
by  a  former  Judge  of the Supreme Court or a former Chief Justice of a High
Court, as also the post of President which we have held to be  a  post  to  be
filled  only  by  a  former  Judge of a High Court with at least five years of
experience as such Judge, however need not be advertised.  Selection to  those
posts shall be made by the Chief Justice of India in consultation with the two
senior  most  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  as  selection  so made will be
consistent with the dignity and importance of these offices and their judicial
character.
120.  The constitution of the National Company Law Tribunal and the  Appellate
Tribunal in the manner now provided, when considered along with the provisions
concerning the Competition Commission under the
Competition Act
2002, seems to   
indicate  rn  of  an  aggressive  executive seeking to take over gradually the
judicial power traditionally exercised by the Courts  under  safeguards  which
ensure  the  competence,  independence  and  impartiality  of  the Judges, and
replacing  them  by  persons  who  have  neither  a  judicial  background  nor
specialised knowledge of the subject for which the Tribunal is created, and by
persons  now  serving the executive who will continue to retain their lien and
loyalty to the executive branch, and be amenable to the influence of executive
superiors and their political masters.
121.  If these attempts being made by the executive were to go unchecked,  the
situation  which  the Privy council visualised in the Jamaican Gun Court case,
of even a Supreme Court being divested of jurisdiction to such an extent as to
leave the Court 'Supreme' only in  name,  can  come  about.    It  was  indeed
submitted  before us by the learned Additional Solicitor General that the only
power of the Courts which the Parliament cannot touch is the power of the High
Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution and that of  the  Supreme
Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution.  It is imperative that the Courts
in India, even as the U.S Supreme Court and the  Privy  Council  did,  draw  a
clear  line  demarcating the judicial functions from executive and legislative
functions, and immunise the performance of judicial function and the  exercise
of  the  State's  j  udicial  power  by the Courts, as also by the Tribunals -
whether such Tribunals are

substitutes, or are supplemental to the Courts - from all executive  influence
at all stages.
122.   It  is,  therefore,  necessary  that  the Court draw the line which the
executive may not cross in their misguided desire to take over bit by bit  the
judicial  functions  and powers of the State exercised by the duly constituted
Courts.
123.  In the light of foregoing discussions it  is  declared  that  until  the
provisions in parts 1B and 1C of the Companies Act introduced by the
Companies 
(Amendment)  Act,  2002
,  which  have been found to be defective in as much as
they are in breach of the basic constitutional scheme of separation of  powers
and  independence  of the judicial function, are duly amended, by removing the
defects that have been pointed out, it would be unconstitutional to constitute
a Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction now  excercised
by the High courts or the Company Law Board.
124.   Petitioners  have also challenged the validity of certain provisions of
the
Companies  (Amendment)  Act,  2002
,  whereby  certain  powers   currently
exercised  by  the  Company Law Board, some of which were earlier exercised by 
the Court, were transferred to the Central Government.  Most of  those  powers
are only  tangentially judicial and are primarily administrative.  There is no
illegality in such transfer.
125.  We place on record our appreciation to Mr.Arvind Datar,  learned  Senior
Counsel  for the petitioner, whose research and cogent presentation has helped
to clarify and bring out the significance  of  the  issues  involved,  and  to
Mr.V.T.Gopalan,  learned  Additional  Solicitor  General  who,  with his usual
fairness presented the case for the respondent with  great  vigour,  and  also
placed before the Court all the relevant materials.
Index :  Yes

Web :  Yes 

