Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/9340969/

[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Mr. R. Varadharajan vs State Of Maharastra on 26 November, 2021
Author:
K.Natarajan
Bench:
K.Natarajan
1


     IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

        DATED THIS THE 26TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2021

                          BEFORE

           THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.NATARAJAN

             CRIMINAL PETITION NO.5719/2021

BETWEEN

1 . MR. R. VARADHARAJAN
    S/O MR. P RAGHAVAN
    AGED 59 YEARS
    R/O NO.245, 4TH CROSS,
    GARDEN VILLAS, NAGARBHAVI
    BANGALORE - 560 072

2 . MR VIVEK NARAYAN
    S/O R VARADHARAJAN
    AGED 25 YEARS
    R/AT NO. 245, 4TH CROSS,
    GARDEN VILLAS, NAGARBHAVI
    BANGALORE - 560 072
                                         ... PETITIONERS

(BY SRI DEEPAK B R, ADVOCATE (VIDEO CONFERENCE))

AND

1.    STATE OF MAHARASTRA
      RABALE POLICE STATION
      THANE NAVI MUMBAI - 400 708

2.    STATE OF KARNATAKA
      THROUGH THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE,
      BANGALORE CITY
      INFANTRY ROAD
      BANGALORE - 560 001.
                            2


3.   SRI BAJIRAO SAMBHAJI PAWAR
     NO.8A, AIROLI
     NAVI MUMBAI - 400 708
                                        ... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI KRISHNA KUMAR K.K., HCGP)

      THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 438
OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, PRAYING TO GRANT
THEM THE RELIEF OF TRANSIT PRE-ARREST BAIL, WITH
NECESSARY CONDITIONS AND FURTHER BE PLEASED TO
DIRECT THE S.H.O RABALE POLICE, THANE, MAHARASHTRA, TO
RELEASE THE PETITIONER ON BAIL IN THE EVENT OF HIS
ARREST LOCAL APPLICATION NUMBER L.A.NO.112/2021 FOR
THE P/U/S.468,420 OF
IPC
(NOT MENTIONED IN THE NOTICE).

     THIS CRIMINAL PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 23.11.2021 AND COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT, THIS DAY THE COURT PRONOUNCED THE
FOLLOWING:

                        ORDER
This petition is filed by the petitioners under
Section 438
of Cr.Pc for granting transit anticipatory

bail for the offences registered by the S.H.O Rabale

Police Station, Thane, Maharashtra in an unknown

crime   number   for   the offence   punishable   under
Section 468
of IPC on the complaint is filed by

respondent No.3.
3
2.   Heard the arguments of learned counsel for

the petitioner,   learned counsel for respondent No.3

and the learned HCGP for the state.
3.   The case of the prosecution is that the

respondent No.1-Rabale Police Station, Thane, Navi

Mumbai, Maharashtra sent a notice to the petitioner,

summoning him to appear on the complaint filed by

respondent No.3 for the purpose of enquiry vide

notice dated 19.7.2021.    The petitioners alleges that

the objections filed by the respondent No.3 and the

affidavit which reveals that the petitioner said to have

committed for the offence punishable under
Sections

406
,
409
,
420
,
465
,
467
,
468
,
469
,
474
read with 34

of
IPC
and the respondent No.3 is said to have a

registered company situated at Mumbai in the name

of Care Bio System India Pvt. Ltd.
4
4.    The petitioner no.1 is a proprietor of M/s.

Roshtec Life Science, which is managed by the first

applicant (petitioner no.1) and his firm has illegally

formed a company to compete with the respondent

company.     The petitioner was previously one of the

director of respondent company and he has resigned

for the post and he is also a partner in Care Bio-

Systems India Pvt. Ltd.,       The applicant without

obtaining any written permission or consent with the

partners started business similar to that of the

respondent and there were more than 1000 clients

across the world for the respondent company. The

first applicant who was one of the directors was taking

care of the Bangalore      office of   the respondent

company and he was authorized to sign all the

documents and cheques pertaining to the respondent

company.     The   petitioner No.1 and his wife had

several talks with the other Board of Directors and
5
they insisted to withdraw themselves from the post of

Directorship   and   they   submitted   resignation   on

10.2.2017.     Inspite of resigning from the post and

starting the business in the name of M/s. Roshtec Life

Science but they are using the letter head of the Care

Bio-sytems India Pvt. Ltd., by forging the signatures

and seal they misappropriated money with a malafide

intention to cause wrongful loss to the respondent

company.
6.   Based upon the complaint the police issued

notice, therefore the petitioners are apprehending

their arrest in the hands of the police for having

committed non bailable offence hence prayed for

granting transit pre arrest bail to the petitioner Nos.1

and 2.
7. The respondent No.3 filed written objections

by taking the contentions that petitioner no.1 inspite
6
of resigning from the post of Director still using the

letter head of the Care Bio System India Pvt. Ltd.,

belonging to respondent No.3, thereby they have

committed the offence alleged against them in the

company. Respondent No.3 also has taken contention

that this Court have no jurisdiction to entertain the

bail application as offences committed at Thane

Mumbai, Maharashtra State.            Apart from that the

question of granting transit anticipatory bail does not

arise.        This Court cannot grant the relief of transit

anticipatory bail, therefore prayed for dismissal of

petition.
8.    Having heard the arguments of the learned

counsel for the petitioners and learned counsel for

respondent -HCGP and perused the record.
9. On perusal of the documents, it is seen from

the objections statement filed by the respondent No.3
7
which reveals that the petitioner No.1 was one of the

Director of the Care Bio System Pvt. Ltd. and the

office at Bangalore was looked after by petitioner No.1

and it is alleged that petitioner no.1 resigned from the

directorship and now again he is using the letter head

of the Care Bio System Pvt. Ltd.             It is seen from the

statement of objections that the petitioner No.1 said

to have tendered resignation on 10.2.2017. However,

respondent counsel has not produced any document

to   show     the    acceptance    of    resignation      of   the

petitioners    from      the   post     of    Director.        The

Memorandum          of   Understanding       dated   10.2.2017

reveals that the continuing Directors shall handover

24 post dated cheques to R.Varadharajan petitioner

No.1 after deducting the tax and the returning

directors shall handover the letter of resignation. The

letter dated 22.12.2019 reveals a mail was sent by

the respondent No.3 to the petitioner No.1 stating
8
that petitioner No.1   was using the forged letter of

Care Bio System Pvt. Ltd and they had asked him to

come for settlement. Thereafter another letter dated

17.1.2019 states a letter sent by the Care Bio System

Pvt. Ltd from respondent No.3 to Jawaharlal Nehru

Centre for advance science research authorizing the

Roshtec Life Science for maintenance.
10.   The petitioner No.1 company M/s. Roshtec

Life Science, also issued letter mentioning the terms

and conditions which reveals that inspite of tendering

his resignation there is business tie up between the

petitioner No.1 and respondent No.3.      The allegation

made against the petitioners by the complainant is

that inspite of tendering resignation by the petitioner

No.1 as Director of Care Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd.,

but still he is using the letter pad and seal of the Care

Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd., by forging the seal and

creating the documents. Hence, they          have filed
9
complaint   to    the   Maharashtra      Police,   but   the

Maharashtra Police without registering the case issued

a notice dated 19.7.2021 to the petitioner calling upon

him to appear for enquiry. Hence the petitioners are

before this court for seeking transit anticipatory bail.
11.    The main objection of the respondent

counsel is that the petitioners are seeking transit pre

arrest bail which cannot be granted as there is no

term transit anticipatory bail in the
Code of Criminal

Procedure
, therefore such a relief cannot be granted.
In support of his argument the respondent counsel

relied on the judgment of Supreme Court in Sandeep

Sunilkumar Lohariya V.Jawahar Chelaram Bijlani @

Suresh Bijlani @ Others decided in Special Leave to

Appeal (Crl) No.4829/2013 and in another case

Crl.A.Nos.1872-73/2009             between
State      of

Maharashtra      Vs   Sanjay   Dalmia    and   Others
and
10
connected matters and also judgment of the Bombay

High Court.
12.    Per Contra the learned counsel for the

petitioners has contended that though the case was

not registered against the petitioner a false complaint

has been filed against them and for short period if the

petitioners    are   granted      anticipatory   bail    for

approaching the regular court at Mumbai, petitioners

are entitled for protection of anticipatory bail and the

same can be granted. The co-ordinate bench of this

Court in Crl.P.No.6956/2020 in Priya Mukherji's case

granted transit anticipatory bail in a case where it was

registered at Mumbai this Coordinate bench by relying

upon    various   judgment     of   the   High   Court   and

Supreme Court have granted bail.
11
13.      The learned counsel also relied upon the

judgment       of     this    court     in   Crl.P.No.1612/2021,

Crl.P.No.5003/2020 and Crl.P.No.1282/2021.
14.      Upon hearing the rival contention of both

the   parties       especially    in   respect   of    the   transit

anticipatory bail sought by the petitioners and looking

to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Sandeep Sunilkumar Lohariya Vs. Jawahar Chelaram

Bijlani @ Suresh Bijlani (Supra
) wherein the Madhya

Pradesh High Court said to have granted transit

anticipatory bail to an accused where the Maharashtra

High Court already rejected the anticipatory bail

petition of the accused and without the knowledge of

the rejection of the anticipatory bail                and without

notice    to    the    State     of    Maharashtra     the   transit

anticipatory bail has been granted by the Madhya

Pradesh High Court which was set aside by the

Hon'ble     Supreme          Court.
In   case     of
State   of
12
Maharashtra Vs Sanjay Dalmia (Supra
) stated that the

Delhi High Court has granted interim protection in a

case registered at Maharashtra where the Hon'ble

Supreme Court transferred the case from Delhi High

Court to Mumbai High Court.        Various High Courts

have rejected the transit anticipatory bail
15. The single judge of the Co-ordinate Bench of

this Court in Crl.P.6956/2020 in Priya Mukherjis case

considered the judgment of the Supreme Court and

various High Courts and granted transit anticipatory

bail for limited period of 20 days and this court in

Crl.P.No.1282/21 granted short term anticipatory bail.
In Crl.P.No.1612/21 in the case of
Jagadish Chandra

Sharma vs Union of India and Another
, this Court

rejected the transit anticipatory bail to the accused

and the same was challenged before the Supreme

Court in Spl. Leave Appeal No.2558/21 which also

came to be dismissed and the Hon'ble Supreme Court
13
granted a protection for a period of two weeks against

the arrest from the police and accused was permitted

to move the competent Court to seek appropriate

relief.
16.
In view of the order passed by this Court

rejecting the transit anticipatory bail to the accused in
Jagadish Chandra
's case (supra) and in case of
Sandeep Sunilkumar Lohariya
(supra) the question of

granting transit anticipatory bail does not arise.
17.    However, after considering the facts and

circumstances of the case, where there is no case

registered    against   petitioner    by      the Maharashtra

police, even though the complaint came to be lodged

by respondent No.3 in the police station, the police

have issued notice dated 19.7.2021 for enquiry which

should be treated as a notice under
Section 41A
of

Cr.P.C.      Therefore,    it    is   clear    that   there   is
14
apprehension of the arrest of the petitioners in the

hands of the Maharashtra police for having committed

non-bailable offence and it is well settled that the

Courts normally will not grant anticipatory bail where

the crime was registered in some other State, than

the residence of the accused persons. But looking into

the documents produced by the respondents and the

petitioners, the allegation against the petitioner is that

they alleged to have forged the document and created

letter head of the Care Bio Sys India Pvt. Ltd. and still

using the seal and letter head inspite of tendering

resignation to the post of Director. It is pertinent to

note that petitioner No.1 is one of the Directors of

Care Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd. and he used to look

after the business at Bangalore Branch.        The letter

head produced by the respondent at Ex.'E' reveals

that the letter head used by the petitioner No.1 dated

17.1.2019 showing the address of Bangalore which is
15
at No.256 Canara Bank colony, Nagarbhavi Road,

Bengaluru and another document Ex.'F' reveals a

different address of petitioner No.1 prepared the letter

head in the name of M/s. Roshtec Life Science,

Bengaluru.      The mail issued by the complainant

company to the petitioner No.1 on 22.2.2019 stating

that the petitioner is using the forged letter of Care

Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd.,   which reveals the Care

Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd.,     was managed by the

petitioner No.1 earlier when he was Director and again

he is using the same letter head inspite of resgining

from the post of Directorship from Care Bio-Systems

India Pvt. Ltd., at Bengaluru and the same reveals

that the alleged offence is committed by the petitioner

at Bengaluru.    It is not the case of the respondents

that the petitioner has stolen the letter head and seal

of the Care Bio-Systems India Pvt. Ltd., from Mumbai.

Therefore, the question of filing complaint at Mumbai
16
or Maharashtra does not arise but filing complaint at

Mumbai reveals only on the ground the respondent

company is at Maharashtra but the actual alleged

offence is committed at Bengaluru.     Such being the

case, the complaint merely filed at some other State,

the benefit of anticipatory bail to the accused cannot

be denied when the case was not registered by the

police. It appears that there is a dispute between the

Directors of the Company and they are trying to

convert the same into criminal case. Therefore, it is

necessary to issue protection to the petitioners from

the arrest by the police until he approaches the police

or the competent Court at Mumbai.
18.   Even otherwise, the petitioner can move

application for anticipatory bail   before the Mumbai

court and he can argue the matter through video

conference without physical appearance.    Such being

the case, question of seeking transit anticipatory bail
17
does not require for the present situation of Covid-19

guidelines.
Therefore, I pass the following order:
The      petitioner   is   directed   to   approach   the

competent Maharashtra court for seeking appropriate

relief and till then the petitioner is protected from the

arrest by the Maharashtra police.
ORDER


     Accordingly, the petition is allowed in part.


     The petitioners are entitled for protection from

the arrest of the Maharashtra police for a period of

two weeks to enable the petitioners approach the

competent Court at Mumbai.
In case if the police arrest petitioners they shall

be released on bail on such terms imposed by the

police.
18
Accordingly petition is disposed of.
Sd/-
JUDGE


AKV
