Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/95152573/

[Cites
29
, Cited by
26
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Nitin Dhiman Alias Neeraj vs State Of Himachal Pradesh & Another on 17 June, 2019
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA




                                                                         .
Cr.MMO No. 233 of 2019





                                    Order reserved on : 12.6.2019
                                    Date of Decision : June                  17 , 2019





    Nitin Dhiman alias Neeraj                                        ...Petitioner.

                                    Versus





    State of Himachal Pradesh & another                              ...Respondent.

    Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1Yes.
For the petitioner            : Mr. Sanjay Jaswal, Advocate, for the
                                    petitioner.
For the respondent            : Ms. Ritta Goswami, Additional Advocate
                                    General, Ms. Divya Sood, Deputy
                                    Advocate General and Mr. Manoj Bagga,
                                    Assistant   Advocate     General   for




                                    respondent No. 1/State.
Respondent        Number         2 is     present       in





                                    person.





    Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
The present petition is under Section 482 Cr. P.C.

    for    quashing        of    F.I.R.    No.     36/2019,         dated       7.3.2019,

    registered at Police Station Nurpur, District Kangra (H.P.)

    under
Section 366
IPC and for quashing of Criminal

    proceedings arising therefrom.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
2
2.            The present F.I.R. stands registered on the basis

    of information given by the prosecutrix (name withheld)




                                                               .
who has been arrayed as respondent No. 2 in the present

    petition.
FACTS:
3.    The gist of the allegations, as contained in the F.I.R., is





    as follows:
(a) The complainant/prosecutrix, (Respondent
                   No. 2), who was aged 21 years, states in her

                   complaint that she was a student of BA-III in

                   Dehri College.
(b)   The accused Neeraj who is the petitioner
                   and in the petition his name is mentioned as



                   Nitin Dhiman alias Neeraj, was a frequent
                   visitor to her college and they became friends.
This friendship had maturity of two years.
(c) In the month of March, 2017 the accused
                   established relationship with her and vowed





                   and sworn that he would marry her.
(d)   In   the       month   of     April,      2017        she
                   accompanied him to           Chamunda Resorts for
outing and on reaching there, she realized that
                   he is taking her to a hotel. Initially, she showed
                   her reluctance to stay in the hotel. On this, tone
                   of the voice of the Neeraj became harsh, which
                   made her agreeable to his request and they
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
3
went to the hotel. When she told him that
        before marriage they would not do anything,




                                                  .
she got a promise from the petitioner/accused





        that he will marry her.
(e)   After this, accused again took her to the





        same resort where they established physical
        relations and petitioner/accused told her that it
        would be a onetime stand so that she does not





        leave him.
(f)   The complainant/prosecutrix agreed to his
        request and       then they repeatedly started

        having sexual intercourse.         She told him that

        she could become pregnant due to these
        sexual intercourses and then he would assure
        that being fathered the child, same would



        belong to him.
(g)   In the F.I.R. the complainant/prosecutrix




        further says that sometimes she would take
        contraceptive pills and sometimes she was not





        in a position to take it. She also admits that on
        many occasions, they indulged in the sexual





        intercourse in the vehicle itself.
(h)   In the year 2018, she was again taken to
        different hotels. During this time she says that
        she had been introduced to all the family
        members of the accused/petitioner and he
        would tell in the presence of everyone that he
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
4
would marry her and that is why he had
               established relationship with her.
.
(i)         Thereafter he started avoiding her on





               the pretext that his mother is refusing to accept
               this marriage and his mother is saying that if





               he marries her, then she would commit suicide.
               On this the prosecutrix says that she spoke
               with the mother of the petitioner/accused and





               disclosed     to    her       about        their       physical
               relationship.
(j)         After   this      the      petitioner/accused

               started threatening her that after one year of

               the marriage he would kill her.
(k) On these allegations the present F.I.R came
               to be registered against the petitioner/accused



               and he was arrested.
(l)         Vide Annexure-P/2 it is inferable that




               the petitioner/accused got regular bail from the
               learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Kangra at





               Dharamshala, vide order dated 10.4.2019.
(m) Vide Annexure-P/6, the affidavit of the





               complainant/prosecutrix, she has mentioned
               her age as 21 years.
CONDUCT OF ACCUSED/PETITIONER:
4.        While the petitioner/accused was in Judicial

    Custody, the complainant (respondent No. 2), moved an

    application to the learned Judicial Magistrate                   that she
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
5
wants to solemnize marriage with the petitioner/accused,

    who is willing to marry her and for that purpose she be




                                                         .
permitted to marry, while in judicial custody, and adequate

    provisions be made to enable him to do so. This fact is





    corroborated from Annexure-P/4, wherein it is evident that

    during custody on 25.3.2019 an application was made by





    the prosecutrix before the Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class,

    Nurpur, Distt. Kangra (H.P.) that she wants to perform

    marriage with the petitioner/accused. Vide order dated


    26.3.2019 the learned Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, Nurpur,

    Distt. Kangra permitted the complainant/prosecutrix to


    solemnize marriage with the respondent and statement was

    recorded. The petitioner/accused was released for this




    purpose and subsequently another order was passed





    wherein it is mentioned that the marriage was solemnized

    on 26.3.2019.
5.         This petition is supported by affidavit Annexure

    P-7 which is the affidavit of the prosecutrix (R-2) in which

    she has admitted that she and petitioner/accused have

    married. She further admits that now she is residing with

    her husband in her in-laws house from 26.3.2019. She is
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
6
residing peacefully and her in-laws have accepted her as

    daughter-in-law. She further states that her husband is




                                                            .
loving and caring. She declares that she wants to withdraw

    the criminal proceedings and she further states that this





    Court may quash the F.I.R.
DEMEANOR OF VICTIM IN COURT:
6.         When the matter was heard on 12.6.2019, the

    prosecutrix (respondent No. 2) was present in Court along

    with her husband Nitin Dhiman and Bhabhi Ms Nisha Rani.
She was identified by the petitioner, as well as Nisha Rani,

    who claimed to be her Bhabhi. Ld. Addl. Advocate General


    also did not dispute her identity.
7.         Her demeanor was seen by the Court and it was




    noticed that she was well oriented to place and time; was in





    a perfect mental and physical state, wearing costumes of a

    newly wedded wife; she was looking happy, there was no





    sign of fear and she was sitting in the Court room quietly.
This Court did not notice any sort of threat directly or even

    indirectly on her. On this, her statement was also recorded,

    on oath, in which she says that she has compromised the

    entire   matter with the accused without any coercion,
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
7
duress, pressure or any wrong tactics. She further states

    that she made statement in her full conscious state of mind




                                                                .
and admitted that she is aware that this stand would result

    in the quashing of F.I.R. against the petitioner/accused.
REASONING:
8.           Admittedly, the dispute pertains to parties who





    are closely related to each other.           The following aspects

    would be relevant to arrive at a final conclusion in this

    petition:-
(i) Admittedly both, complainant and the accused,
                  are now legally married wife and husband. They
                  are living together a happy married life.
(ii) They have already compromised the matter
                  and in terms of the affidavit (Annexure P/7), and
                  vide statement of Complainant Wife (R-2), recorded




                  in Court on oath, wherein she wants FIR to be





                  quashed.
(iii) Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be





                  through District Magistrate as a normal procedure.
However, there is inherent jurisdiction of the High
                  Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
                  Procedure to intervene in such kind of matter and
                  it   is   not   the   requirement      of    law     that     the
                  cancellation has to be approved only through the
                  District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of High
                  Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
8
exercised,   depending       upon        the     facts      and
                   circumstances of each and every case.
(iv) Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are




                                                                .
likely to maintain the stand which they have taken
                   in this compromise which is likely to result in the
                   acquittal of the accused.
(v) Prima facie, it appears that the complaint was
                   used as a tool to put pressure on the Petitioner to
                   fulfill his promise of marriage, which he indeed





                   performed.
(vii)     The parties are likely to live together for
                   long time and intervention at this stage would

                   create cordial environment for peaceful relation

                   between them.
(viii) If the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC is not invoked, then it may lead to bitterness


                   in relations. Every time the accused will be
                   summoned      in   the    Court,      he     would       blame
                   complainant for the money spent on case and




                   travel.
9.           Yuvan Noah Harari, in his world famous book,





    "Sapiens- A Brief History of Humankind", (London: Vintage,

    2011), p-427-428, wrote about the impact of happy married

    life, as follows:
"Family and community seem to have more
                   impact on our happiness than money and
                   health. People with strong families who live in
                   tight-knit and supportive communities are
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
9
significantly    happier     than      people       whose
                families are dysfunctional and who have never
                found (or never sought) a community to be




                                                              .
part of.   Marriage is particularly important.
                Repeated studies have found that there is a
                very close correction between good marriages





                and high subjective well-being, and between
                bad marriages and misery.             This holds true
                irrespective of economic or even physical





                conditions.          An     impecunious             invalid
                surrounded by a loving spouse, a devoted
                family and a warm community may well feel

                better than an alienated billionaire, provided

                that the invalid's poverty is not too severe and
                that his illness is not degenerative or painful."
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
10.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H.




    Chanchani and another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme





    Court holds that the determination of the question as

    regards the propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking





    cognizance and issuing process need not necessarily wait

    till the stage of framing the charge. The Court observed

    thus :-
"....   ....        ....This argument, however, does not
                appeal to us inasmuch as merely because an
                accused has a right to plead at the time of framing
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
10
of charges that there is no sufficient material for
                 such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred




                                                           .
from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic
                 earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes
                 cognizance of the offence and summons the





                 accused to appear to contend that the very
                 issuance of the order of taking cognizance is
                 invalid on the ground that no offence can be said





                 to have been made out on the allegations made in
                 the complaint petition. It has been held in a
                 number of cases that power under
Section 482
has

                 to be exercised sparingly and in the interest of

                 justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to
                 continue   even    where   the     allegations       in    the
                 complaint petition do not make out any offence


                 would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of
                 court, and therefore, there cannot be any dispute
                 that in such case power under
section 482
of the




                 Code can be exercised."
11.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack





    Ltd. and another
, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court

    holds as under:-
"8. .... .... ....There is no hard and fast rule that
                 the objection as to cognizability of offence and
                 maintainability of the complaint should be allowed
                 to be raised only at the time of framing the
                 charge."
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
11
12.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.

    (Criminal) 758, the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court




                                                                 .
holds as under:-
"30.
In the light of these judgments of the





                 Supreme Court, we have no doubt in our mind that
                 under
Section     482
of   the     Code      of    Criminal
                 Procedure, the High Court has the power to quash
                 an FIR or even a complaint subject to limitations





                 and conditions
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme
                 Court in various judgments. It need not wait for
                 completion of investigation and taking cognizance

                 by the Magistrate. There is no dispute that this

                 power has to be exercised by the High Courts very
                 sparingly with circumspection and also in rarest of
                 rare    cases.   Though      there      are    limitations       on



                 exercise of power by the High Court, yet that would
                 not in any way suggest that High Court lacks the




                 power."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
13.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866,





    a three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as

    under:-
"6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent
                 jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to
                 quash proceedings in a proper case either to
                 prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or
                 otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily,
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
12
criminal   proceedings         instituted       against       an
        accused    person       must    be     tried     under       the
        provisions of the Code, and the High Court would




                                                     .
be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings
        at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible,
        desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible





        rule which would govern the exercise of this
        inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate
        some categories of cases where the inherent





        jurisdiction can and should be exercised for
        quashing the proceedings. There may be cases
        where it may be possible for the High Court to

        take the view that the institution or continuance of

        criminal proceedings against an accused person
        may amount to the abuse of the process of the
        Court or that the quashing of the impugned


        proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If
        the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of
        an offence alleged to have been committed by an




        accused person and it manifestly appears that





        there is a legal bar against the institution or
        continuance of the said proceeding, the High





        Court   would      be    justified    in    quashing         the
        proceedings on that ground. Absence of the
        requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases
        under this category. Cases may also arise where
        the allegations in the First Information Report or
        the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
        value and accepted in their entirety, do not
        constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no
        question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
13
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the
        First Information Report to decide whether the
        offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it




                                                     .
would be legitimate for the High Court to hold that
        it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process
        of the criminal Court to be issued against the





        accused person. A third category of cases in which
        the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be
        successfully invoked may also arise. In cases





        falling under this category the allegations made
        against the accused person do constitute an
        offence alleged but there is either no legal

        evidence adduced in support of the case or

        evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to
        prove the charge. In dealing with this class of
        cases, it is important to bear in mind the


        distinction between a case where there is no legal
        evidence or where there is evidence which is
        manifestly    and     clearly    inconsistent        with     the




        accusation made and cases where there is legal





        evidence which on its appreciation may or may
        not   support      the   accusation       in    question.       In





        exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High
        Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to
        whether the evidence in question is reliable or
        not. That is the function of the trial magistrate,
        and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to
        invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and
        contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the
        evidence     the     accusation      made       against       the
        accused would not be sustained. Broadly stated
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
14
that is the nature and scope of the inherent
                 jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the
                 matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that




                                                            .
is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point
                 (Vide : In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928
                 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen





                 Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v.
                 State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954 Punj
193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu





                 Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan
                 Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47 Mad
                 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
14.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao

    Chandrojirao Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, the Hon'ble Supreme

    Court has held as under:-
"7. The legal position is well-settled that when a
                prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be




                quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as





                to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made
                prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the





                court   to   take into   consideration          any     special
                features which appear in a particular case to
                consider whether it is expedient and in the interest
                of justice to permit a prosecution to continue. This
                is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised
                for any oblique purpose and where in the opinion
                of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is
                bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to
                be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
15
continue,   the     court     may       while      taking      into
                consideration the special facts of a case also quash
                the proceeding even though it may be at a




                                                               .
preliminary stage."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
15.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai

    Karmur and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr., Criminal Appeal





    No. 1723 of 2017, decided on 4.10.2017, a Three Judges

    Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad

    principles for quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as

    follows:
"15. The broad principles which emerge from the
                precedents on the subject, may be summarised in
                the following propositions :
(i)
Section 482
preserves the inherent powers of
                the High Court to prevent an abuse of the process





                of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The
                provision does not confer new powers. It only
                recognises and preserves powers which inhere in





                the High Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High
                Court to quash a First Information Report or a
                criminal proceeding on the ground that a
                settlement has been arrived at between the
                offender and the victim is not the same as the
                invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of
                compounding an offence. While compounding an
                offence, the power of the court is governed by the
                provisions of
section 320
of the Code of Criminal
                Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
16
Section 482
is attracted even if the offence is non-
compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal




                                                   .
proceeding or complaint should be quashed in





        exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482
, the
        High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
        justice would justify the exercise of the inherent





        power;
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has
        a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised;
(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an





        abuse of the process of any court;
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
        Information Report should be quashed on the
        ground that the offender and victim have settled

        the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and

        circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
        elaboration of principles can be formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under
Section 482
and while dealing with a plea that the dispute has


        been settled, the High Court must have due regard
        to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous
        and serious offences involving mental depravity or
        offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot




        appropriately be quashed though the victim or the
        family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such





        offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature
        but have a serious impact upon society. The
        decision to continue with the trial in such cases is





        founded on the overriding element of public
        interest in punishing persons for serious offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there
        may     be    criminal   cases   which   have an
        overwhelming or predominant element of a civil
        dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far
        as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is
        concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise
        from commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership
        or similar transactions with an essentially civil
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
17
flavour may in appropriate situations fall for
                quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the




                                                            .
criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise





                between the disputants, the possibility of a
                conviction is remote and the continuation of a
                criminal proceeding would cause oppression and





                prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set
                out in propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic
                offences involving the financial and economic well-
being of the state have implications which lie
                beyond the domain of a mere dispute between
                private disputants. The High Court would be
                justified in declining to quash where the offender is
                involved in an activity akin to a financial or

                economic       fraud     or   misdemeanour.      The

                consequences of the act complained of upon the
                financial or economic system will weigh in the
                balance."
16.       A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court,



    in
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has




    settled   the   law    on        quashing       on       account           of

    compromise/compounding, in the following terms:
"53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language





                suggests, saves the inherent power of the High
                Court which it has by virtue of it being a superior
                court to prevent abuse of the process of any court
                or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It begins
                with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which means
                that the provision is an overriding provision. These
                words leave no manner of doubt that none of the
                provisions of the Code limits or restricts the
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
18
inherent power. The guideline for exercise of such
        power is provided in
Section 482
itself i.e., to
        prevent abuse of the process of any court or




                                                       .
otherwise to secure the ends of justice. As has
        been repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers no
        new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards





        existing inherent powers possessed by High Court
        necessary to prevent abuse of the process of any
        Court or to secure the ends of justice. It is equally





        well settled that the power is not to be resorted to
        if there is specific provision in the Code for the
        redress of the grievance of an aggrieved party. It

        should be exercised very sparingly and it should

        not be exercised as against the express bar of law
        engrafted in any other provision of the Code.
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on
        the ground of settlement between an offender and
        victim is not the same thing as compounding of




        offence.     They      are          different        and        not
        interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of





        compounding of offences given to a court under
Section    320
is   materially       different      from      the





        quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court
        in   exercise    of   its     inherent        jurisdiction.       In
        compounding of offences, power of a criminal court
        is circumscribed by the provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is guided solely and
        squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the
        formation   of    opinion      by    the     High     Court      for
        quashing a criminal offence or criminal proceeding
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
19
or criminal complaint is guided by the material on
        record as to whether the ends of justice would
        justify   such   exercise   of    power      although        the




                                                    .
ultimate    consequence       may       be     acquittal       or
        dismissal of indictment.
58.   Where      High   Court     quashes        a    criminal
        proceeding having regard to the fact that dispute
        between the offender and victim has been settled





        although offences are not compoundable, it does
        so as in its opinion, continuation of criminal
        proceedings will be an exercise in futility and

        justice in the case demands that the dispute

        between the parties is put to an end and peace is
        restored; securing the ends of justice being the
        ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts


        which have harmful effect on the public and
        consist in wrong doing that seriously endangers
        and threatens well-being of society and it is not




        safe to leave the crime- doer only because he and
        the victim have settled the dispute amicably or





        that the victim has been paid compensation, yet
        certain crimes have been made compoundable in





        law, with or without permission of the Court. In
        respect of serious offences like murder, rape,
        dacoity, etc; or other offences of mental depravity
        under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of moral
        turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of
        Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public
        servants while working in that capacity, the
        settlement between offender and victim can have
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
20
no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences
                which overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil
                flavour having arisen out of civil, mercantile,




                                                                   .
commercial, financial, partnership or such like
                transactions      or     the      offences       arising      out      of
                matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or





                the family dispute, where the wrong is basically to
                victim and the offender and victim have settled all
                disputes between them amicably, irrespective of





                the fact that such offences have not been made
                compoundable, the High Court may within the
                framework      of      its    inherent      power,      quash         the

                criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if

                it is satisfied that on the face of such settlement,
                there is hardly any likelihood of offender being
                convicted    and       by      not    quashing        the    criminal


                proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of
                justice   shall     be       defeated.     The      above      list    is
                illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will




                depend on its own facts and no hard and fast





                category can be prescribed."
17.
In Criminal Appeal No. 349 of 2019, titled as
State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Laxmi Narayan
, decided on 5th

    of March, 2019, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as

    under:
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
21
"13.      Considering the law on the point and the
        other decisions of this Court on the point, referred
        to hereinabove, it is observed and held as under:
.
i) that the power conferred under Section 482 of
           the Code to quash the criminal proceedings for
           the non-compoundable offences under Section





           320 of the Code can be exercised having
           overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil
           character, particularly those arising out of
           commercial transactions or arising out of
           matrimonial relationship or family disputes and





           when the parties have resolved the entire
           dispute amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those
           prosecutions which involved heinous and serious

           offences of mental depravity or offences like
           murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are

           not private in nature and have a serious impact
           on society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised
           for the offences under the special statutes


           like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences
           committed by public servants while working in
           thatcapacity are not to be quashed merely on
           the basis of compromise between the victim and




           the offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms
           Act etc. would fall in the category of heinous





           and serious offences and therefore are to be
           treated as crime against the society and not
           against the individual alone, and therefore, the





           criminal      proceedings    for    the   offence
           under
Section 307
IPC and/or the
Arms Act
etc.
           which have a serious impact on the society
           cannot be quashed in exercise of powers
           under Section 482 of the Code, on the ground
           that the parties have resolved their entire
           dispute amongst themselves. However, the High
           Court would not rest its decision merely because
           there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR
           or the charge is framed under this provision. It
           would be open to the High Court to examine as
           to whether incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
22
there for the sake of it or the prosecution has
        collected sufficient evidence, which if proved,
        would lead to framing the charge under
Section
        307
IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to




                                                .
the High Court to go by the nature of injury





        sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the
        vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
        weapons used etc. However, such an exercise





        by the High Court would be permissible only
        after     the    evidence    is   collected     after
        investigation      and     the    charge       sheet
        is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial.
        Such exercise is not permissible when the





        matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the
        ultimate conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7
        of the decision of this Court in the case of
        Narinder Singh (supra) should be read
        harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in

        the circumstances stated hereinabove;
v) while exercising the power under Section
        482 of the Code to quash the criminal
        proceedings in respect of non-compoundable
        offences, which are private in nature and do not
        have a serious impact on society, on the ground


        that there is a settlement/compromise between
        the victim and the offender, the High Court is
        required to consider the antecedents of the
        accused; the conduct of the accused, namely,




        whether the accused was absconding and why
        he was absconding, how he had managed with





        the complainant to enter into a compromise etc.
14. Insofar as the present case is concerned, the
        High     Court    has    quashed     the    criminal





        proceedings for the offences under
Sections
        307
and
34
IPC mechanically and even when the
        investigation was under progress. Somehow, the
        accused managed to enter into a compromise
        with the complainant and sought quashing of
        the FIR on the basis of a settlement. The
        allegations are serious in nature. He used the
        fire arm also in commission of the offence.
        Therefore, the gravity of the offence and the
        conduct of the accused is not at all considered
        by the High Court and solely on the basis of a
        settlement between the accused and the
        complainant, the High Court has mechanically
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
23
quashed the FIR, in exercise of power
                   under Section 482 of the Code, which is not
                   sustainable in the eyes of law. The High Court
                   has also failed to note the antecedents of the




                                                          .
accused."
NON COMPOUNDABLE OFFENCES CAN BE QUASHED:
18.         In the present case, the offences are not

    compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. However, in view of





    the entire facts and circumstances of the case, the inherent

    jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC can be invoked to quash

    the FIR and subsequent proceedings.
19.
In
Mahesh Chand v. State of Rajasthan
, 1990

    SCC 781 the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:
"2. The accused were acquitted by the trial court,
                but they were convicted by the High Court for the




                offence under
section 307
Indian Penal Code This
                offence is not compoundable under law. The





                parties, however. want to treat it a special case, in
                view of the peculiar circumstances of the case. It is
                said and indeed not disputed that one of the
                accused is a lawyer practising in the lower court.
There was a counter case arising out of the same
                transaction. It is said that this case has already
                been compromised. The decision of this Court in
Suresh Babu v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, 1987(2) JT
                361, has been also referred to in support of the
                plea for permission to compound the offence.
3. We gave our anxious consideration to the
                case and also the plea put forward for seeking
                permission to compound the offence. After
                examining the nature of the case and the
                circumstances under which the offence was
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
24
committed, it may be proper that the trial
                court shall permit them to compound the
                offence."
.
20.
In
Y. Suresh Babu v State of A.P.
, 2005 (1) SCC

    347, Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with
section 326
of IPC, which was non-compoundable offence, permitted the

    parties to compound the offence.
21.
In
Bharti v. State of Haryana
, 2014(4) SCC 14,

    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:
"6. We are mindful of the fact that
Section 354
of

                 the IPC is, as of today, non-compoundable. But,
                 as noticed by us, it was compoundable when the
                 instant   offence    was     committed          with      the


                 permission of the court. Even then, we would
                 have hesitated to permit compounding of the
                 offence. But, facts of this case are very peculiar.
Respondent No.2 and her husband have, even





                 today, maintained their stand taken in the trial
                 court that they have entered into a compromise





                 with the appellant. As we have already noted,
                 respondent No.2 has filed an affidavit to that
                 effect in this Court. Compromise is, therefore, not
                 an   afterthought.   Pertinently,     the     incident      in
                 question took-place way back in the year 2000.
                 About 13 long years have gone-by. In her affidavit
                 respondent No. 2 has stated that the appellant is
                 her neighbour and they are staying peacefully
                 since 2000 till date. We are of the opinion that
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:50 :::HCHP
25
since the appellant and respondent No. 2 are
                    neighbours it would be in the interest of justice to
                    permit the parties to compound the offences. If




                                                             .
the conviction is confirmed, the relations may get
                    strained and the peace, which is now prevailing
                    between the two families, may be disturbed. In





                    the peculiar facts of this case, therefore, in order
                    to accord quietus to the disputes between the
                    appellant and respondent No. 2 and in the larger





                    interest of peace, we permit the appellant and
                    respondent No. 2 to compound the offences.
                    Accordingly, offences under
Sections 451
and
354
of the IPC are permitted to be compounded. The

                    impugned judgment is set aside. The appellant is
                    acquitted. The appellant-Bharti is in jail. The
                    appellant-Bharti should be released forthwith,


                    unless he is required in any other case."
22.
In
Saloni Rupam Bhartiya v. Rupam Prahlad




    Bhartiya
, 2015(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 172, a three Judges





    Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with
Section





    498-A
of IPC, which was non-compoundable offence, holds

    as follows:
"It was submitted by learned counsel for the
                     parties that in the light of the above subsequent
                     developments     especially     the     fact    that     the
                     marriage between the parties itself stands
                     dissolved by a decree passed by a competent
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:51 :::HCHP
26
court, nothing really remained between the
                   parties to be addressed and that the conviction
                   of the respondent-husband under Section 498A




                                                            .
of the
Indian Penal Code
could be set aside. We
                   see no reason to decline that prayer. In the
                   circumstances, therefore, and in the light of the





                   fact    that    the   parties     have       successfully
                   negotiated an amicable settlement sinking and
                   resolving all their differences and disputes and





                   finding a lasting solution on all the outstanding
                   issues between themselves, we see no reason
                   why the conviction recorded by the courts below
                  rand the sentence of imprisonment till the rising

                   of the Court, which the respondent has already
                   undergone should continue to blemish the
                   respondent-husband. We accordingly set aside


                   the judgment and order of conviction of the
                   respondent under
Section 498A
of the Indian
                   Penal Code."
RELIEF:
23.       In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as





    well as judicial precedents, a few of which have been

    mentioned hereinabove, I am of the considered opinion that

    continuation   of     these    proceedings       will     only       cause

    unnecessary burden on the trial Courts but in all likelihood

    is going to cause distressing hardship on both the victim as

    well as the accused, without resulting into any fruitful
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:51 :::HCHP
27
purpose whatsoever. The accused and the prosecutrix are

    living happily. The denial of relief may bring the bitterness in




                                                               .
the euphoria of new wedding. Moreover, our trial Courts are

    already burdened with so many cases and it will be a total





    wastage of the valuable time of the Courts. If these types of

    proceedings are permitted to be continued and the accused





    are prosecuted, it will serve no purpose whatsoever.
Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that this is a fit

    case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to

    quash    the    above      mentioned          FIR    and       consequent


    proceedings.
24.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State




    of Himachal Pradesh (SC
); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble





    Supreme Court holds as under:-
"47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of





                   2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this
                   Court challenging the order of cognizance only
                   because of the reason that matter was already
                   pending as the appellants had filed the Special
                   Leave Petitions against the order of the High Court
                   rejecting   their   petition    for    quashing        of    the
                   FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to these peculiar
                   facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:51 :::HCHP
28
any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be
                 quashed, order of cognizance would automatically
                 stands vitiated."
.
CONSEQUENCES:
25.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
,





    (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p 642,           Hon'ble Supreme Court

    observed as follows:
"The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when
                 parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and
                 weave a sense of fellowship or reunion."
26.        Consequently, this petition is allowed and the

    F.I.R. No. 36/2019, dated 7.3.2019, registered at Police

    Station Nurpur, District Kangra (H.P.) for the commission of



    offences punishable under
Sections 366
and
376
of the




    Indian Penal Code,       is quashed.       Since FIR has been

    quashed, all the consequential proceedings, if any, are also





    quashed and set aside.
27.        The bail bonds are accordingly discharged.
Petition is allowed. All pending application(s), if

    any, also stand disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                      Judge.
June   17 , 2019 (PK)
::: Downloaded on - 28/09/2019 23:31:51 :::HCHP
