Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1901
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/97914714/

[Cites
32
, Cited by
9
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Neetesh Raghuvanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1901
Author:
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
Bench:
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
1


             THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                         MCRC 34068 of 2019
              Nitesh Raghuvanshi vs. State of MP and Anr.
Gwalior, Dated :28/11/2019

       Shri Sushil Kumar Goswami, counsel for the applicant.

      Shri R.K.Upadhyay, Public Prosecutor for the respondent No.1/ State.
This petition under
Section 482
of CrPC has been filed for quashment

of FIR in Crime No.377 of 2018 registered at Police Station Basoda City,

District Vidisha for offence under
Section 376(2)(n)
of IPC and under
Section 5L
/
6
of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [in

short ''
POCSO Act
''].
(2)    The necessary facts for disposal of the present petition in short are

that on 24/07/2018, a FIR was lodged by the prosecutrix/ complainant that

she is the resident of Village Pachama, Basoda, District Vidisha and in the

year 2017 she was studying in Class-IX and she used to go to the school by

walking. The applicant was working in ICICI Bank and used to visit her

village in the house of his relative Bhavani Singh Raghuvanshi, who is

resident of her village Pachama, Basoda. By the passage of time, she fell in

love and the applicant used to have physical relations with her on the pretext

that he would marry her and thereafter, he did not marry her, therefore, on

her report, the applicant was arrested on 24/03/2017. Thereafter, the

applicant pursued the complainant to change her version on the pretext that

he would marry her and thereafter, relying on the assurance given by the

applicant, the complainant changed her statement. The applicant was
2
released on bail and he again had physical relations with her. Thereafter, on

27/06/2018, she went to Basoda in order to attend the marriage of one Raju

Kushwah, where the applicant had physical relations with her for the last

time on the pretext that he would marry her. Thus, it was alleged by the

complainant that she is minor and because of continuous physical relations

developed by the applicant, she has become pregnant but now, the applicant

has refused to marry her. On this allegation, the FIR for offence under
Section 376(2)(n)
of IPC and under
Section 5L
/
6
of POCSO Act was

registered in Crime No.377 of 2018 by police station Basoda City, District

Vidisha.
(3)    It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that the FIR has been

lodged on the false allegations. On 18/03/2019, the applicant has married the

complainant and now, they are living their life peacefully and accordingly,

the FIR be quashed. In support of his contention, the applicant has filed the

copy of marriage certificate issued by Arya Samaj Mandir, Bhagirathpura,

Indore, which indicates that on 18/03/2019, the marriage of the applicant

with the complainant has been performed. It is further submitted that at

present also, the complainant is pregnant and in case, if the FIR is not

quashed, then the life of the applicant as well as of the complainant would

be ruined and as the applicant has married the complainant, therefore, there

is no possibility of his conviction and, therefore, the FIR be quashed.

(4)    Per contra, it is submitted by the Counsel for the State that the date
3
of birth of the prosecutrix is 01/02/2001 and the FIR was lodged on

24/07/2018. Thus, even on the date of lodging of FIR, the prosecutrix was

minor. Further, the allegations are that from the year 2017, the applicant was

continuously having physical relations with the prosecutrix on the pretext of

marriage and on earlier occasion also, the applicant was tried for offence

under
Section 376
of IPC. It is further submitted that after the FIR was

lodged, the prosecutrix had given birth to a child who died after two days.

It is further submitted that the applicant has married the prosecutrix, cannot

be a ground to quash the proceedings. It is further submitted that the charge

sheet has been filed against the applicant under
Section 299
of CrPC and he

is still absconding.
(5)    Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.

(6)   According to the prosecution case, the FIR was lodged by the

prosecutrix on 24/07/2018 and as per the mark sheet of Class-IX of the

prosecutrix, the date of birth of the prosecutrix is 01/02/2001. Thus, even on

the date of lodging of FIR, the prosecutrix was minor. On the date of lodging

of FIR, the prosecutrix was pregnant and according to the case diary, on

19/12/2018, the prosecutrix had given birth to a child who died during

treatment on 21/12/2018 and the cause of death was due to asphyxia as a

result of premature lungs. The blood sample of the prosecutrix as well as

body parts of the child have also been sent for DNA Test. Thus, it is clear

that the allegations are that for the last time, the applicant had committed
4
rape on the prosecutrix on 27/06/2018 and because of physical relations

developed by the applicant with the prosecutrix, she became pregnant and

gave birth to a child on 19/12/2018, who died on 22/12/2018. It is the

contention of the applicant that he has married the prosecutrix on

18/03/2019. Even if the contention of the applicant with regard to marriage

with the prosecutrix is considered, this Court is of the considered opinion

that it is not a good ground for quashment of FIR.

(7)    The Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Madanlal
,

reported in (2015) 7 SCC 681, has held as under :
''18. The aforesaid view was expressed while dealing with
         the imposition of sentence. We would like to clearly state
         that in a case of rape or attempt to rape, the conception of
         compromise under no circumstances can really be thought
         of. These are crimes against the body of a woman which is
         her own temple. These are the offences which suffocate the
         breath of life and sully the reputation. And reputation,
         needless to emphasise, is the richest jewel one can
         conceive of in life. No one would allow it to be
         extinguished. When a human frame is defiled, the "purest
         treasure", is lost. Dignity of a woman is a part of her non-
         perishable and immortal self and no one should ever think
         of painting it in clay. There cannot be a compromise or
         settlement as it would be against her honour which matters
         the most. It is sacrosanct. Sometimes solace is given that
         the perpetrator of the crime has acceded to enter into
         wedlock with her which is nothing but putting pressure in
         an adroit manner; and we say with emphasis that the courts
         are to remain absolutely away from this subterfuge to adopt
         a soft approach to the case, for any kind of liberal approach
         has to be put in the compartment of spectacular error. Or to
         put it differently, it would be in the realm of a sanctuary of
         error.
19. We are compelled to say so as such an attitude reflects
         lack of sensibility towards the dignity, the élan vital, of a
         woman. Any kind of liberal approach or thought of
5
mediation in this regard is thoroughly and completely sans
legal permissibility. It has to be kept in mind, as has been
held in
Shyam Narain v. State (NCT of Delhi
) (2013) 7
SCC 77 that: (SCC pp. 88-89, para 27)
           "27. Respect for reputation of women in the
        society shows the basic civility of a civilised society.
No member of society can afford to conceive the
        idea that he can create a hollow in the honour of a
        woman. Such thinking is not only lamentable but
        also deplorable. It would not be an exaggeration to
        say that the thought of sullying the physical frame of
        a woman is the demolition of the accepted civilised
        norm i.e. 'physical morality'. In such a sphere,
        impetuosity has no room. The youthful excitement
        has no place. It should be paramount in everyone's
        mind that, on the one hand, society as a whole
        cannot preach from the pulpit about social, economic
        and political equality of the sexes and, on the other,
        some perverted members of the same society
        dehumanise the woman by attacking her body and
        ruining her chastity. It is an assault on the
        individuality and inherent dignity of a woman with
        the mindset that she should be elegantly servile to
        men."
20. At this juncture, we are obliged to refer to two
 authorities, namely,
Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab
(
2011)
 13 SCC 705 and Ravindra v. State of M.P.
(2015) 4 SCC
 491 Baldev Singh was considered by the three-Judge
 Bench in Shimbhu (2014) 13 SCC 318 and
in that case
it
 has been stated that: (Shimbhu case, SCC pp. 327-28, para
18)
         "18.1.
In
Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab
though the
     courts below awarded a sentence of ten years, taking
     note of the facts that the occurrence was 14 years old,
     the appellants therein had undergone about 3½ years of
     imprisonment, the prosecutrix and the appellants
     married (not to each other) and entered into a
     compromise, this Court, while considering peculiar
     circumstances, reduced the sentence to the period
     already undergone, but enhanced the fine from Rs 1000
     to Rs 50,000.
In the light of a series of decisions, taking
     contrary view, we hold that
the said decision
in
Baldev
     Singh v. State of Punjab
cannot be cited as a precedent
     and it should be confined to that case."
6
21. Recently, in Ravindra, a two-Judge Bench taking note
         of the fact that there was a compromise has opined thus:
(SCC p. 497, paras 17-18)
                 "17. This Court has in
Baldev Singh v. State of
             Punjab
, invoked the proviso to
Section 376(2)
IPC on
             the consideration that the case was an old one. The
             facts of
the above case
also state that there was
             compromise entered into between the parties.
18. In light of the discussion in the foregoing
              paragraphs, we are of the opinion that the case of the
              appellant is a fit case for invoking the proviso to
Section 376(2)
IPC for awarding lesser sentence, as the
              incident is 20 years old and the fact that the parties are
              married and have entered into a compromise, are the
              adequate and special reasons. Therefore, although we
              uphold the conviction of the appellant but reduce the
              sentence to the period already undergone by the
              appellant. The appeal is disposed of accordingly."
22.    Placing reliance on Shimbhu, we also say that the
         judgments in Baldev Singh and Ravindra have to be
         confined to the facts of the said cases and are not to be
         regarded as binding precedents.''
                                                  (underline supplied)


      The Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Laxmi Narayan
,

reported in (2019) 5 SCC 688 has held as under :-
''11. At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present
     appeals, the High Court in exercise of its powers under
Section
     482
CrPC has quashed the FIR for the offences under
Sections
     307
and
34
IPC solely on the basis of a compromise between
     the complainant and the accused. That in view of the
     compromise and the stand taken by the complainant,
     considering the decision of this Court in
Shiji vs. Radhika
(2011) 10 SCC 705, the High Court has observed that there is
     no chance of recording conviction against the accused persons
     and the entire exercise of a trial would be exercise in futility,
     the High Court has quashed the FIR.
11.1. However, the High Court has not at all considered the fact
     that the offences alleged were non-compoundable offences as
     per
Section 320
CrPC. From the impugned judgment and order,
     it appears that the High Court has not at all considered the
7
relevant facts and circumstances of the case, more particularly
      the seriousness of the offences and its social impact. From the
      impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, it
      appears that the High Court has mechanically quashed the FIR,
      in exercise of its powers under
Section 482
CrPC. The High
      Court has not at all considered the distinction between a
      personal or private wrong and a social wrong and the social
      impact. As observed by this Court in
State of Maharashtra v.
      Vikram Anantrai Doshi
(2014) 15 SCC 29, the Court's
      principal duty, while exercising the powers under
Section 482
CrPC to quash the criminal proceedings, should be to scan the
      entire facts to find out the thrust of the allegations and the crux
      of the settlement. As observed, it is the experience of the Judge
      that comes to his aid and the said experience should be used
      with care, caution, circumspection and courageous prudence.
      In the case at hand, the High Court has not at all taken pains to
      scrutinise the entire conspectus of facts in proper perspective
      and has quashed the criminal proceedings mechanically. Even,
      the quashing of the FIR by the High Court in the present case
      for the offences under
Sections 307
and
34
IPC, and that too in
      exercise of powers under
Section 482
CrPC is just contrary to
      the law
laid down by
this Court in a catena of decisions.''
The Supreme Court in the case of
Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of

Gujarat
, reported in (2017) 9 SCC 641 has held as under :-
''16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents
         on the subject, may be summarised in the following
         propositions:
16.1. Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the
               High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any
               court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does
               not confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves
               powers which inhere in the High Court.
16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court
               to quash a first information report or a criminal
               proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been
               arrived at between the offender and the victim is not the
               same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of
               compounding an offence. While compounding an
               offence, the power of the court is governed by the
               provisions of
Section 320
of the Code of Criminal
               Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482
8
is attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal
proceeding or complaint should be quashed in exercise
of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court
must evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify
the exercise of the inherent power.
16.4. While the inherent power of the High Court has a
wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised (i) to
secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent an abuse of
the process of any court.
16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or first
information report should be quashed on the ground that
the offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves
ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case
and no exhaustive elaboration of principles can be
formulated.
16.6. In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and
while dealing with a plea that the dispute has been
settled, the High Court must have due regard to the
nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious
offences involving mental depravity or offences such as
murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be
quashed though the victim or the family of the victim
have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact
upon society. The decision to continue with the trial in
such cases is founded on the overriding element of
public interest in punishing persons for serious offences.
16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may
be criminal cases which have an overwhelming or
predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a
distinct footing insofar as the exercise of the inherent
power to quash is concerned.
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in
appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties
have settled the dispute.
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the
criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise
between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is
remote and the continuation of a criminal proceeding
would cause oppression and prejudice; and
9
16.10.    There is yet an exception to the principle set
               out in propositions 16.8. and 16.9. above. Economic
               offences involving the financial and economic well-
being of the State have implications which lie beyond the
               domain of a mere dispute between private disputants.
               The High Court would be justified in declining to quash
               where the offender is involved in an activity akin to a
               financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The
               consequences of the act complained of upon the financial
               or economic system will weigh in the balance.''

(8)    Thus, it is clear that where the accused is facing trial for the offence

of rape, then conception of compromise under no circumstances can really

be thought of. These are crimes against the body of a woman. When a

woman is violated, then ''purest treasure'' is lost. The dignity of a woman is

an essential part of her non-perishable and immortal self and no one should

ever think of painting it in clay. The honour of a woman cannot be put to

stake by compromise or settlement. The Supreme Court in the case of
Madanlal
(supra) has further held that ''sometimes solace is given that

the perpetrator of the crime has acceded to enter into wedlock with her

which is nothing but putting pressure in an adroit manner; and we say

with emphasis that the Courts are to remain absolutely away from this

subterfuge to adopt a soft approach to the case, for any kind of liberal

approach has to be put in the compartment of spectacular error or to

put it differently, it would be in the realm of a sanctuary of error''.

Thus, it is clear that even if the accused come forward with the case that

now since he has married the prosecutrix, therefore, the prosecution

should be quashed, then such prayer cannot be accepted under any
10
circumstances.
(9)    Further, Delhi High Court in the case of
Vikash Kumar @ Sonu Vs.

The State
by order dated 1-8-2017 passed in Crl.M.C. No. 2763 of 2017

has held as under :-
''20. The two decisions relied upon by learned Senior
          Advocate for the petitioner in Mr.Manteshwar
          Hanumantrao Kattimani Vs. State of Maharashtra and
          Anr. (Supra) and Jaya D.Ovhal Vs. State of Maharashtra
          (Supra) are not binding precedents.
Otherwise also,
          while considering prayer of the petitioner for quashing
          the FIR and consequential proceedings emanating
          therefrom, guiding principles are laid down in
Gian
          Singh
's case (Supra).
''21. The petitioner could not seek any assistance by
               placing reliance on Deeapk Gulati vs. State of
               Haryana (Supra) as it was an appeal against
               conviction for committing the offence punishable
               under Section 365/366/376IPC wherein by giving
               benefit of doubt, the appellant/accused was
               acquitted.
22. It would also be apposite to mention here that in
               a decision dated 3rd August, 2015 by Co-ordinate
               Bench of this Court in Crl.M.C. No.1824/2015, the
               petition under
Section 482
CrPC filed by the
               petitioner for quashing of FIR registered under
Section 376
IPC on the ground that complainant has
               got married to the petitioner, has been dismissed by
               passing the following order:-
"This is a petition seeking quashing of the FIR
                       No.163/2015 registered under
Section 376
of
                       the IPC at the behest of respondent No.2.
Respondent No.2 is present. She is an adult
                       stated to be 27 years of age. Her presence has
                       been identified by the Investigating Officer.
                       She states that she in fact wishes to marry the
                       petitioner and the FIR has been got registered
                       under a misunderstanding. She does not wish
                       that any action should be taken against the
                       petitioner. The petitioner is stated to be a
                       Government servant.
11
In view of this factual matrix, the petitioner be
                    not arrested till the time when the statement of
                    the prosecutrix is recorded before the Sessions
                    Judge.
Learned Public Prosecutor for the State under
                    instructions from the Investigating Officer
                    states that challan is almost ready and shall be
                    filed positively within two weeks. The trial
                    Judge will endeavour to record the statement of
                    the prosecutrix as early as possible.
This Court is otherwise not inclined to
                    entertain a quashing petition under Section 376
                    of IPC in view of the judgment of the Apex
                    Court reported as 10 SCC 303 Gian Singh Vs.
                    State of Punjab and Anr., With these directions,
                    petition disposed of.
Order dasti under the signatures of the Court
                    Master."
23.The above order passed in Crl.M.C.
               No.1824/2015 declining the prayer for quashing of
               the criminal proceedings despite the fact that the
               parties got married, was challenged by filing a
               Special Leave to Appeal No...../2016 (Crl.M.P.
               No.1865/2016) before the Supreme Court. The SLP
               also stands dismissed vide order dated 8th February,
               2016.''
                                               (underline applied)


      The Supreme Court in the case of
Shimbhu vs. State of Haryana
,

reported in (2014) 13 SCC 318 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 651, has held as

under :-
''20. Further, a compromise entered into between the
           parties cannot be construed as a leading factor based on
           which lesser punishment can be awarded. Rape is a non-
           compoundable offence and it is an offence against the
           society and is not a matter to be left for the parties to
           compromise and settle. Since the court cannot always be
12
assured that the consent given by the victim in
          compromising the case is a genuine consent, there is
          every chance that she might have been pressurized by the
          convicts or the trauma undergone by her all the years
          might have compelled her to opt for a compromise. In
          fact, accepting this proposition will put an additional
          burden on the victim. The accused may use all his
          influence to pressurize her for a compromise. So, in the
          interest of justice and to avoid unnecessary
          pressure/harassment to the victim, it would not be safe in
          considering the compromise arrived at between the
          parties in rape cases to be a ground for the court to
          exercise the discretionary power under the proviso of
Section 376(2)
IPC.
21. It is imperative to mention that the legislature
          through the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
has
          deleted this proviso in the wake of increasing crimes
          against women. Though, the said amendment will not
          come in the way of exercising discretion in this case, on
          perusal of the above legislative provision and catena of
          cases on the issue, we feel that the present case fails to
          fall within the ambit of exceptional case where the Court
          shall use its extraordinary discretion to reduce the period
          of sentence than the minimum prescribed.''

(10)   It is submitted by the counsel for the applicant that since the applicant

has married the prosecutrix, therefore, there is no possibility of his

conviction. The submission made by the counsel for the applicant is

misconceived and is hereby rejected.
(11)   The Supreme Court in the case of
Hemudan Nanbha Gadhvi vs.

State of Gujarat
passed vide order dated 28th September, 2018 in Criminal

Appeal No.913 of 2016 has held as under:-
'' 10. It would indeed be a travesty of justice in the peculiar
          facts of the present case if the appellant were to be acquitted
          merely because the prosecutrix turned hostile and failed to
          identify the appellant in the dock, in view of the other
          overwhelming evidence available.
In
Iqbal vs. State of
13
U.P.
, 2015 (6) SCC 623, it was observed as follows:
''15. Evidence of identification of the miscreants in
         the     test identification     parade    is     not    a
         substantive evidence. Conviction cannot be based
         solely on the identity of the dacoits by the witnesses
         in     the     test    identification    parade.     The
         prosecution has to adduce substantive evidence by
         establishing incriminating evidence connecting the
         accused with the crime, like recovery of articles
         which are the subject matter of dacoity and the
         alleged weapons used in the commission of the
         offence."
11. The corroboration of the identification in T.I.P is to be
found in the medical report of the prosecutrix considered in
conjunction with the semen found on the clothes of the
prosecutrix and the appellant belonging to the Group B of the
appellant. The vaginal smear and vaginal swab have
also confirmed the presence of semen. A close analysis
of the facts and circumstances of the case, and the nature
of the evidence available unequivocally establishes the
appellant as the perpetrator of sexual assault on the
prosecutrix. The serologist report was an expert
opinion under
Section 45
of the Evidence Act,1872
and was therefore admissible in evidence without being
marked an exhibit formally or having to be proved by oral
evidence.
12. The contention on behalf of the appellant that the
serological report was not put to him by the court under
Section 313 Cr. P.C. and therefore, he has been prejudiced in
his defence, has been raised for the first time before this
court. The serological report being available, it was a failure
on the part of the trial court to bring it to the attention of the
appellant. The prosecution cannot be said to be guilty of not
adducing or suppressing any evidence.
In view of the nature
of the evidence available in the present case, as discussed
hereinbefore, we are of the opinion that no prejudice can be
said to have been caused to the appellant for that reason, as
held in
Nar Singh vs. State of Haryana
, (2015) 1 SCC 496:
''32...........When there is omission to put
       material evidence to the accused in the course
       of examination under
Section 313
CrPC, the
       prosecution is not guilty of not adducing or
       suppressing such evidence; it is only the failure on the
       part of the learned trial court. The victim of the offence
14
or the accused should not suffer for laches or
                 omission of the court. Criminal justice is not
                 one-sided. It has many facets and we have to draw a
                 balance between conflicting rights and duties.
33.Coming to the facts of this case, the FSL report
                 (Ext. P-12) was relied upon both by the trial court as
                 well as by the High Court. The objection as to the
                 defective
Section 313
CrPC statement has not been
                 raised in the trial court or in the High Court and the
                 omission to put the question under
Section 313
CrPC,
                 and prejudice caused to the accused is raised before
                 this Court for the first time. It was brought to
                 our notice that the appellant is in custody for
                 about eight years. While the right of the accused to
                 speedy trial is a valuable one, the Court has        to
                 subserve the interest of justice keeping in view the
                 right of the victim's family and society at large.''

(12)   Thus, it is clear that even if the prosecutrix turns hostile but still the

accused can be convicted on the basis of scientific and other circumstantial

evidence. Thus, it cannot be said that in case if the prosecutrix turns hostile,

then there is no possibility of conviction of the accused at all.
(13)    The Supreme Court in the case of
Satish Kumar Jayanti Lal

Dabgar Vs. State of Gujarat
reported in (2015) 7 SCC 359 has held as

under :-
9. The questions formulated at Sl. Nos. (1) to (4) above
           were decided in the affirmative. The discussion in the
           judgment reveals that it was an admitted case that the
           victim and the accused were from the same community
           and they both had gone out of station together. It was
           also established on record that there was physical
           relationship between them at different places and at
           different times and marriage was also performed on 9-3-
2003 at Unza which was duly registered in the Office of
           the Marriage Registrar. However, the primary defence of
           the appellant was that the prosecutrix was major; she
           accompanied the appellant willingly and entered into
15
physical relationship as well as matrimonial alliance out
          of her free will, desire and consent. Therefore, the most
          important question before the trial court, on which the
          fate of the case hinged, was the age of the victim from
          which it could be discerned as to whether she was major
          on the date of the incident or not.
*      *     *      *
15. The legislature has introduced the aforesaid
          provision with sound rationale and there is an important
          objective behind such a provision. It is considered that a
          minor is incapable of thinking rationally and giving any
          consent. For this reason, whether it is civil law or
          criminal law, the consent of a minor is not treated as
          valid consent. Here the provision is concerning a girl
          child who is not only minor but less than 16 years of
          age. A minor girl can be easily lured into giving consent
          for such an act without understanding the implications
          thereof. Such a consent, therefore, is treated as not an
          informed consent given after understanding the pros and
          cons as well as consequences of the intended action.
          Therefore, as a necessary corollary, duty is cast on the
          other person in not taking advantage of the so-called
          consent given by a girl who is less than 16 years of age.
          Even when there is a consent of a girl below 16 years,
          the other partner in the sexual act is treated as criminal
          who has committed the offence of rape. The law leaves
          no choice to him and he cannot plead that the act was
          consensual. A fortiori, the so-called consent of the
          prosecutrix below 16 years of age cannot be treated as
          mitigating circumstance.
Further, this Court by order dated 20-9-2019 passed in the case of
Arif

Khan Vs. State of MP & Anr. (MCRC
39588/2019) Gwalior has held as

under :
''So far as the order passed by the Coordinate Bench of
          this Court in the case Pankaj Parmar(supra) is
          concerned,it has not taken note of the judgments passed
          by the Supreme Court in the case of
Madanlal
(supra),
Laxmi Narayan
(supra),
Shimbhu
(supra) as well as
          the order passed by Supreme Court and the Delhi High
          Court in the case of
Vikash Kumar @ Sonu
(supra).
16
The Coordinate Bench of this Court has also not taken
          note of the fact that the
POCSO Act, 2012
is a ''
Special
          Act
'' and thus, in the light of the judgments passed by
          the Supreme Court in the case of
Gian Singh
(supra)
          and
Narinder Singh
(supra), the compromise cannot be
          accepted where the accused is facing trial for offence
          punishable under the
Special Act
. The Coordinate
          Bench of this Court has also not taken note of the
          provisions of Sections 375 Sixthly of
IPC
which
          provides that sexual intercourse with or without consent
          of a girl below 18 years of age would be ''rape''. Thus,
          when the consent of minor prosecutrix is immaterial at
          the time of commission of offence, then under no
          circumstances, her consent would become relevant for
          the purpose of compromise.
Thus, with great respect, it is held that the order
          passed by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in the
          case of Pankaj Parmar (supra) has rendered per
          incuriam as the above-mentioned judgments and aspects
          have not been taken note'.
(14)   If the facts of this case are considered, then it is clear that earlier also,

the applicant was arrested for committing rape on the prosecutrix and again

he succeeded in persuading the prosecutrix that he would marry her. But

after his release, he did not fulfil his promise, and again indulged in physical

relations on the pretext of marriage. Even when the prosecutrix became

pregnant, he did not marry her. It is also not out of place to mention again

that the prosecutrix was minor, therefore, her consent was immaterial. Thus,

it is clear that the applicant, had all the time, exploited the prosecutrix.
Therefore, in the light of the observations made by the Supreme Court in the

case of
Madanlal
(Supra), it is clear that in fact the marriage with the

prosecutrix appears to be an eyewash to pressurize the prosecutrix to once

again enter into an agreement.
17
(15)     Furthermore, the charge sheet has been filed against the applicant and

               he is still absconding. Under these circumstances, this Court is of the

               considered opinion that no case is made out warranting quashment of FIR in

               Crime No.377 of 2018 registered at Police Station Basoda City, District

               Vidisha for offence under
Section 376(2)(n)
of IPC and under
Section 5L
/
6
of POCSO Act.
(16)    Accordingly, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia)
                                                                       Judge

MKB
Digitally signed by MAHENDRA KUMAR BARIK
Date: 2019.11.30 15:31:10 +05'30'
