Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 26 OF 2021
Citation: SCC OnLine Pat 3 [Full Bench of Patna High Court]
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/98110535/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
87
]
Bombay High Court
Nandini N. Suchde vs The State Of West Bengal And Anr on 5 May, 2022
Author:
Sarang V. Kotwal
Bench:
S. S. Shinde
,
Sarang V. Kotwal
1
                                                        ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt




                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

[1]                  ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 161 OF 2022

Prajith Thayyil Kallil S/o Jogesh K J                     ... Applicant
                     Versus
The State of Maharashtra                                  ... Respondent
                                         .....
                                        WITH
[2]                  ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 26 OF 2021

Pinkesh Mehta S/o Suresh Mehta & Ors.                     ... Applicants
                     Versus
The State of Maharashtra                                  ... Respondent
                                         .....
                                        WITH
[3]                  ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 137 OF 2022

Nikhil Premraj Kalapadan & Ors.                           ... Applicants
                     Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                           ... Respondents
                                         .....
                                        WITH
[4]                  ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 162 OF 2022
Sameer Jai Hiremath                                       ... Applicant
           Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                           ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[5]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 186 OF 2022
Ashish Shah                                    ... Applicant
                     Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                           ... Respondents



      Deshmane(PS)
                                                                                 1 / 37
                                   2
                                             ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


                              .....
                             WITH
[6]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 372 OF 2021
Zoheb Nazir Ahmed Shaikh                       ... Applicant
          Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[7]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 397 OF 2021
Neeraj Shyam Sahay                             ... Applicant
           Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.                ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[8]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 399 OF 2021
Sonal Neeraj Sahay                             ... Applicant
          Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.                ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[9]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 627 OF 2018
Javed Anand and Anr.                           ... Applicants
           Versus
The State of Gujarat & Ors.                    ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[10]      ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION (STAMP) NO.1628 OF 2020
Mohammad Hameed Shaukat Ali                    ... Applicant
          Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                ... Respondents




                                                                      2 / 37
                                       3
                                                      ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


                               .....
                              WITH
[11]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1839 OF 2021

Kawal Chamanlal Sharma                                  ... Applicant
           Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                         ... Respondents
                               .....
                              WITH
[12]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION (STAMP) NO.3544 OF 2020

Nandini N. Suchde                                       ... Applicant
           Versus
The State Of West Bengal & Anr.                         ... Respondents
                              .....
                             WITH
[13]   ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO.1628 OF 2021

Vishnu @ Shreenivas Laxman
Jagdale and others                                      ... Applicants
           Versus
The State of Maharashtra                                ... Respondent
                               .....
                              WITH
[14]       ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1770 OF 2021
Amol Gunaji Sonawane & Anr.                             ... Applicants
           Versus
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.                         ... Respondents

                                ......
Mr. Mihir Desai, Senior Advocate i/by Mr. Mihir Joshi for Applicant in
ABA/627/2018.
Mr. Amit Desai, Senior Advocate a/w Mr. Gopalakrishna Shenoy and Mr.
Mitesh Jain, Jarin Doshi i/by Mr. Kalpesh Joshi Associates for Applicant in
ABA/162/2022.
Mr. Satish Maneshinde a/w Deepal Thakkar i/by Ms. Anandini Fernandes for

                                                                               3 / 37
                                       4
                                                      ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


Applicant in ABA/397/2021 and ABA/399/2021.
Mr. Ashok Bhatia, for Applicant in ABA/161/2022.
Mr. Ram Mani Upadhyay for Applicant in ABA/1839/2021.
Mr. Alankar Kirpekar a/w Mr. Sagar Kasar i/by VMK Legal for Applicant in
ABA/186/2022.
Mr. Onkar Chandurkar a/w Rajesh Devgharkar, Umeash Waydande, Neha Patail
and Meghnesh Birwadkar i/by Akshay Vijay Kamble for Applicants in
ABA/1770/2021.
Ms.Saima Ansari i/b. Hulylkar & Associates in ABASt/1628/2020
Mr. Anil C. Singh, Ld. ASG a/w Mr. Aditya Thakkar, Ms. Savita Ganoo, Dr. D.
P. Singh, Ms. Smita Thakur and Mr. Pranav Thackur for Respondent / Union of
India.
Mr. A. A. Kumbhakoni, Ld. A.G. a/w. Smt. G. P. Mulekar, APP and Shri. Manoj
Badgujar for Respondent-State.
                                   .....

                        CORAM :    S. S. SHINDE AND
                                   SARANG V. KOTWAL, JJ.

                      RESERVED ON  : 22nd APRIL, 2022
                      PRONOUNCED ON : 05th MAY, 2022

ORDER :
[PER SARANG V. KOTWAL, J.]
1.         This matter is placed before us to answer the reference

made by a Single Judge of this Court (Coram: Revati Mohite Dere,

J.) in Anticipatory Bail Application No.627/2018 vide order dated

5.4.2018 and the corrected order dated 30.8.2019 in the case of
Javed Anand and another Vs. State of Gujarat and another
. Following

are the issues framed for reference :
4 / 37
5
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


       (1)    Whether an application for transit anticipatory bail for a
              short duration, is maintainable in order to enable the
              accused to approach the Court of appropriate jurisdiction
              for seeking regular anticipatory bail for a short duration ?
(2)    Whether the order dated 14th September, 2017 passed by
              Gadkari, J. in Anticipatory Bail Application No. 1599 of
              2017 and other connected applications, on the basis of the
              observations made by the Apex Court in an interim order
              dated 14th June, 2013 would lay down the law, that an
              application seeking transit anticipatory bail is not
              maintainable ?
(3)    Whether the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court
              in the case of N.K. Nayar, Director, Hastinapur Metals
              Ltd. Bombay and others Vs. State of Maharashtra and
              others1 is a binding precedent ?
2.             Reference to a Larger Bench was necessitated because

Her Ladyship disagreed with a view of another Bench presided over

by learned Single Judge (Coram: A.S. Gadkari, J.), expressed in

the order dated 14.9.2017 passed in Anticipatory Bail Application

No.1599/2017 in the case of Dr. Augustine Francis Pinto and another

Vs. The State of Maharashtra and others . Gadkari, J. took a view that

such         applications      for   transit       anticipatory     bail    were      not

maintainable.
1    1985 Mh.L.J. 450 [Division Bench of Bombay High Court]
5 / 37
6
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt
3.           Though the term 'transit anticipatory bail' is not defined

or mentioned under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, generally it is

understood to mean - 'Order under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. for a short

duration in respect of an offence registered in a different state to

enable the Applicant/s to approach the Court in that state for

obtaining regular order under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C.'.
4.           Both these conflicting orders make specific reference to a

few judgments and orders dealing with the issue of Transit

Anticipatory Bail. They are as follows:
i.   N.K. Nayar (supra);
ii.
Syed Zafrul Hassan and another Vs. State2
iii.
Sailesh Jaiswal Vs. The State of West Bengal
& others3
     iv.
Sandeep Sunilkumar Lohariya Vs. Jawahar Chelaram Bijlani @
          Suresh Bijlani
and others4.
5.           We have heard Shri Mihir Desai, learned Senior Counsel,

Shri Amit Desai, learned Senior Counsel, Shri Ashok Bhatia,

learned Counsel, Shri Onkar Chandurkar, learned Counsel, for the

respective Applicants in Anticipatory Bail Applications, Shri Anil
2    1986 SCC OnLine Pat 3 [Full Bench of Patna High Court]
3    1998 SCC OnLine Cal 215 [Five Judge Bench of Calcutta High Court]
4    Order dated 14.6.2013 passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Special Leave to
     Appeal (Crl.) No.4829/2013.
6 / 37
7
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General for Union of India and

Shri A. A. Kumbhakoni, learned Advocate             General for the

Respondent-State of Maharashtra.
6.        Learned A.S.G. Shri Singh and learned A.G. Shri

Kumbhakoni took the empathetic stand that such type of orders

cannot be passed since legally they are not sustainable; and neither

a Sessions Court nor a High Court in one State can give protection

in the nature of the order under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. in relation to

an offence registered in a some other State.       The thrust of the

argument of Shri Singh, learned A.S.G., is that the order in
Sandeep

Lohariya
's case (supra) has concluded the issue and there was no

necessity to consider any other judgment of any other High Court

to decide the issue.
7.        Learned A.G. Shri Kumbhakoni submitted that such

orders granting transit anticipatory bail could not be passed;

however he argued that, the issues referred by learned Single Judge

are important and the same need to be decided by a Larger Bench.

In support of his contention that further reference be made to a

Larger Bench for deciding these issues of public importance, our
7 / 37
8
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


attention was invited to Rule 8 of Chapter-I of the Bombay High

Court, Appellate Side, Rules. Learned A.G. did not agree with the

submission of learned ASG that the order in
Sandeep Lohariya
's case

has concluded the issue.     According to learned A.G., Sandeep

Lohariya's order has no binding precedent.
8.        Learned Senior Counsel Shri Amit Desai and Shri Mihir

Desai, on the other hand, took a firm stand that by invoking
Section

438
of the Cr.P.C. such orders can be passed in the interest of

justice. Both of them, in fact, submitted that even final orders in

the nature of protection under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. can be passed

in such a situation. It is jointly submitted that order dated 14 th

June 2013 passed in the case of Sandeep Lohariya's has no binding

precedent as it was passed at an interim stage. It appears from the

perusal of order passed by the learned Single Judge (Coram :
Revati Mohite Dere, J.) that Shri Mihir Desai's submissions in that

behalf were accepted in the order of reference.
9.        In addition to submissions made by Shri Mihir Desai,

learned Senior Counsel, Shri Amit Desai, learned Senior Counsel

submitted that the power under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. flows from
8 / 37
9
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt
Article 21
and, therefore, in a given case it can be elevated to the

pedestal of
Article 21
because liberty of a person is paramount. In

a given case, the statutory rights merge with the constitutional

rights and, therefore,
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. should be given its

effect without any limitations.
10.       Shri Amit Desai, learned Senior Counsel submitted that

maintainability of an anticipatory bail application should not be

decided on the basis of consideration of territorial jurisdiction. A

reasonable apprehension of any person of his/her arrest should be

the guiding factor and not the territorial jurisdiction. He submitted

that giving rise to such apprehension itself is a cause of action

giving jurisdiction to a Court before which such apprehension is

expressed by such person. He further submitted that the Courts are

empowered to pass orders under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. for a limited

duration and for all practicable purposes this could be resorted to,

to enable the Applicant to approach the appropriate Court.
11.       Shri Amit Desai further submitted that the High Courts

and the Sessions Court are empowered to grant even final relief

though the offence is registered beyond their territorial jurisdiction.
9 / 37
10
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


He submitted that the order in the nature of transit anticipatory

bail can be termed as final order under
Section 438
for a limited

duration to enable the Applicant to approach the Court under

whose jurisdiction the alleged offence is actually registered. He

further maintained that the High Courts and the Sessions Court do

have jurisdiction to decide such applications though the offence

may be registered outside their territorial jurisdiction.
Learned counsel appearing for the respective parties were

unanimous to contend that the issues involved in this matter can be

more advantageously heard by Larger Bench. Learned A.S.G. left it

to the discretion of the Court whether to refer it to a Larger Bench.
12.       These, in short, are the submissions made by the parties.

Of course, they have elaborately made their submissions by reading

different judgments, which we shall refer to in the following

discussion.
At the outset, we may mention that we are inclined to

refer these issues to a Larger Bench and, therefore, we are

refraining from making any conclusive observations.
10 / 37
11
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt
13.         After hearing the arguments, the first issue which we

considered was, whether we can refer these issues to a Larger

Bench and as to whether for such exercise it was necessary to

record our disagreement with the view expressed by another

Division Bench in N.K Nayar's case (supra). To consider this, it is

necessary to reproduce Rule 8, Chapter I of the Bombay High Court

Appellate Side Rules, 1960 (for short, 'Appellate Side Rules') which

reads as follows :
"                             CHAPTER I
JURISDICTION OF SINGLE JUDGES AND BENCHES OF THE HIGH COURT
8.   Reference to two or more Judges.--If it shall appear to
           any Judge, either on the application of a party or otherwise,
           that an appeal or matter can be more advantageously heard
           by a Bench of two or more Judges, he may report to that
           effect to the Chief Justice who shall make such order
           thereon as he shall think fit."
A bare reading of this Rule suggests that the power to make such a

reference definitely lies with a Single Judge. But, the question

whether it also lies with the Division Bench; if it was felt that the

matter can be more advantageously heard by a Larger Bench; is

answered by a Five Judges' Bench of this Court in the case of State
11 / 37
12
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


of Maharashtra Vs. Kusum Charudutt Bharma Upadhye 5. The Bench

was considering Rule 28 of Chapter I of the Bombay High Court

Original Side Rules, 1980 (for short, 'Original Side Rules'), which

was reproduced in paragraph-15 of that judgment. Said Rule 28

reads thus :
"                               CHAPTER I
                         ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
28. Reference to two or more Judges: - If it shall appear to
          any Judge, either on the application of a party or otherwise,
          that a suit or matter can be more advantageously heard by a
          bench of two or more Judges, he may report to that effect to
          the Chief Justice, who shall make such order thereon as he
          shall think fit."
Learned Judges made a reference to Rule 28 of the Original Side

Rules, which is worded similar to Rule 8 of Chapter I of the

Appellate Side Rules; and after giving their reasons based on the
General Clauses Act
, they held that the words "any Judge"
occurring in Rule 28 would include "any Judges, whether two or

more, exercising original jurisdiction of the High Court."
The same principles should apply to Rule 8 of Chapter I

of the Appellate Side Rules. We agree with Shri Kumbhakoni in

5   1980 SCC OnLine Bom 309
12 / 37
13
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


that behalf and under that Rule a reference to a Larger Bench can

be made even by a Division Bench if it appeared that the matter can

be more advantageously heard by a Larger Bench.
14.            Shri Kumbhakoni submitted that for reference to a Larger

Bench, conflict with the coordinate Bench of equal strength is not

necessary. To support this submission, he relied on the judgment of

a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Anant H. Ulahalkar and

another Vs. Chief Election Commissioner and others 6. In paragraph-15,

the Full Bench considered the submissions regarding incompetency

of the reference to proceed upon the premise that the power of the

Chief Justice to make such reference was confined only to cases

where a conflict was noticed between decisions of two or more

coordinate Benches. The Full Bench observed that such a premise

was neither supported by any legal provisions nor by precedents.

The Full Bench proceeded to answer the reference which was made

by a Division Bench on forming the opinion that the matter, in that

case, could be more advantageously heard by a Bench of more than

two Judges.
6     2017(1) Mh.L.J. 431 [Full Bench]
13 / 37
14
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


              Thus, from these observations, it is clear that we do not

have to disagree with the view expressed in N.K. Nayar's case

(supra); and yet, we can refer the matter to a Larger Bench if we

form a opinion that it can be more advantageously heard by a

Larger Bench of more than two Judges. Such course of action was

recently adopted by a Division Bench headed by Hon'ble the Chief

Justice (Coram:Dipankar Datta, CJ & M.S.Karnik, J) vide order

dated 25.11.2021 passed in (O.S.)
Writ Petition No.2935/2018 in

the case of
Jalgaon Janta Sahakari Bank Ltd. and another Vs. Joint

Commissioner of Sales Tax and another
with other companion

Petitions.
15.           Based on the reasons mentioned in the following

discussion, we are also inclined to adopt a similar approach.
16.           To emphasize the complexity and the importance of the

issue involved, it is now necessary to refer to the divergent views

expressed by different High Courts. Most of these judgments have

referred to a landmark judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

the case of
Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others Vs. State of Punjab7
.

7     (1980) 2 SCC 565
14 / 37
15
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


As is well known, the judgment discusses the scope of
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. in the background of
Article 21
of the Constitution of

India. This judgment considered various facets of the powers under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C.    It was observed that there was no risk

involved in entrusting a wide discretion to the Court of Session and

the High Court in granting anticipatory bail because these are

higher courts manned by experienced persons and their orders are

not final but are open for appeal or revisional scrutiny and above

all; because, discretion has always to be exercised by Courts

judicially and not according to whims, caprice or fancy.
17.       Shri Mihir Desai submitted that
Shri Gurbaksh Singh

Sibbia
's case indicates that there is absolutely no restriction on

exercise of the powers under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. and, therefore,

this power can be exercised by the Sessions Court or the High Court

in Maharashtra in respect of the offences registered outside the

State of Maharashtra.
18.       Shri Kumbhakoni, learned A.G., on the other hand,

submitted that the exercise of such powers will have to be

circumscribed by the territorial limits of the High Court and the
15 / 37
16
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


Sessions Court in that particular State. He submitted that the High

Court cannot pass orders directing the authorities beyond the

territorial limits of the High Court and similarly the Sessions Court

cannot give directions to the authorities outside its territorial limits.
19.          The term 'High Court' is defined under
Section 2(e)
of

Cr.P.C. thus :
"2. Definitions.-- In this Code, unless the context otherwise
              requires,--
(e) "High Court" means, -
(i)   in relation to any State, the High Court for that
                       State;
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the
                       jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has
                       been extended by law, that High Court;
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the
                       highest Court of criminal appeal for that territory
                       other than the Supreme Court of India;"
Article 214
of the Constitution of India refers to 'High Court' as

follows :
"214. High Courts for States.-There shall be a High Court for
            each State."
Territorial limits of the High Court can be related to these two

provisions.
16 / 37
17
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt
20.          Various judgments taking different views were cited

before us. We are referring only to a few prominent judgments in

that behalf.
JUDGMENTS TAKING A VIEW THAT SUCH ORDERS CANNOT BE PASSED :
21.          The prominent judgments taking a view that such power

cannot be exercised outside the territories are as follows :
(i)
Syed Zafrul Hassan
(supra);
(ii) Sailesh Jaiswal (supra); and
(iii) Mathews Peter and others Vs. State of Maharashtra and others 8
22.          The Full Bench of Patna High Court in
Syed Zafrul Hassan
(supra) was answering the question whether
Section 438
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 envisages the grant of

anticipatory bail by any High Court or any Court of Session within

the country, irrespective of the locale of the commission of the

offence. It was observed in that judgment that the law assumes in

this context, that, the reference to the Court is in terms of the Court

having territorial jurisdiction. In
the said judgment
, the phraseology

"the High Court" or "the Court of Session" was considered

emphasizing the fact that, it meant the Court having jurisdiction

8     1999 SCC OnLine AP 1180
17 / 37
18
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


over the area where a non-bailable offence was committed. After a

detailed discussion, ultimately it was held that such power vests

only in the Court of Session or the High Court having jurisdiction

over the locale of the commission of offence of which a person is

accused.
23.            The same issue fell for consideration before a Five Judge

Bench of Calcutta High Court in the case of
Sailesh Jaiswal
(supra).
It was ultimately held that the reasoning of the Full Bench decision

of the Patna High Court in the case of
Syed Zafrul Hassan
(supra)

appeared to be more reasonable and convincing and, therefore, the

said Bench of Calcutta High Court agreed with the views of the Full

Bench decision in
Syed Zafrul Hassan
(supra).
While agreeing with

this view, the Five Judge Bench of Calcutta High Court disagreed

with the view of a Single Bench of Karnataka High Court expressed

in the case of
L.R. Naidu Vs. State of Karnataka9
, wherein it was held

that the place of offence was not material while considering the

prayer for bail and the Applicant could move before the Court

where he ordinarily resides even though the offence was committed


9     1984 Cri.L.J. 757
18 / 37
19
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


outside the jurisdiction of that Court.
24.       In the case of Mathews Peter (supra) a Division Bench of

High Court of Andhra Pradesh held that it is the place of offence

which determines the jurisdiction for anticipatory bail and not the

place of residence of the accused.
25.       It was contended by Shri Kumbhakoni that if final relief

could not be granted for want of territorial jurisdiction, then even

the interim relief for a short duration, which is described as 'transit

anticipatory bail', cannot be granted.
26.       Since the bench presided over by Justice A. S.Gadkari has

relied extensively on the case of
Sandeep Lohariya
(supra) and since

the issue under reference makes a reference to that Order, it would

be appropriate to refer to the observations in the said Order.
In the

case of
Sandeep Lohariya
(supra), the offence had taken place within

the jurisdiction of Vashi Police Station, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra

under Sections 302, 120B read with 34 of
IPC
and under
Sections 3
and
25
of the Arms Act. The accused Sandeep
in that case
had

applied for anticipatory bail before this High Court, which was
19 / 37
20
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


rejected vide order dated 25.2.2013. Thereafter, he had filed an

application for anticipatory bail in the nature of transit bail before

the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. In that background, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court passed the order on 14 th June 2013.
We reproduce

the said order in
Sandeep Lohariya
's case (supra) in its entirety, as

under :
"These special leave petitions have come up before
              this Court challenging the order passed by the High
              Court of Madhya Pradesh Bench at Indore in which
              notice has already been issued by this Court and the
              impugned order has been stayed. The matter came up
              before us in the category of 'notice served' cases and
              on perusal of the impugned order and hearing the
              counsel for the parties; we are amazed and shocked to
              see the nature of the order passed by the High Court
              of Madhya Pradesh in M.Cr.C. No. 3807 of 2013
              whereby the High Court has granted transit bail to the
              respondent no. 1 even without notice to the State of
              Maharashtra where the case against the respondent
              no.1/accused was registered; although admittedly he
              is an accused in a case under
Sections 302
,
120B
,
34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and under
Section 3
and
25
of the Arms Act, which offence took place at
              Police Station Washi, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra.
              The respondent no.1/ accused thereafter applied for
              anticipatory bail before the High Court of Bombay
              which was rejected vide order dated 25.02.2013.
20 / 37
21
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


Thereafter, the respondent no.1/accused appears to
have filed an application for anticipatory bail in the
nature of transit bail, which in our view has no
provision under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
1973. The High Court of Madhya Pradesh, without
considering as to whether the bail application was
maintainable before it or not in regard to an incident
which took place at Police Station Washi, Navi
Mumbai, Maharashtra and the High Court of Bombay
had already rejected the anticipatory bail application
of the respondent no.1, ignoring the fact that the order
of the High Court of Bombay was upheld by this
Court in SLP(Crl) No.2790/2013 vide order dated
29.04.2013. Learned senior counsel for the respondent
submitted that one of the matter was dismissed as
withdrawn. However, the implication of this order is
quite clear that the order of the High Court of Bombay
was refused to be interfered with by this Court and the
SLP against the same practically was dismissed and
the order of the High Court of Bombay was upheld.
Thereafter, the respondent no. 1 had also filed a
second special leave petition SLP(Crl.) No.4297/2013
against the same order, which also was dismissed vide
order dated 13.05.2013. In spite of the aforesaid
orders, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh entertained
anticipatory bail application termed as transit bail
application.
It is difficult to comprehend under what
provisions and under what authority of law such an
application was even registered by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh. In our view it is an absolutely
21 / 37
22
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


              shocking order which has been brought to the notice
              of this Court, hence we deem it appropriate to direct
              the Petitioner-State of Maharashtra as also the
              Petitioner-complainant/son of the deceased to implead
              the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in these petitions.
              Thereafter a notice be issued to the High Court of
              Madhya Pradesh through the Registrar indicating to
              file reply as to how the bail application of the
              respondent no.1/accused was even registered by the
              High Court before it was taken up by the Bench and
              also as to whether the Bench was apprised of the fact
              of rejection of his anticipatory bail application by the
              High Court of Bombay, which was upheld by the
              Supreme Court of India on two occasions.
List for further arguments on 12.07.2013.
                     In the meantime the respondent no.1/accused
              is directed to surrender forthwith before the concerned
              Trial Court in the State of Maharashtra."
It was specifically observed in this order that there was no provision

under
Cr.P.C
. for grant of anticipatory bail in the nature of transit

bail. It was also observed that it was difficult to comprehend under

what provisions and under what authority of law such application

was even registered by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
27.       However, learned Advocate General and learned counsel

for various Applicants raised an issue which was also in fact was

raised before the bench presided over by Justice Revati Mohite Dere
22 / 37
23
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


that the order passed
Sandeep Lohariya
's case (supra) was in the

nature of interim order and it had not decided the question and,

therefore, it was not a binding precedent. It was argued on behalf

of these parties that the said matter was posted by the Supreme

Court for further arguments on 12.7.2013 and, therefore, the issue

was not concluded by said order dated 14.6.2013.
28.       Learned A.S.G. however, supported the view taken by

Gadkari, J.. He submitted that, as far as the issue of transit

anticipatory bail is concerned, it was concluded on the date of this

order i.e. on 14.6.2013 because the accused was directed to

surrender forthwith before the concerned trial Court in the State of

Maharashtra. Therefore, according to learned A.S.G., this issue was

specifically referred to in the order and it was observed that there

was no such provision for transit anticipatory bail. According to

learned A.S.G., this concluded issue and the observations of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court were binding.
29.       The bench presided over by Justice A.S.Gadkari, in fact,

had taken a similar view in respect of which the bench presided

over by Justice Revati Mohite Dere had expressed a different
23 / 37
24
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


opinion.   However, since we are proposing to refer all the issues to

a Larger Bench, we are refraining from making any observations as

to whether this order in
Sandeep Lohariya
's case (supra), is in the

nature of interim order or final order and whether it, therefore,

decides the issue involved. Various judgments were cited before us

to canvass what is 'ratio decidendi', what is 'obiter dicta' and

whether such observations can have binding effect. Since we are

not expressing any opinion about the binding nature of this order

and since we are leaving this issue to be decided by a Larger Bench,

we are not expressing any opinion whether these observations are

either ratio decidendi or obiter dicta and as to whether they are

binding precedents.
JUDGMENTS TAKING VIEW THAT SUCH ORDERS CAN BE PASSED:
30.        As mentioned earlier, there are various judgments which

have taken a view that such orders can be passed protecting the

citizens either for a limited period or by way of final relief in

respect of an offence registered in a different state.           A few

prominent judgments are discussed in the following paragraphs.
24 / 37
25
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt
31.       The Madras High Court in the case of
S.P. Shanthi Swaroop

Vs. State of Tamil Nadu
10 has considered the Patna High Court Full

Bench judgment in
Syed Zaful Hassan
(supra) and disagreed with

that view. It was observed in the concluding paragraph that, the

view taken by the Full Bench of the Patna High Court was an

extreme one and it was against the very concept of anticipatory bail

as provided under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. and also was affecting the

liberty of the person whose liberty is guaranteed under the

Constitution of India providing necessary safeguards against arrest.

The definition of 'High Court'    provided under
Section 2(e)
of

Cr.P.C. had no relevance in that context and it cannot be said that in

view of the said definition, the High Court cannot exercise the

power of granting anticipatory bail under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. in

respect of persons who are sought to be arrested or who face threat

of arrest within the jurisdiction of that particular High Court where

the apprehension arises.
In arriving at this conclusion, the Madras

High Court relied on
Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
's case (supra). At

the same time, in the same judgment, the Madras High Court

clarified that while granting anticipatory bail the High Court had to
10 1990 SCC OnLine Mad 914
25 / 37
26
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


restrict the relief for a limited period and had to direct the

concerned persons to move the Court which was having jurisdiction

over the matter in the meantime and also could impose such

conditions so as to make the petitioners available for interrogation

by the concerned police in the meantime.
Thus, though this judgment in
S.P. Shanthi Swaroop
's case

(supra) granted limited relief, the last observations meant that

ultimately the final relief had to be obtained from the Court having

jurisdiction over the matter.
To that extent, the view is different

from N.K. Nayar's case (supra).
32.         The Delhi High Court went a step further in the case of Capt.
Satish Kumar Sharma Vs. Delhi Administration and others
11.
This

judgment considered the ratio in the cases of
Shri Gurbaksh Singh

Sibbia
(supra), N.K. Nayar (supra) and
Syed Zafral Hassan
(supra).

It was ultimately held that though the Petitioner before the Delhi

High Court was apprehending arrest in respect of non-bailable

warrant issued by C.J.M. Sultanpur, State of Uttar Pradesh, there

was a threat of deprivation of liberty of the petitioner in Delhi in

11 ILR (1990) I Delhi 203
26 / 37
27
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


connection with an offence alleged to have been committed in the

State of Uttar Pradesh; the cause of action in part arose in Delhi.

Therefore, the Delhi High Court had jurisdiction in the matter

irrespective of the seat of the Government or the High Court within

whose jurisdiction the offence had allegedly been committed. It

was further held that since the petitioner had reason to believe that

he could be arrested in Delhi on an accusation of having committed

a non-bailable offence, the Delhi High Court had the jurisdiction to

enlarge the petitioner on anticipatory bail under
Section 438
of

Cr.P.C. as well as under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.


.         This judgment suggests that even a final relief can be

granted by a High Court though the offence was not committed

within the jurisdiction of that Court.
33.       The main judgment which this Court needs to discuss is a

Division Bench judgment of this Court itself in the case of N.K.

Nayar (supra). After that judgment, all the Courts in Maharashtra

have been following this particular ratio expressed in this

judgment. In that case, the FIR was filed at Rai Police Station,

Sonipat District in the State of Haryana and the Applicants were
27 / 37
28
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


apprehending their arrest in Mumbai as they were permanent

residents of Mumbai.
Again after referring to the observations in
Shri Gurbaksh

Singh Sibbia
's case (supra) and other judgments, viz., the judgment

of the Karnataka High Court in the case of
Dr. L.R. Naidu Vs. State of

Karnataka12
and also the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in the

case of
B.R. Sinha Vs. The State13
, in the concluding paragraph it was

observed that an order of anticipatory bail would have a relevancy

to the moment of arrest of the concerned person and, therefore,

this Court would have the jurisdiction if a person was likely to be

arrested at a place within the jurisdiction of this Court even if the

offences     were     allegedly   committed   outside   the    State        of

Maharashtra. Having observed thus, the Court also considered a

practical difficulty that the Public Prosecutor in Mumbai would not

have details of the offence and other material in respect of the

offence and it was ultimately observed that the Bench intended to

exercise their powers under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. by granting

anticipatory bail for a period of one month to enable the Applicants

12 1984 Cr.L.J. 757
13 1984 Cr.L.J.61
28 / 37
29
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


to move appropriate Courts for seeking appropriate orders. It was

clarified that the anticipatory bail order was to stand automatically

vacated at the end of that period if in the intervening period no

orders about grant of anticipatory bail from the appropriate Court

were obtained.     The concluding lines of this judgment are also

important which read thus :
"In the event of the arrest of the applicants in the territory of
     this State each of the applicants be released on bail upto 12 th
     April, 1985 on each of them executing a personal recognizance
     bond of Rs.2000/- and a surety in the like amount."
The analysis of this judgment shows that the Division Bench held

that anticipatory bail under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. can be granted to

a person apprehending arrest in this State though the offence is

registered in a different State. The discussion indicates that the

relief in the nature of final relief can be granted.                However,

considering the practical difficulties the relief actually granted by

the Court was restricted to a period of one month. The important

words in the operative portion were that "In the event of the arrest

of the applicants in the territory of this State.........". This operative

part gives rise to a practical difficulty that for the period of one
29 / 37
30
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


month if the Applicants were not arrested at all then this order was

practically ineffective as the applicants could not step out of this

State without protection if they were not arrested in this State.

This position needs to be clarified.
34.       There is one more aspect which needs to be considered if

it has to be held that N.K. Nayar's case (supra) is still good law.

After this judgment was delivered in 1985, there was a subsequent

Maharashtra amendment of 1993 to this particular
Section 438
of

Cr.P.C. The amended provision reads thus :
" Maharashtra:
For section 438, substitute the following section,
              namely:-
"438. Direction for grant of bail to person
              apprehending arrest.--(1) When any person has reason
              to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of
              having committed a non-bailable offence, he may
              apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a
              direction under this section that in the event of such
              arrest, he shall be released on bail; and that Court
              may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the
              following factors:--
(i)   the nature and gravity or seriousness of
                    accusation as apprehended by the applicant;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the
                    fact as to whether he has, on conviction by a
30 / 37
31
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


             Court, previously undergone imprisonment for a
             term in respect of any cognizable offence;
(iii) the likely object of the accusation to humiliate or
             malign the reputation of the applicant by having
             him so arrested, and
(iv) the possibility of the appellant, if granted
             anticipatory bail, fleeing from justice, either
             reject the application forthwith or issue an
             interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that where the High Court or, as the
      case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed any
      interim order under this sub-section or has rejected the
      application for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be
      open to an officer in charge of a police station to
      arrest, without warrant, the applicant on the basis of
      the accusation apprehended in such application.
(2)   Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the
      Court of Session, considers it expedient to issue an
      interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub-
section (1), the Court shall indicate therein the date,
      on which the application for grant of, anticipatory bail
      shall be finally heard for passing an order thereon, as
      the Court may deem fit; and if the Court passes any
      order granting anticipatory bail, such order shall
      include inter alia the following conditions, namely:--
(i)    that the applicant shall make himself available
              for interrogation by a police officer as and
              when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or
              indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
              promise to any person acquainted with the
31 / 37
32
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


                 facts of the accusation against him so as to
                 dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
                 Court or to any police officer;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without
                 the previous permission of the Court; and
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under
                 sub-section (3) of section 437 as if the bail was
                 granted under that section.
(3)   Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-
section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice, being not
          less than seven days notice, together with a copy of
          such order to be served on the Public Prosecutor and
          the Commissioner of Police or, as the case may be,
          the concerned Superintendent of Police, with a view
          to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity
          of being heard when the application shall be finally
          heard by the Court.
(4)   The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory
          bail shall be obligatory at the time of final hearing of
          the application and passing of final order by the
          Court, if on an application made to it by the Public
          Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence
          necessary in the interest of justice.
(5)   On the date indicated in the interim order under sub-
section (2), the Court shall hear the Public Prosecutor
          and the applicant and after due consideration of their
          contentions, it may either confirm, modify or cancel
          the interim order made under sub-section (1).]


[Vide Maharashtra Act 24 of 1993,
sec. 2
(w.e.f. 28-7-1993)]"
32 / 37
33
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt




          The     amendment    may      impact   the   reasoning      and

effectiveness of this judgment. After the amendment, which is still

in force today, two steps were contemplated. At the first stage,

either interim relief could be granted or the application itself could

be rejected. If interim relief is granted and the matter is posted for

consideration at the final stage then the Court may either confirm,

modify or cancel the interim order. Therefore, the question would

arise if the interim order is granted by the Court in Maharashtra

whether it can be confirmed, modified or cancelled by a Court

outside the State. In this respect, Shri Amit Desai submitted that

when the Court in Maharashtra grants relief under
Section 438
of

Cr.P.C. it would be a final relief though it could be restricted for a

limited period.
It is argued by the learned Advocate General that, in such

a case, the applicants would have options of approaching four

different Courts i.e. the Sessions Court and the High Court in this

State as well as the Sessions Court and the High Court having

jurisdiction where the offence is committed. This may give rise to
33 / 37
34
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


unhealthy practice of forum shopping. Therefore, this aspect also

needs a serious consideration.
35.        One more issue which needs to be considered is whether

the High Court can exercise its power under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India in respect of the offence registered outside the

State of that High Court.
In this context, reference can be made to

the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Navinchandra N. Majithia Vs. State of Maharashtra
and others14.
36.        We have discussed different view points, practical

difficulties and the arguments advanced before us. It is more than

clear that there is a vertical rift in the views expressed by different

High Courts. The importance of this question cannot be overstated.

It involves liberty of citizens. At the same time, the Court will have

to balance the difficulties of the investigating agency. The provision

can be misused either by the accused or even by the complainant.

In a given case, only with a view to harass somebody, the informant

may choose to file his FIR at a far away place in India, by showing

some part of cause of action there. In such a case, the accused


14 (2000) 7 SCC 640
34 / 37
35
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


would require some protection to approach that Court. On the

other hand, as has happened in
Sandeep Lohariya
's case (supra), the

accused may take wrong advantage of this provision by obtaining

this type of order to buy time, which could be used to destroy the

evidence.     Both these mischiefs must      be     checked        while

considering this issue. Therefore, based on all this discussion, we

are of the view     that the matter involves larger interest of the

citizens and, therefore, it can be more advantageously heard by a

Larger Bench.
37.         We have already discussed that Rule 8 of Chapter I of

Appellate Side Rules does make such provision and the ratio of the

judgments referred to hereinabove cited by learned A.G. does

enable a Division Bench to refer such cases to a Larger Bench.
38.         Considering the importance of the issue instead of

answering the reference we are forwarding three issues framed in

reference order mentioned in para-1 hereinabove, and additional

issues to be decided by a Larger Bench.            Hence, following

additional issues are framed for reference to a Larger Bench :
35 / 37
36
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


      (4)   Whether the Maharashtra Amendment of 1993 to
Section
            438
of Cr.P.C. affects the ratio of N.K. Nayar's case
            (supra).
(5)   Whether the final relief under Section 438 of Cr.P.C. can be
            granted for the offences registered or likely to be registered,
            outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Sessions Court or
            the High Court, as the case may be.
(6)   Whether a Sessions Court can grant any relief under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. in respect of the offences registered
            outside its jurisdiction.
(7)   If it is held that the powers of the High Courts under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. are restricted to passing of these
            orders only for the offences registered or likely to be
            registered within the territorial jurisdiction, whether the
            High Courts in exercise of their powers under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, can pass protective orders in
            the nature of relief under
Section 438
of Cr.P.C. in respect
            of those offences.
It is made clear that whether the order dated 14.6.2013 of

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Sandeep Lohariya
's case, referred to in

Issue No.2, is interim or not, is also left open.
39.          It is, of course, the prerogative of the Hon'ble the Chief

Justice to decide whether these matters should be placed before a

Larger Bench consisting of three or more Judges. Therefore, after
36 / 37
37
ABA-161-22-GROUP-F.odt


                     framing of these additional issues in addition to 3 issues in

                     reference order of learned Single Judge mentioned in para-1 herein

                     above, we direct the Registry to place these matters with this order

                     before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice as per Rule 8 of Chapter I of

                     the Appellate Side Rules.
(SARANG V. KOTWAL, J.)                         (S.S. SHINDE, J.)



                     Deshmane (PS)
Digitally signed
by
PRADIPKUMAR
PRADIPKUMAR PRAKASHRAO
PRAKASHRAO  DESHMANE
DESHMANE
            Date:
            2022.05.05
            15:39:20 +0530
37 / 37
