Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 66 of 2016
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2019 GUJ 62
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/100368045/

[Cites
50
, Cited by
4
]
Gujarat High Court
Mahulbhai Bipinbhai Tamboli vs Akshaybhai Ramanbhai Thakkar on 26 April, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 GUJ 62
Author:
J. B. Pardiwala
Bench:
J.B.Pardiwala
C/SA/66/2016                                          CAV JUDGMENT




            IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD

                      R/SECOND APPEAL NO. 66 of 2016
                                  With
                CIVIL APPLICATION (FOR STAY) NO. 1 of 2016
                                    In
                      R/SECOND APPEAL NO. 66 of 2016

FOR APPROVAL AND SIGNATURE:

HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE J.B.PARDIWALA                                       Sd/-

==========================================================

1     Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to                  Yes
      see the judgment ?

2     To be referred to the Reporter or not ?                              Yes

3     Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the             No
      judgment ?

4     Whether this case involves a substantial question of law             No
      as to the interpretation of the Constitution of India or any
      order made thereunder ?

      Circulate this judgement in the subordinate judiciary.
==========================================================
              MAHULBHAI BIPINBHAI TAMBOLI & 3 other(s)
                              Versus
             AKSHAYBHAI RAMANBHAI THAKKAR & 1 other(s)
==========================================================
Appearance:
MR DIPEN DESAI(2481) for the Appellant(s) No. 1,2,3,4
MR HS MUNSHAW(495) for the Respondent(s) No. 2
NISARG H VYAS(9431) for the Respondent(s) No. 1
==========================================================

    CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE J.B.PARDIWALA

                               Date : 26/04/2019

                                CAV JUDGMENT
1.     This second appeal under section 100 of the Civil
Procedure Code, 1908 ( for short "
the CPC
") is at the instance
Page 1 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
of the original plaintiffs and is directed against the judgment
and order passed by the 7th Addl. District Judge, Bhavnagar
dated 05.03.2016 in the Regular Civil Appeal No.6 of 2016, by
which, the 7th Addl. District Judge, Bhavnagar, dismissed the
appeal preferred by the plaintiffs, thereby affirming the
judgment and decree passed by the 2nd Addl. Civil Judge,
Bhavnagar dated 04.01.2016 below Exh.11 in the Regular Civil
Suit No.704 of 2015.
2.   For the sake of convenience, the appellants herein shall
be referred to as the original plaintiffs and the respondents
herein shall be referred to as the original defendants.
3.   It appears from the materials on record that the plaintiffs
instituted the Regular Civil Suit No.704 of 2015 in the court of
the Principal Civil Judge,    Bhavnagar for a declaration and
injunction. The defendant No.1 is a private party, whereas the
defendant     No.2 is the    Bhavnagar Municipal        Corporation
through its Commissioner. The suit came to be instituted by
the plaintiffs stating that the subject matter touches the public
interest and the suit has the ingredients of
Order 1 Rule 8 of
the CPC
. The defendant No.1 preferred an application, Exh.11,
under the provisions of Order 7 Rule 11 (d)
of the CPC
and
prayed for rejection of the plaint on the ground that as the suit
had been instituted under the provisions of Order 1 Rule 8, the
permission of the Court before filing such suit is mandatory,
and as no such permission had been obtained, the plaint was
liable to be rejected.   The 2nd Addl. Civil Judge, Bhavnagar
adjudicated the application, Exh.11, and allowed the same.
The Civil Judge rejected the plaint on the ground that the suit
was barred by law, i.e., the provisions of Order 1 Rule 8 of the
Page 2 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
CPC
.
4.     The plaintiffs, being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
order passed by the Civil Judge, rejecting the plaint, preferred
the Regular Civil Appeal No.6 of 2016 in the court of the
District Judge at Bhavnagar. It appears that in the course of the
hearing of the appeal preferred by the plaintiffs, one additional
point was raised on behalf of the Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation. Over an above the issue with regard to
Order 1
Rule 8 of the CPC
, the Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation raised
an issue that the suit was otherwise also not maintainable in
the absence of any prior notice issued by the plaintiffs under
the provision of
section 487
of the Bombay Provincial Municipal
Corporation Act, 1949 ( for short "the Act, 1949). The Lower
Appellate Court considered both the issues and on both the
counts, took the view that the suit instituted by the plaintiffs is
not maintainable and, accordingly,            dismissed the appeal
preferred by the plaintiffs.
5.     In such circumstances, referred to above, the plaintiffs,
being dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the
Lower Appellate Court, has come up with this second appeal
under
section100
of the CPC.
6.     The following substantial questions of law have been
framed in the memorandum of the second appeal:
"(I) Whether the learned lower appellate court as well
       as the learned Trial Court       erred in coming to the
       conclusion that the civil suit instituted by the appellants
       is liable to be rejected under the provisions of
Order 7
       Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
?
Page 3 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
(II) Whether the learned lower appellate court as well
     as the learned Trial      Court erred in coming to the
     conclusion that the civil suit instituted by the appellants
     is a representative suit and is liable to be rejected for
     non-compliance of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
     Procedure
?
(III) Whether the learned lower appellate court erred in
     deciding the issue of cause of action when such issue
     was not point for determination in Regular Civil Appeal
     No.6 of 2016?"
7.   A Coordinate Bench of this Court, while admitting the
second appeal, passed the following order:
"1. After hearing the learned Senior Advocate Mr. Mihir
     Thakore for the appellants and the learned Senior
     Advocate Mr. S.N. Soparkar for the respondent No.1, the
     appeal is ADMITTED on the following substantial
     question of law : -
(i) Whether the lower appellate court has
            committed an error of law in upholding the decree
            passed by the trial court rejecting the plaint of the
            appellants plaintiffs under Order VII Rule 11(d) of
            the Civil Procedure Code on the ground that the suit
            was barred by Section 487 of the BPMC Act (now
GPMC Act
), 1959.
2.    Mr. A.S. Vakil, learned advocate waives service of
     notice of admission on behalf of respondent No.1. Notice
     of admission be issued to respondent No.2."
8.   I take notice of the fact that in the application, Exh.11,
preferred by the original defendant No.1 under the provisions
of Order 7 Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
, the only ground urged was
with regard to non-compliance of the provisions of
Order 1
Rule 8 of the CPC
. In the application, Exh.11, the ground with
regard to the non-compliance with the provision of
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 has not been raised.       It is but-obvious that
even otherwise the original defendant No.1, being a private
Page 4 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                    CAV JUDGMENT
party, could not have raised the issue with regard to issue of
the prior notice under
section 487
of the Act, 1949. The
Municipal     Corporation   could    have    raised      this     issue        by
preferring an appropriate application on their own. The plaint,
ultimately, came to be rejected on the ground of non-
compliance of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
.
When the plaintiffs went in appeal against the order passed by
the Civil Judge, rejecting the plaint, the Corporation, for the
first time, raised an issue as regards
section 487
of the Act,
1949. In such circumstances, two issues were adjudicated by
the lower appellate court. First, with regard to
Order 1 Rule 8
of the CPC
and secondly with regard to
Section 487
of the Act,
1949. I take notice of the fact that only one substantial
question of law has been framed by the Coordinate Bench and
that is with regard to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949. It appears
that inadvertently the substantial question of law as regards
the rejection of the plaint on the ground of non-compliance of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
could not be framed. If I take the
view that the plaint could not have been rejected by the Lower
Appellate Court on the ground of
Section 487
of the Act, 1949,
still the issue with regard to
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
would
remain as it is. This point was elaborately argued by both the
sides and discussed in the course of the hearing of this second
appeal. In such circumstances, Mr. Desai, the learned counsel
appearing for the plaintiffs make a fervent appeal to add one
more substantial question of law, keeping in mind Section 100
(5) proviso
of the CPC
. In addition to the substantial queation
of law already framed by the Coordinate Bench, the following
substantial question of law has been proposed on behalf of the
plaintiffs.
Page 5 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
"(A) Whether the courts below committed an error in rejecting
the plaint on the ground that as the suit has been instituted
under the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
, the prior
permission of the court was necessary and as no permission
was obtained, the suit was liable to be dismissed by rejecting
the plaint?"
9.    Mr. M.C. Bhatt, the learned counsel appearing for the
defendant No.1 submitted that it is not permissible for this
Court to add any other substantial question of law at this
stage, more particularly, when the second appeal             is heard
finally. Mr. Bhatt submitted that the proviso to sub-section (5)
of Section 100 is an exception to the general rule and it is only
in rare cases that the Court should exercise its power under
the proviso to frame a substantial question of law at a later
stage. However, Mr.      Bhatt submitted     that even if             the
substantial question of law as regards
Order 1 Rule 8 of the
CPC
is framed at this stage, he would be in a position to
convince this Court that the plaint was rightly rejected on such
ground.
10.
Section 100
, C.P.C. was amended by
Amending Act
No.
104 of 1976. The object and reasons for the introduction of the
new section are as under:--
"Section 100 of the Code provides that a second appeal
      may lie to the High Court from a decree passed in appeal
      by any Court subordiante to the High Court on any of the
      following grounds namely :--
(a) the decision being contrary to law or some usage
      having the force of the law;
Page 6 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
(b) the decision having failed to determine some material
      issue of law or usage having the force of law; and
(c) a substantial error or defect in procedure provided
      by the Code or any other law for the time being in force,
      which may possibly have produced error or defect in the
      decision of the case upon the merits.
Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 100 are very wide in
      effect and Cluses (b) and (c) have led to plethora of
      conflicting judgments. In dealing with second appeals,
      the Courts have devised and successfully adopted,
      several concepts such as, a mixed question of fact and
      law, a legal inference to be drawn from facts proved, and
      even the point that the case has not been properly
      approached by the Courts below. This has created
      confusion in the minds of the public as to the legitimate
      scope of second appeal under Section 100 and has
      burdened the High Courts with an unnecessarily large
      number of second appeals. Section 100 is, therefore,
      being amended to provide that the right of second appeal
      should be confined to cases where a question of law is
      involved and such question of law is a substantial one."
11.   The grounds specified in Section 100 might be changed
from time to time by the Legislature, having regard to the
legislative policy relating to the second appeals.
12.   It will be pertinent to note that the aims and objects
make it apparently clear that Section 100 has been made very
stringent. By virtue of the amendment introduced in Section
100, the High Court's jurisdiction is restricted only to a
consideration of a question of law framed. A further right has
been conferred on the respondent to show that no such
question has arisen in the case. Sub-section (3) of
Section 100
,
C.P.C. requires that in an appeal under this section, the
Page 7 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                     CAV JUDGMENT
memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the substantial
question of law involved in the appeal and under Sub-section
(4) the High Court, if it is satisfied, that a substantial question
of law is involved in the case, shall formulate that question and
thereafter the appeal shall be heard on the question of law so
formulated. No doubt, the proviso to Sub-section (5) gives
power to the Court to hear an appeal on any other substantial
question of law not formulated by it, if the High Court is
satisfied that such a substantial question is involved. But
before doing so, the High Court is required to record reasons
for permitting the appellant to argue on such questions which
have not been formulated by the Court at the time of
admission of the appeal. Proviso to Sub-section (5) of Section
100 is an exception to the general rule and before the proviso
could come into operation, it must be established that the
questions of law sought to be raised are capable of being
raised as substantial question of law. It is only in rare cases,
where substantial question of law is patent on the face of the
record and grave injustice is likely to be caused because of the
Court's failure to formulate such question at the stage of
admission, then only this proviso can be resorted to.
13.   I may refer to a very recent pronouncement of the
Supreme Court in the case of Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead)
Thr. LRS. vs. Ahsanul Ghani, Civil Appeal No.8199 of 2009,
decided on 15th February, 2019, wherein the Supreme Court
has explained the scope of the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section   100
of   the   CPC.    I    may   quote   the       relevant
observations:-
Page 8 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
"20. As per
Section 100
CPC, the appeal would lie to the
High Court from the decree passed in appeal by any
Court subordinate only if the High Court is satisfied that
the case involves a substantial question of law; such
question is required to be stated in the Memorandum of
Appeal; the High Court is required to formulate the
question on being satisfied that the same is involved in
the case; the appeal is to be heard on the question so
formulated; and at the time of hearing, the respondent
could urge that the case does not involve such a
question.
The proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 100
CPC makes
it clear that the Court could hear the appeal on any other
substantial question of law not formulated by it, but only
after recording the reasons that the case involves such a
question.
In the case of
Surat Singh (Dead) v. Siri
Bhagwan and Ors.
: (2018) 4 SCC 562 this Court has
pointed out the contours of the powers of High Court
under the proviso to sub-section (5) of
Section 100
CPC
as under:-
"21......... The proviso to sub-section (5), however, also
recognises the power of the High Court to hear the
appeal on any other substantial question of law which
was not initially framed by the High Court under sub-
section (4). However, this power can be exercised by the
High Court only after assigning the reasons for framing
such additional question of law at the time of hearing of
the appeal".
21. We are clearly of the view that the proviso to sub-
section (5) of
Section 100
CPC is not intended to annul
the other requirements of Section 100 and it cannot be
laid down as a matter of rule that irrespective of the
question/s formulated, hearing of the second appeal is
open for any other substantial question of law, even if not
formulated earlier. The said proviso, by its very nature,
could come into operation only in exceptional cases and
for strong and convincing reasons, to be specifically
recorded by the High Court. There being no such strong
and convincing reason in the present case to formulate
and hear the second appeal on any other question of law,
the High Court cannot be faulted in rejecting the
contentions urged on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant in
this regard."
Page 9 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
14.   Thus, under the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 100,
additional substantial question of law can well be permitted to
be raised with the leave of the Court and along with the initial
question framed can partake and formulate the subject matter
of the debate in such appeal. This proviso is indicative of the
legislative intention in this regard. It confers enabling power
upon the Court and consequent entitlement in favour of the
party. The          restrictive scheme of Section 100 couched in
mandatory terms firstly cast a duty on the Court not to admit
the appeals which do not invoke substantial questions of law,
for, such an appeal is not provided for, and secondly, it
requires the admission order to speak about and spell out such
substantial question and thirdly on that question the notice has
to be issued to the respondents, who are enabled to show that
such a question is neither a substantial question of law, nor
arises in a given appeal,       but further at that stage wish the
leave of the Court the appellant is further enabled to rely on
any other substantial question of law which can form the part
of the debate at the final hearing stage. While working out this
compact scheme, however, occasions like the present one may
arise, wherein, at times, inadvertently, a particular substantial
question of law although formulated in the memorandum of
the second appeal, yet, may not be found to be framed by the
Court while admitting the second appeal. In the case on hand,
if I do not exercise my power under proviso to sub-section (5)
of section 100, then the same will lead to gross miscarriage of
justice because, as noted above, even if I hold that
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 has no application to the case on hand at this
stage,      the plaintiffs would not succeed because the plaint
would still remain rejected on the erroneous ground of non-
compliance of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
. As I have
Page 10 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
heard both the sides at length on the issue of
Order 1 Rule 8
CPC
, no prejudice would be caused if the substantial question
of law as regards
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
is framed at this stage.
The principle that applies to the omissions, errors or mistake
on the part of the Court should always be available in such an
eventuality provided the course of justice is not prejudiced or
affected to opponent's disadvantage. Once the litigant has
diligently followed the procedural law, he cannot be punished
for the omission of the Court. To act ex debito justitiae is the
basic rule in matters of administration of justice and,
particularly, when if arises out of the procedural laws. Failure
on the part of the Court, therefore, though serious does not
affect the process of appeal, which is set for final hearing, nor
can the appeal be dismissed for that reason.
15.   It is not in dispute that in the memorandum of the second
appeal, the substantial question of law as regards the
applicability of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
has been
formulated. It is also not in dispute that the plaint came to be
rejected by the Trial Court only on one ground, i.e,
Order 1
Rule 8 CPC
. It is also not in dispute that the Lower Appellate
Court did consider in details the issue with regard to
Order 1
Rule 8 of the CPC
.
16.   I am of the view that where the substantial question of
law is patent on the face of the record and grave injustice is
likely to result because of courts failure to formulate the point
at the stage of admission, the resort to the proviso to
section
100(5)
of the CPC should be made. It is true that the proviso to
section 100(5)
of the CPC is an exception to the main provision
Page 11 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
of section 100. The Court has a discretion to hear the appeal
on any substantial question of law but the legislature has
placed an exception to keep the hearing confined to the
question formulated by it at the hearing of the appeal.                The
proviso to section (5) of section 100 could be said to have been
kept as the repository of judicial discretion for reasons to be
recorded, the power although not unbridled yet enough to
impress all such questions which deserves consideration to
sub-serve the ends of justice.. I am convinced up to the brim
that the plaint could not have been rejected on the ground of
prior permission of the court not being obtained under
Order 1
Rule 8 of the CPC
. I shall assign the reasons in this regard little
later. However, if I don't frame this particular question of law
in exercise of my powers under the proviso to clause (5) of
section 100
of the CPC, then the same will lead to a serious
miscarriage of justice. In such circumstances,        the objection
raised by Mr. Bhatt, the learned counsel appearing for the
defendant No.1 in this regard is rejected.
17.   The Supreme Court in the case of Kshitish Chandra
Pukair vs. Santosh Kumar Pukair & Ors., reported in AIR
1997 SC 2517, has observed as under:-
"We would only add that (a) it is the duty cast upon the
      High Court to formulate the substantial question of law
      involved in the case even at the initial stage; and (b) that
      in (exceptional) cases, at a later point of time, when the
      Court exercised its jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-
      section (5) of
Section 100
C.P.C in formulating the
      substantial question of law, the opposite party should be
      put on notice thereon and should be given a fair or
      proper opportunity to meet the point. Proceeding to hear
      the appeal without formulating the substantial question
      of law involved in the appeal is illegal and is an
Page 12 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
abnegation of abdication of the duty cast on Court and
even after the formulation of the substantial question of
law, if a fair or proper opportunity is not afforded to the
opposite side, it will amount to denial of natural justice.
The above parameters within which the High Court has
exercise its jurisdiction under
Section 100
C.P.C should
always be borne in mind. We are sorry to state that the
above aspect are seldom borne in mind in may case and
second appeals are entertained and/or disposed of
without conforming to the above discipline.
The guidelines to determine as to what is a "substantial
question of law" within the meaning of
Section 100
C.P.C., have been laid down by this Court in a
Constitution Bench decision in
Sir Chunilal V. Mehta
and
sons
Ltd. Vs. Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co.
Ltd.
, [AIR 1962 SC 1314 = (1962) Supp. (3) SCR 549].
There is also a later decision of this Court in
Mahindra
and Mahindra Ltd Vs. The Union of India and another
.
(AIR 1979 SC 798). It is unnecessary to deal at length
with that aspect any further.
8.     In the light of the legal position stated above we are
of the view that the High Court acted illegally and in
excess of jurisdiction in entertaining the new plea, as it
did, and consequently in allowing the Second Appeal.
Even according to the High Court the point urged on
behalf of the appellant was only a "legal plea" thought no
specific plea was taken or no precise issue were framed
in that behalf. The High Court failed to bear in mind that
it is not every question of law that could be permitted to
be raised in second appeal. The parameters within which
a new legal plea could be permitted to be raised are
specifically stated in sub-section (5) of
Section 100
C.P.C
Under the proviso, the Court should be "satisfied" that
the case involves a "substantial question of law" and not
mere "question of law". The reason for permitted the
substantial question of law to be raised, should be
"recorded" by the Court. It is implicit therefrom, that on
compliance of the above, the opposite party should be
afforded a fair or properly opportunity to meet the same.
It is not any legal plea that could be raised at the stage of
second appeal. It should be a substantial question of law.
The reasons for permitting the plea to be raised should
also be recorded. Thereafter, the opposite party should
be given a fair or proper opportunity to meet the same.
Page 13 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
In the present case, as the extracts from the judgment
      quoted hereinabove would show, the High Court has
      totally ignored the mandatory provisions of
Section 100
C.P.C. The High Court proceeded to entertain the new
      plea and rendered it decision without following the
      mandatory provision of
Section 100
C.P.C."
18.   The Supreme Court in the case of
Kondiba Dagadu
Kadam vs. Savitriben Sopan Gujar
, reported in 1999 (3)
SCC 722, has observed as under:
"After the amendment a second appeal can be filed only
      if a substantial question of law is involved in the case.
      The memorandum of appeal must precisely state the
      substantial question of law involved and the High Court is
      obliged to satisfy itself regarding the existence of such
      question. If satisfied, the High Court has to formulate the
      substantial question of law involved in the case. The
      appeal is required to be heard on the question so
      formulated. However, the respondent at the time of the
      hearing of the appeal has a right to argue that the case
      in the court did not involve any substantial question of
      law. The proviso to the Section acknowledges the powers
      of the High Court to hear the appeal on a substantial
      point of law, though not formulated by it with the object
      of ensuring that no injustice is done to the litigant where
      such question was not formulated at the time of
      admission either by mistake Or by inadvertence. "
19.   A Division Bench of the Patna High Court in the case of
Zafar Alam vs. Md. Nizam & Ors., reported in LAWS (PAT)
1986 236, has observed as under:
"7. Under the amended
Sec. 100
of the Code of Civil
      Procedure the appellant is required to state precisely the
      substantial question of law in the memorandum of appeal
      and when the High Court is satisfied that a substantial
      question of law is involved it shall formulate that
      question. Sec. 100(5) mandates that the appeal shall be
Page 14 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
heard on the question so formulated and the respondent
is called upon to show that the case does not involve
such question,. It is, therefore, manifest that at the time
of hearing the respondent is noticed only to answer the
question formulated. It is in the nature of leave and/or
limited rule granted to the appellant only with respect to
the point formulated at the time of hearing under
Order
41 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
. It is no doubt
true that the Court is left with a discretion to hear the
appeal on any other substantial question of law not
formulated after recording the reasons therefore and
when the Court is so satisfied and not ordinarily. This
power, therefore, is required to be exercised cautiously.
8. This provision has come to be enacted by amendment
of 1976. There is a salutary purpose for the amendment
of Sec. 100 as would be apparent from the 14th Report of
the Law Commission (Law Commission's 14th Report;
Volume I, page 190). It recommended that the Judge
admitting the second appeal should state the points of
law which arise for consideration and enabling the High
Court to admit second appeal on specified points only.
The Shah Committee in 1972 reiterated the 14th Report
of the Law Commission and observed that there should
be stricter and better scrutiny of second appeal subject
to special leave instead of an absolute right of appeal.
The Law Commission in its 54th Report (pages 17 and 87)
reviewed the position and recommended that the right of
second appeal should be confined to cases where a
question of law is involved and such a question is a
substantial one. It was only the Joint Committee of the
Parliament which felt that the discretion of the Court to
hear the appeal on any other substantial question of law,
not formulated by it, should not be taken away, so that
justice may be cone between the parties (See the
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 1.4.1976, Part II,
Sec. 2
, pages 804 -810.
9. Looking to the history and object of the present
amendment as well as from 'he words of
Sec. 100(5)
of
the Code of Civil Procedure, we are of the opinion that
this Court should be very slow in reopening the whole
case at the stage of hearing and not confirming its
consideration to the substantial questions of law
formulated at the time of admission it is only in rare
cases where the substantial question of law is patent on
Page 15 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
the face of the record and grave injustice is likely to flow
      in Court's not formulating the said point, which was
      omitted to be formulated at the stage of admission,
      resort to the proviso to Sec. 100(5) could be made. The
      proviso to Sec. 100(5) carves out an exception to the
      main provision and in our opinion for exceptional cases
      indicated above."
20.   I may also refer to and rely upon a decision of the
Gauhati High Court in the case of
Maheshpur Tea &
Industries        Pvt. Ltd. vs. Mantala Tea Co. Ltd. & Ors.
,
reported in AIR 2001 Gauhati 152. A.K. Patnaik, J. (as his
Lordship then was), has observed in para-10 as under:-
"10. After the said orders were passed on 30.8.1999 and
      1.9.1999 framing the seven substantial questions of law,
      opportunity was given to the appellant in the three
      appeals as well as the respondents in the said appeals to
      make their submissions on each of the aforesaid
      substantial question of law framed by the Court by the
      orders dated 3.8.1999 and 1.9.1999. Opportunity was
      also given to the respondent No. 1 to argue that no such
      substantial question of law as formulated by the Court by
      the orders dated 30.8.1999 arose for decision in the
      appeals. After about eleven months the substantial
      questions of law were formulated on 30.8.1999 and
      1.9.1999, on 31.7.2000, 1.8.2000, 2.8.2000 and
      3.8.2000, the learned counsel for the appellants and the
      respondents including the learned counsel for the
      respondent No. 1 in the appeals were heard at length on
      each of the aforesaid seven substantial questions of law
      framed by the Court on 30.8.1999 and 1.9.1999 and the
      hearing was concluded on 3.8.2000. Thus, none of the
      parties including the respondent No. 1 has suffered any
      prejudice whatsoever by formulation of the substantial
      questions of law by the Court by orders dated 30.8.1999
      and 1.9.1999. For the aforesaid reasons I am unable to
      accept the contention of Mr. Chakravorty, learned
      counsel for the respondent No. 1, that the Second
      Appeals should be dismissed in limine on the ground that
      none of the aforesaid seven substantial questions of law
      were formulated at the time of admission of the
Page 16 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
appeals."
21.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, I frame the following
additional substantial question of law:
"(A) Whether the courts below committed an error in rejecting
the plaint on the ground that as the suit has been instituted
under the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
, the prior
permission of the court was necessary and as no permission
was obtained, the suit was liable to be dismissed by rejecting
the plaint?"
22.   I shall now proceed to deal with this appeal on merits.
23.   As this litigation has something to do with the rejection of
the plaint, I must give a fair idea as regards the suit preferred
by the plaintiffs. I deem fit to incorporate the entire plaint
along with the prayer clause. The true English translation of
the original plaint is as under:
"1) The plaintiffs are the citizens of independent India
      and are protected by the Constitution Articles
      Nos.14,16,19, the plaintiffs are awakened citizens of
      Bhavnagar City. We carry out social and constructive
      activities in public interests and we are the tax payers in
      Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation. The suit dispute is also
      affecting the plaintiffs and is also touching the public
      interest and their activities are contrary to the public
      interest thus the present suit is also having the
      ingredients
of CPC
Order (1) Rule (8).
2)   The plaintiffs are living in Bhavnagar City at their
      ownership
      property shown in the cause title of the plaint, and in the
      said place constructed building for residential purpose
Page 17 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
and living in it with family, and certain plots are open.
The plaintiffs have purchased the said property by way of
sale deed, details of the same are as here below.
The plaintiff No. 1 has purchased this property plot No.27
by way of registered sale deed No.947 on 17/04/2010
from Mr. Vamanbhai Ratilal Patel, who had purchased
this plot from Mrs. Kumudinikumari @ Kumudkumari
Jyotindrasingh Jadeja.
The plaintiff No. 2 has purchased the plot No. 32 by way
of registered sale deed No.3655 on 16/9/ 2013 from Mr.
Anand Shantilal Khakkhar who had purchased this plot
from     Mrs.     Kumudinikumari     @      Kumudkumari
Jyotindrasingh Jadeja.
The plaintiff No. 3 had purchased plot No. 33 by way of
registered sale deed No. 1667 on 27/4/2007 from Mrs.
Kumudinikumari @ Kumudkumari Jyotindrasingh J Jadeja.
The plaintiff No. 4 has purchased the plot Nos. 34-35 on
13/12/2005 from had purchased this plot from Mrs.
Kumudmikumari @ Kumudkumari Jyotindrasingh Jadeja.
3)    The defendant No. (1) in this matter has purchased
Open vacant plot No.36 and he had purchased this plot
from     Mrs.     Kumudinikumari         @     Kumudkumari
Jyotindrasingh Jadeja. And his said plot is situated besides
the plots of the plaintiffs. With this copy of the sale deed
of plot No. 36 purchased by the defendant No. 1 is
produced          below           Mark         4/2/6.
4)    The plots purchased by the plaintiffs these
properties-plots and the plot purchased by the defendant
No. 1 original property, was of the original Bhavnagar
State of that time, it was the property of the ownership of
the Bhavnagar State, and at that time the then ruler of
the Bhavnagar State Raol Mr. Krishnakumarsinghji, his
younger brother Dhramkumarsinghji Bhavsinghji Gohil
had on 25/10/1941 vide document No. 3 S.1998
bequeathed for construction of residential house, and the
grantee Dharamkumarsinghji Bhavsinghji Gohil had
constructed on his land residential house during the
period of 1946 and also put up other constructions and
with the passage of time the said land and residential
bungalow were acquired by Mrs. Kumudinikumari@
Page 18 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
Kumudkumari Jyotindrasingh Jadeja and she had become
the absolute and independent owner. She has been
making use of the said property land and building for
residential purposes. In these facts as per the details
stated in the above paragraph No. 3 are clearly stated on
the page No. 6 of the sale deed of the defendant No. 1.
5)    The properties plots purchased by the defendant
No. 1 including the plot property the original land
property was used for residential use successively, with
such facts and documentary evidences the plaintiffs had
made an application on. 5/5/15 before the Collector,
Bhavnagar in the form of objections. A copy of the same
and the copies of annexures with it are produced in the
said matter below Mark 4/ 2-1 to 4/2-8. All the facts
stated in the said objection application,details and
representation is requested to be considered a part of
this suit.
In the matter of the said objection application the
Collector has taken into consideration the representation
made by the applicant of that application that is the
defendant No. (1) in this matter, all the facts stated in
the application, details and the representations made by
us and the documentary evidences produced and
granted stay "in the case of the objection application not
to put up any construction on the plot till the next date of
hearing' such stay orders were granted, also on the date
of hearing thereafter the stay orders were modified that
till the time the change of purpose permission is not
received till then not to put up any construction, and the
stay was ordered to be extended till then.
6) The plaintiffs, are having their residential houses in the
neighbourhood of the defendant No. 1 and in the sale
deed of the plot holders adjacent the original land owner
has stated the following clear facts, in the form of
condition, binding to the vendor and vendee, accordingly
it is stated. 'the vendee will be entitled to use for
residential purpose, or cause to use, and to get the
construction plans approved from the Bhavnagar
Municipal Corporation and to put up residential
construction, or cause to put up, and to live in it, and to
sell the same, mortgage, bequeath. the vendee will be
entitled.'
Page 19 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
'the vendor and the confirming party further gives
assurance that, in the ownership , occupation, use by the
vendee and their legal heirs, etc. the vendor or the
confirming party and others will not cause any
obstructions, hindrance and interference or cause to
interfere, in spite of this if anyone does then any and
every kind of damages or costs caused to the vendee will
be paid with consideration and in this regard the vendor
and all the confirming parties and our heirs and legal
representatives      etc.      will   be    bound."
7) Thus, it is the humble belief of the plaintiffs that, this
written assurance is given, thus the defendant No. (1) in
this matter has taken action for putting up commercial
nature of construction, therefore the peace and harmony
of the plaintiffs, and there is obstruction in the peaceful
occupation of the plaintiffs with their families in this
property, and also there is adverse effects to our civil
rights. Also, in these facts the plaintiffs would be
constrained to enter into litigations with the vendors of
our land and assurance givers due to the act of the
defendants such circumstances have arisen due to the
defendants in this matter, and are continued at present.
If such acts of the defendant are not controlled then, the
damages caused to the plaintiffs due to the same, and
for recovering as per the assurance given also, we will be
constrained to take legal action against the original
vendors. That is there would be multiplicity of the
proceedings.
8)     All the above conditions, which are given in the
form of assurance, to all the plot holder plaintiffs in the
sale deed, the same facts, word to word are clearly
stated on the page No. 17 in the sale deed of the
defendant No. 1 plot No. 36 holder putting up commercial
construction unlawfully. In these facts on the suit
premises, the defendant No.(1) has himself on the plot
purchased, acquired what nature of rights, titles, and
interests, in this regard he is well conversant, in spite of
this when he does not have any rights more than the
residential rights, titles and interests then also, he has
violated the conditions of the sale deed made, and taken
the law in his hands, and grabbed the rights of the
neighbours, legally conveyed by the original land owners/
vendors and violated the civil rights and particularly in
the residential area where there is a residential society,
Page 20 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
where against the fundamental rights to live without any
kinds of nuisance, annoyances, disturbance and
independently and jointly, for causing adverse effects
such construction works are being done caused to be
done, for preventing such activities with immediate effect
the plaintiffs have publicly and jointly, made objection
application/representation     before    the    Bhavnagar
Municipal Corporation and District Collector. Accordingly,
such representation is made before you in the matter of
this   suit    in   particular    and     state   that,

It is the humble belief of the plaintiffs that, as per the
established principles of law, 'A person cannot pass on
any right, title or interest better than what he possesses.
Similarly, vice versa, a person cannot acquire any right,
title or interest better than or more than what is
conveyed                  to              him.'
9) Thus as per the above stated details the defendant No.
(1) has voluntarily violated the mutual understanding,
applicable conditions, by his own will, the same are
violated, and on the residential plot he does not have any
rights to put up any commercial, industrial or any other
purpose construction or cause to construct then also the
misdeed of construction of commercial nature of
construction on the said plot is continued, therefore the
need for filing this suit has arisen.
10) The plaintiffs have stated in particular that, the
defendant No.(1) in this matter had produced the lay-out
plans for putting up commercial nature of construction
before the Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation. The said
lay-out plans were approved by the Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation vide the approval No.48 dated 9/3/15, and
issued the Development Permission letter Raja Chitthi
No. 66, which is produced in this matter below Mark
4/2/7.
11) In the said map or starting the construction
conditions are recorded. In which as per the condition No.
1 to 3, are printed by rubber stamp, whereas the
condition No. 4 is written with hands, which is as here
below.
'Before obtaining the completion of the construction the
NOC for change of purpose will have to be obtained from
Page 21 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                CAV JUDGMENT
the             Collectorate          and   produced.'

Also on the said lay out plans rubber stamp is impressed
and below the same it is written in hands that, 'this lay
out plan is approved subject to the conditions mentioned
in the Town Development Department Raja Chitthi No. 66
dated 9/3/15.'

Also on the bottom of the lay out plans rubber stamp is
impressed and written in handwriting that, 'Comm. K.M.
No. 280 dated 2/3/15' said lay-out plans are produced
below Mark 4/2/8 in this matter.
12) With these lay-out plans in the development letter/
Raja Chitthi No. 66 also details as stated in the above
paragraph No. (11) are stated. But on the rear of the said
document there are printed conditions. Of these
conditions on taking into consideration the Condition No.
(14) then it reads as here below,

'As per all the other Acts and Rules all the other
permissions required to be taken or certificates will have
to be obtained from the concerned Competent Officer
only thereafter the construction work will have to be
started. On such condition this permission is granted."
13) In the above facts as stated in the paragraph Nos.
(11) and (12), the Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation has
granted the development permission letter that is the
Raja Chitthi No. 66 on 9/3/15. It is clear that there are
absolutely contrary conditions in the same.
14) In view of the Act and Rules, the printed condition
No.14 on the reverse side page is legal and rational,
because, although the development permission is
obtained then also, it is not encouraging the illegal
construction. Because as per the said condition before
commencing the construction all permissions have to be
obtained.
15) Whereas contrary to the above condition, on the
construction plans in very minute handwritings the
condition No. 4 is written. Also, on the Development
Permission letter main page, in very small handwritings
condition No. 4 is written. Accordingly the person getting
the   development      permissions,    has   started   the
Page 22 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
construction without obtaining the necessary permissions
and certificates from the competent authority illegally
starts the construction work, and completes the same,
and sells the said constructions, and unauthorizedly
earns thick profits, and disappears, does not obtain the
change of purpose permission, does not pay the premium
to the State Government, and in this manner causes
financial losses to the government, does not obtain the
completion certificate, that is there is no assessment of
the house tax, therefore the Municipal Corporation would
suffer house tax loss, it is encouraging such criminal act,
thus the defendant No. 1 is given this condition No. 4
facility for committing such chain of criminal acts. The
conditions are to restrict applicant, whereas in this case
the conditions are bestowed in the form of gift/ prize and
for giving advantage.
16) It is also the belief of the plaintiffs that, the above
condition No. 4 is made consciously and with mala tide
intentions, for putting up criminal illegal construction, for
some unknown public purposes, given to certain definite
persons. And the honourable court can assume the
intentions behind the same.
17) On the above issue we had made an application on
5/5/15 to the Bhavnagar Collector making inquiry that if
the owner of the Plot No. 36 had made any
representation regarding change of purpose, then in this
regard my client had made anticipatory objection
application, which is produced in this matter below Mark
4/2. It is requested to take into consideration the
representation made and the annexures with the said
application.
18) In the matter of the said objection application, the
City Mamlatdar has vide his letter dated 12/6/15 on the
page No.94 stated in the paragraph No. 6 that, 'the Raja
Chitthi No.66 issued by the Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation dated 9/3/15 in which there are two
absolutely contrary conditions seen. In fact before the
plot holder commences the construction the NOC has to
be obtained from the Collectorate and only thereafter the
construction permission has to be granted. Thus, due to
the contrary conditions in the Raja Chitthi issued by the
Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation the legal issues have
arisen.'
Page 23 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                            CAV JUDGMENT
19) Thus in the above facts the Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation has without obtaining the change of purpose
permission from the Collector the lay-out plans are
approved. And due to this reason there is no action taken
by the concerned persons for obtaining permission for
the change in purpose. And the government is also
suffering damage of very huge premium. And thereafter
also by putting up the illegal construction there is no
entry made in the government records therefore also
there is huge loss of land revenue caused to the
government. Thus, it is requested to direct the Municipal
Corporation to approve the lay-out plans only after the
change in purpose permission is granted. Also, in this
case also it is requested to pass appropriate orders. With
this the documents page Nos. 1 to 273 are enclosed and
forwarded. This is for your kind information. The said
letter is produced in this matter below Mark 4/3.
20) In this matter the owner of the plot No. 36 has made
his statement before the Circle Officer on 12/6/15.
Wherein he has stated that, 'We will not breach any of
the Raja Chitthi conditions by the Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation. This plot No. 36 is residential purpose plot,
and therefore for making change of purpose to
commercial we have made application as per the Land
Revenue Code to the Collector, Bhavnagar Which is
pending consideration at present. The Circle Officer has
drawn the pancha kyas before the panchas. In which it is
noted that, 'and at present for change of purpose of this
residential plot to commercial plot for obtaining
necessary permission the proceedings are at present
pending before the Collector. On inspecting the site at
present there is no construction work going on.' On
making inquiry Mr. Akshaybhai Thakkar has stated that,
after making the said statement there is strike down, and
below the same '[after obtaining the necessary
permission from the Collector we will start the
commercial construction]' whether the said struck out
statement is recorded later on or 'at present for the past
three days the construction work is stopped.' The said
pancha rojkam copy is produced below Mark 4/4.
21) In the said matter City Mamlatdar has addressed a
letter to the Bhavnagar Deputy Collector on 30/7/15. In
the last paragraph of the said letter he has stated that,
Page 24 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
'thus, in the above facts and on the basis of the facts
produced on the subject plot No. 36 for putting up
commercial construction there is breach of condition.
This is for your kind information.' The copy of said letter
is produced below Mark 4/5.
22) In the said matter the Collectorate, Bhavnagar
Municipal Corporation has written a letter on 13/5/15. A
copy of the same is produced below Mark 4/6.
In the said latter the Municipal Commissioner has stated
that, 'with regard to the Bhavnagar city Victoria Park
Main Road near the water tank proposed Dilharbag
Society plot No. 36 having Ward No. 7, City Survey No.
3024 [paiki) representation is made for not granting the
commercial construction permission. A copy of the same
is enclosed herewith. As per these details you are
requested to take appropriate action within your
jurisdiction.'
23) From the above letter it is evident that, without
obtaining the change of purpose permission from the
office of the Collector the development permission that is
granted by the Municipal Corporation the said
permission, by the development permission letter
condition No. 5, 11 and 14 are violated and these facts
came to the notice of the Collector, thus, at the relevant
time, a letter was addressed to the Commissioner,
Municipal Corporation in spite of this the directions
issued in the said letter are overlooked and there is no
procedure as per the rules followed by the Commissioner,
and has committed contempt of the letter by the
Collector.
24) All the above letters were produced by the plaintiffs
from time to time before the Municipal Commissioner.
The objection application which the plaintiffs have made
on 5 5/15 before the Collector, the same objection
application   copy     was    given    to  the   Municipal
Commissioner, Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation on
8/5/15, the receipt in this regard is produced below Mark
4/7 in this matter.
25) With regard to the said objection application, the
Municipal Commissioner, Municipal Corporation was also
appraised about the civil rights of the other plot holders
Page 25 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
in the said society, and the conditions- undertakings on
which the other plot holder were allotted the plots in the
said Dilharbag Society, that is the civil rights that are
acquired by the plot holders through the original vendors.
26) A copy of the letter dated 12/5/15 addressed by the
plaintiffs to the Municipal Commissioner is produced
herewith below Mark 4/8. With regard to the said letter
for halting the construction works on the said plot No. 36
and in its place to maintain status quo qua the suit
premises, for granting interim/permanent stay, not to put
up construction, for passing such orders, the defendant
No. 2 in this matter had made application to the
Municipal Commissioner, in spite of this, there is no
action taken by him in the interest of justice and the
defendant No. 1 is assisted contrary to the interest of
Justice.
27) In this mater the letter written by my client on
24/6/15 to the Municipal Commissioner is produced in
this matter below Mark 4/9. In this regard we had
produced the issue of the said plot No. 36, and
representation made on 12/5/15, made particular
representation, and the copy of the opinion by the City
Mamlatdar       was   produced,    and     requested     the
Commissioner to take due action in the interest of justice,
in spite of this he has not taken any action in the interest
of justice and allowed the commercial construction to be
put up on criminally and illegally on the suit premises,
and has remained silent on this issue.
28) Thus, in all these facts, in the facts stated in all the
above paragraphs, circumstances and in support of the
same evidences produced may be taken into
consideration, and the owner of the plot No. 36 that is
the defendant No. 1 has acted criminally contrary to the
public interest and started unauthorized construction and
for such act against the public interest the defendant No.
2 has abetted, and planned complications, and given
wide road to the defendant No. 1 for putting up such
criminal and unlawful construction, and made it
convenient for him and provided him the facilities.
29) In the said matter the Deputy Collector, Bhavnagar
has on 24/8/15 addressed a letter to the Collectorate,
Non    Agriculture   unit   vide  its   outward    No.
Page 26 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
Jamin/Vashi/5899/15. 1n the said letter the following
facts / opinion is given. 'the details as per which the
applicant has got the lay-out plans for the commercial
purposes approved and started the construction works.
But as per the conditions of the approval and as per the
provisions of the Land Revenue Code the applicant has
started the commercial construction at site without
obtaining the change or purpose conditions, it appears to
be necessary to stop it. Thus, the applicant has started
the construction without any change in purpose therefore
it is requested to take action for the breach of conditions.
With this the original documents in this matter produced
by the Mamlatder, Bhavnagar are enclosed.' The said
letter is produced below Mark 4/ 10.
30) Taking into consideration the facts stated in the
above paragraphs, circumstances and the evidences
produced herewith are taken into consideration then the
defendant No. (1) has started the criminal unauthorized
construction against the public interest, and such
contrary to the public interest construction is abetted by
the defendant no.2 and has used words in complicated
way and given a wide road to the defendant No.1 in
commission of this criminal unlawful act, and made it
convenient for him and given him facilities. Also, the
defendant No.1 is putting up commercial construction on
the residential plot No. 36, and in the neighbouring of
this plot No. 36 the residential plots of the plaintiff Nos. 1
to 4 plot Nos. 27 to 35 are situated.
In the above facts the defendant No. 1 in this matter has
also violated the condition No. 11 printed on the reverse
of the said development permission. The said condition
No.11 is as here below.
The construction work will have to be done such that
there is no damage of any legal rights, interests of
anyone.' Also defendant No. 2 is a public institution, and
the condition No. 4 that is inscribed clearly appears to be
fraudulent, therefore we are required to bring this suit.
31) in view of all the above facts and circumstances,
facts of the defendant No. (1) sale deed page No. 17, and
etc., all above facts and circumstances taken into
consideration, and taking into consideration the
evidences produced, it is the respectful request by the
Page 27 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
plaintiffs that, in this matter the so called development
permission letter Raja Chitthi, contrary to the principles
of natural justice, and contrary to the rules and
regulations by the government, and contrary to the other
prevailing laws, contrary to the standing orders,
improper, unlawful, and illegal, favouritism, partial and is
unfair practice, and unfair equity is followed, and in these
facts till the final decision it is requested to cancel the
development permission Raja Chitthi, and to pass such
declaration in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendants, and for obtaining mandatory stay orders this
suit is filed.
32) As per the above details although the proceedings
followed in the office of the Collector are appraised to the
Municipal Commissioner then also, and although the
necessary correspondences are on their records,
evidences etc. are produced then also, although it is his
pious duty to cancel this scam development permission
letter and lay-out plans then also, instead of become
active in the interest of justice, take due care, and take
trouble instead of this on 13/8/15 by the orders of the
Municipal Commissioner the Town Development Officer
has informed that all our representations cannot be taken
into consideration, this is stated, and observed that no
action is required to be taken, and by such act put their
stamp on the criminal, unauthorized development
permission letter by corrupt ways, and instead of taking
action for the corrupt practices by their department, and
instead of cancelling the permission letter with
immediate effect, informed the applicants to make
representation before appropriate authority regarding
this corrupt development permission letter, and by such
act our valuable time and funds would be wasted and in
this manner the person putting up unauthorized
construction would get enough time to complete his
construction, such type of action is taken and is
continued at present, and therefore our application and
representation is ordered to be filed and thus the
collusion of the government office with the person
making illegal construction is clearly proved, in this
manner also the cause for filing this suit has arisen. The
said    letter  is    produced     below    Mark    4/11.
33) The defendant No. 1 has got the illegal, unlawful and
unauthorized construction lay-out plans approved
Page 28 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
through the defendant No. 2, and on basis of such
approval the defendant No. 1 is putting up commercial
construction in his premises, therefore due to this reason
the plaintiffs, who have their residences in this area,
there would be adverse effect on their lives, and there is
unnecessary nuisance and annoyance created. Also the
defendant No. 2 has imposed basic conditions, contrary
to the same and in gross violation of the same no
conditional construction plans or Raja Chitthi for the
same can be granted by the defendant No. (2), in spite of
this such action is taken. Albeit, all such proceedings by
the defendant No. 2 are unlawful, illegal, contrary to the
rules and regulations, and with mala fide, partial and
contrary to the Constitution and principles of natural
justice, and without any jurisdiction, violative of the
rights of the plaintiffs to live peacefully, with political
motivation, ex parte, nullity and void. The defendant
No.1 who is very rich and having political influences and
considered a 'big head', and having acquaintances in the
government offices and etc. they have made use of all
these influences in their favour, and by such act violated
the mandatory provisions of the BPMC Act, Land Revenue
Code and other prevailing laws, and in this manner the
plans are approved and obtained the Raja Chitthi. Due to
all these facts the personal rights, interests and powers
of the plaintiffs are damaged, and there is adverse effect
on the same.
34) The plaintiffs came to know about the above situation
so the plaintiffs have made their representation before
the defendant No. 2 and before the authority that has to
grant the permission for change in purpose, before all
these authorities on basis of the Constitutional rights
bestowed upon us and below the Right to information Act
at different stages the defendant No. 2 made
representations, and whatever conditions that are
imposed at the time of giving the Raja Chitthi to the
defendant No. 1 with regard to the construction plans,
subject to such conditions if the defendant No. 1 has
made any demand for obtaining such approval then
before granting such permission request was made to
afford the plaintiffs opportunity of hearing and if any
situation contrary to the provisions of the BPMC Act, Land
Revenue Code and General Clauses Act and due to this
reason if these persons get encouragement and due to
this reason in the surrounding areas citizens suffer
Page 29 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                CAV JUDGMENT
nuisance, annoyance and any physical and mental
harassment then no such permission can be granted to
the defendant No. 2. Therefore in this regard whatever
construction plans are approved and Raja Chitthi is given
then subject to the condition therein for change of
purpose if any such permission is sought by the
defendant No. 1 then without hearing the plaintiffs it
cannot be granted. Inspite of this in view of the
representation made by the plaintiffs separately and to
which the reply is also given, in view of the said facts it is
a clear fact that, when the defendant No.2 has in
violation of the mandatory provisions of law and
particularly by giving any wrong conditional approval and
on the basis of the same the concerned authority can
also not take any decision on such application for change
of purpose without hearing the plaintiffs. Therefore
whatever permission is granted is unlawful, illegal,
contrary to the rules and regulations, and on the basis of
the same non agriculture/ULC/ lay out plans orders
conditions are violated in such manner there cannot be
any permissions granted. In the said facts the defendant
No. 1 has violated the condition No. (5) printed on the
reverse of the permission letter. The said condition No. 5
is as here below.
'With regard to the said land the conditions on which
non-agriculture use orders and lay-out plans approval is
granted of these if there is breach of any condition then
the permission will be considered cancelled."
Thus, the approved construction plans by the defendant
No. 2 and the Raja Chitthi issued, all these transactions
are ab initio nullity, illegal, unlawful, contrary to the rules
and regulations, without any jurisdiction, and contrary to
the Constitution and principles of natural justice, with
malalide intentions, partial and for giving benefits to a
deiinite person, nullity and void for obtaining such
declaration against the defendant No.(1) and defendant
No. (2), and for cancellation of the Raja Chitthi issued by
the defendant No. (2) and before obtaining the change or
purpose conditions for cancellation of the approved plans
and Raja Chitthi and for obtaining mandatory orders and
to restrain the defendant No. 1 for putting up any kind of
construction on the basis of the Raja Chitthi issued by the
defendant No. 2, and on the plot No. 36 of the ownership
of the defendant No. 1 no kind of commercial purpose
Page 30 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
construction be put up on basis of the illegal plans, or
take on hand any such proceedings, for obtaining such
permanent injunction we are constrained to file the
present suit.
35) The cause for filing this suit is that the defendant No.
(1) has got the lay-out plans approved conditionally
illegally from the defendant No.(2) without making any
change in purpose and obtained the Raja Chitthi which is
issued without obtaining the approval for the change in
purpose by the competent authority. On the basis of the
same since a few days on the said place illegal
excavations and etc. materials, labour and the materials
in this regard are brought on site and we personally met
them and tried to stop them but they did not listen, and
for preventing the unlawful activities contrary to law and
in the meanwhile the defendant No. 1 should not take on
hand any further particular activities, in this manner it
has arisen and continued at present.
36) Thus, as per all the facts stated in the above
paragraphs the plaintiffs have the cause arisen for filing
the suit before this honourable court.
37) For hearing and adjudicating this suit and for taking
decision this court has the jurisdiction.
38) This suit is filed for declaration, mandatory orders
and permanent injunction, therefore the suit is valued at
Rs. 600/and four fees fixed stamp of Rs. 400/ is used, and
the due process fees is paid.
39) The names and addresses of the parties shown above
are true and correct. The memo of address, copies to be
supplied to the defendants, and list of documentary
evidences etc. are produced separately.
Therefore the plaintiffs have filed this suit and prayed for
relief that,
(a) Be pleased to hold that the decision by the defendant
No.2 of approving the plans conditionally placed by the
defendant No. 1 and in reference to the same the Raja
Chitthi issued and the defendant No. 1 has not obtained
the permission from the Collector, Bhavnagar for change
in purpose, but when the mala fide intentions of the
Page 31 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
defendants were revealed then, they have made
application, and on the basis of the same in a manner
that the conditions of the original non agriculture/ULC/
Lay-out plan are breached and the conditions in the sale
deed are also breached, in such manner the permission
granted and the lay-out plans approved by the defendant
No.2 and the Raja Chitthi issued and as per the
undertaking given in the sale deed that the suit plot is
sold only for residential purposes, such condition is
breached and the commercial nature of construction is
being put up, and the Raja Chitthi condition Nos. (5),
(11), and (14) are violated, and basically all the
transactions are nullity, unlawful, illegal, contrary to the
rules and regulations, and contrary to the Constitution
and principles of natural justice, with mala fide and
partial, without any reasons, necessity or jurisdiction or
authority, for giving benefit to definite persons and
contrary to the conditions and is fraudulent and nullity,
as established from the rulings by the honourable
Supreme Court and honourable High Court, and any
development permission granted encouraging the wrong
doers and contrary to the public interest and contrary to
the principles of natural justice, such development
permission letter/ Raja Chitthi [approval] is void ab initio,
be pleased to make such declaration, and grant such
permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiffs and
against the defendants.
(b) The defendant No. 2 is bound to withdraw the lay out
plans approved for commercial purposes of the
defendant No. 1 and to withdraw the permission for
construction, therefore be pleased to pass mandamus to
implement accordingly at the earliest.
(c) Be pleased to restrain the defendant from putting up
any commercial purposes construction on the Plot No.36
as per the non agriculture/ULC/ lay out plans orders and
as per the sale deed, and therefore on the basis of the
approved lay-out plans and the Raja Chitthi issued by the
defendant No. 2 or in any other manner there cannot be
any commercial purposes construction done, nor caused
to be constructed, and also on the basis of the said
approved layout plans not sell to anyone else nor obtain
any loan from any bank and financial institution nor
obtain any financial facilities, be pleased to grant such
permanent injunction.
Page 32 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                    CAV JUDGMENT
(d) Be pleased to grant any other and further relief in the
      facts of this case, and be pleased to award the costs of
      this suit from the defendants."
24.   Thus, it appears from the pleadings in the plaint and the
materials on record that the plaintiffs are aggrieved by the act
of the original defendant No.1 in putting up the construction in
the residential area. The construction which has been put up
by the defendant No.1 is commercial in nature, whereas it is
the case of the plaintiffs that the entire area is residential and
the   Bhavnagar       Municipal    Corporation       could       not       have
sanctioned the plans and granted              the permission to put up
such construction. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the action
of the Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation is tainted with
malafides and all the permissions granted by the Corporation
are illegal and void ab-initio. This is the sum and substance of
the case put up by the plaintiffs.
25.   It appears that even before the written statements came
to be filed by the defendants, the defendant No.1 preferred the
application,Exh.11, under Order 7 Rule 11(d)
of the CPC
and
prayed for rejection of the plaint.           The application, Exh.11,
reads thus:
"(1) The suit by the plaintiffs is for declaration and
      injunction. The suit is relating to immovable property.
The suit property is of the ownership, occupation and use
      of the defendant No. 1. This is an undisputed fact. The
      defendant No.1 has got the lay-out plans for the said
      property approved and wants to put up residential and
      commercial construction. Therefore the lay-out plans
      were presented before the defendant No. 2, and thus the
      lay-out plans were approved conditionally. From amongst
      the conditions of approval the condition No. 4 is as here
      below. 'Before obtaining the completion of the
Page 33 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
construction the NOC from the office of the Collector
      regarding the change in purpose will have to be
      obtained.' The above condition has to be complied with
      till the construction works are completed. As stated by
      the plaintiffs in this matter they are the plot holders of
      the plots in their neighbourhood, and as averred by them
      by putting up commercial construction on the suit
      property nuisance would be created. Therefore they had
      made an application to the Collector, Bhavnagar, and
      challenged the permission granted by the defendant No.
2. And in the present suit also similar relief is prayed for.
(2) The plaintiffs have made applications against us
      before the Collector and taken action and the Collector
      has initiated the proceedings as per the said condition
      No.4, the said orders are at present pending.
(3) In the above circumstances there is no agreement
      with the plaintiffs. They have come only with the
      pleadings of nuisance in the present suit, and the relief of
      the suit is also sought by them before the Collector also
      as per the BPMC Act and Land Revenue Code. Thus, when
      the plaintiffs have alternative remedy available to them
      then, and also as averred by the plaintiffs themselves the
      present suit is filed as per
the CPC
Order 1 Rule 8
      provisions, thus, these legal provisions are not fully
      complied with and the suit is filed contrary to the
      mandatory provisions. For filing the suit the permission
      from the honourable court is not obtained, and the true
      facts are suppressed. In view of all these circumstances
      this suit is prima facie not tenable and therefore this
      application is made.
(4)    It is humbly prayed that,
1) As per
the CPC
Order 7 Rule 11 (d) provisions the
      plaintiffs in the suit have alternative remedy available to
      them, and the provisions
of the CPC
are not complied
      with, therefore, it is requested to dismiss the suit with
      costs."
26.   The application, Exh.11, was adjudicated by the Civil
Judge and by an order dated 04.01.2016, the plaint came to be
rejected.     The impugned order passed by the Civil Judge,
Page 34 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
rejecting the plaint, reads thus:
"1. This application is filled by the defendant no.1 under
     order-7, rule-11 of Civil procedure code. In the
     application it is stated by the defendant no.1 that, he
     does not have any agreement with the plaintiffs herein
     regarding the suit property. Plaintiffs have filled suit with
     the pleadings regarding nuisance only. Plaintiffs have
     filed application before Collector under BPMC Act and
     Land Revenue Code regarding the same prayer. Hence
     they have already opted for the alternate remedy. More
     over defendant no.1 has stated that, plaintiffs have led
     this suit under the provisions of Order-l, rule8
of
     C.P.C
ode. but they have not taken the permission of the
     court for filling the suit which is the mandatory provision.
     Hence defendant no.1 has prayed for rejection of plaint
     under Order-7, rule-11(d)
of C.P.C
ode.
2.    Plaintiff no.1 to 4 have filed reply vide Exh.
     22,23,29,30      respectively   and    have    denied     the
     contentions of the Defendant No. 1 in this application.
     Plaintiffs have stated that, Defendant no.4 has filled this
     application with. wrong contentions. He has concealed
     the facts from the court. Plaintiffs have stated that they
     have not challenged the permission given to the
     defendant no.1 before collector but they have filled
     "Vandha Arji" i.e objection application before Collector so
     that truth can come on record. Further plaintiffs have
     stated that they have not filed the suit under Order 1.
     rule 8
of C.P.C
ode, they have filled this suit in relation to
     their civil rights. Hence there is no any specific bar to file
     this suit and has prayed to reject this application with
     cost. Plaintiff No.1 has filled detailed written arguments
     in support of his contentions vide Ex-34 other plaintiffs
     have supported the same vide Ex35 purshish.
3. Now when this application is filed under Order-7, rule-
     11
of C.P.C
ode, it is required to go through the said
     provision. It is as under.
11. Rejection of plaint.-The plaint shall be rejected in the
     following cases:
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;
Page 35 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                  CAV JUDGMENT
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the
plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct the
valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to
do so;
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued but the
plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped, and
the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the
requisite stamp-paper within a time to be fixed by the
Court, fails to do so;
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the
plaint to be barred by any law;
(e)    where it is not filed in duplicate;]
(f) where the plaintiff fails to comply with the provisions
of rule 9:] [Provided that the time fixed by the Court for
the correction of the valuation or supplying of the
requisite stamp-paper shall not be extended unless the
Court, for reasons to be recorded is satisfied that the
plaintiff was prevented by any cause of an exceptional
nature for correcting the valuation or supplying the
requisite stamp-paper, as the case may be, within the
time fixed by the Court and that refusal to extend such
time would cause grave injustice to the plaintiff.]

The Defendant No.1 has prayed for rejection of plain on
the ground of point (d) to rule -11 of Order-7 i.e plaint is
barred by law. It is the say of the defendant that,
plaintiffs have filled this suit under Order 1, rule 8
of
C.P.C
ode. And asI per the said provision, permission of
court is mandatory before filling the suit. But plaintiffs
herein have not taken any permission before filling the
suit hence there is a breach of mandatory provision of
law. Now before discussing further on this point, it is
necessary to go through Order -1, rule-8
of C.P.C
ode. it is
as under. '
8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same
interest.--(1) Where there are numerous persons having
the same interest in one suit,
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permission
of the Court, sue or be sued, or may defend such suit, on
behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested;
Page 36 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such
persons may sue or be sued. or may defend such suit, on
behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested.
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or
direction is given under sub-rule (1), at the plaintiff's
expense, give notice of the institution of the suit to all
persons so interested, either by personal service, or,
where. by reason of the number of persons or any other
cause, such service is n0t reasonably practicable, by
public advertisement, as the Court in each case may
direct. (3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose
benefit, a suit is instituted, or defended under sub-rule
(1), may apply to the Court to be made a party to such
suit. (4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be
abandoned under sub-rule (1), and no such suit shall be
withdrawn under sub-rule (3), of rule 1 of Order XXlll, and
no agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall be
recorded in any such suit under rule 3 of that Order,
unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's expense,
notice to all persons so interested in the manner
specified in sub-rule (2). (5) Where any person suing or
defending in any such suit does not proceed with due
diligence in the suit or defence, the Court may substitute
in his place any other person having the same interest in
the suit. (6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall
be binding on all persons on whose behalf, or for whose
benefit, the suit is instituted, or defended, as the case
may be. Explanation.-For the purpose of determining
whether the persons who sue or are sued, or defend,
have the same interest in one suit, it is not necessary to
establish that such persons have the same cause of
action as the persons on whose behalf, or for whose
benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as the
case may be.]

Now looking to Order -1, rule-8 (a), permission of court
before filling such suit is mandatory. Plaintiffs in their
reply have stated that, they have not filed this suit under
Order' 1, rule-8. However in para -1 of the plaint vide Ex-
1, plaintiffs have specifically stated that dispute in this
suit is relating to the public interest and as act of
defendants is against public interest, this suit also
contains ingredients of Order -1, rule-8
of C.P.C
ode. Now
when plaintiffs have specifically stated that their suit
contains ingredients of Order -1, rule-8
of C.P.C
ode, their
Page 37 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
contention in reply to this application that they have not
filled this suit under Order-1, rule-8 is not tenable at all.
Hence it is necessary for the plaintiffs to get permission
of the court before filing the suit. In this suit, plaintiffs
have not taken permission of the court, which a
mandatory provision, before filing this suit.
4.    Here lit is also required to understand the term
'barred 'in the legal sense. According to The Concise
Oxford Thesaurus (page no. 51) the term 'bar' means
debar, prohibit, preclude, forbid, ban, exclude, keep out,
block, impede, obstruct, hinder, restrain, check, stop,
defer.
5.     Now looking to the provision in Order -1, rule-8
of
C.P.C
ode. permission of court is mandatory before filling
the suit under said provision. And as discussed earlier,
the suit filed by the plaintiff herein is under Order -1,
rule-8
of C.P.C
ode. And in absence of permission of court,
the suit of plaintiff is barred i.e prohibited as per Order-1,
rule-8(a)
of C.P.C
ode. Herein judgment of Hon'ble Apex
court in case of Bhagbat v. Gobardhan reported in AIR
1983 Ori. 50 is relevant which says that The provisions of
Rule 8 are mandatory and they have to be complied with.
A suit instituted without complying with the rule is bad
and is not maintainable. Para 9 of the said judgment says
that, "A representative suit cannot be said to have been
validly instituted unless and until the mandatory
provisions of Order-1,Rule-8 are complied with. It is only
when action is taken under Order1,Ru|e-8
of C.P.C
that
the suit is properly brought against the defendants." .
6.    Now when suit of the plaintiffs is barred by law, the
provision of Order-7, rule-11(d)
of C.P.C
ode is attracted
which says that plaint shall be rejected where the suit
appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by
any law. Hence looking to the above discussion, facts and
legal provisions, this court is of the view that plaint of the
plaintiffs deserves to be rejected under Order-7, rule-11
(d)
of C.P.C
ode. Hence following order is passed in the
interest of justice.
ORDER

Plaint of the plaintiffs is hereby ordered to be rejected
Order-7, RUle-11 (d)
of C.P.C
ode.
Page 38 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
No order as to cost.
Pronounced in open court today on 4'"January, 2016. "
27.   Being dissatisfied, the plaintiffs went in appeal before the
District Judge. The Lower Appellate Court, while dismissing the
appeal preferred by the plaintiffs, observed thus:
"23. Now, while ascertaining the other aspect that when
      the plaint is rejected under Order-7, Rule-11(d), Order-7,
      Rule-11(d)
of the CPC
provides as under :
Order-7, Rule-11(d) :
(d) Where the suit appears from the
             statement in the plaint to be barred by any
             law :
I have gone through para-5 of order below Ex.11, passed
      by the Trial Court which reads as under :
5.    Now looking to the provision in Order-1,
             rule-8
of C.P.C
ode, permission of court is
             mandatory before filing the suit under said
             provision. And as discussed earlier, the suit
             filed by the plaintiff herein is under Order-1,
             rule-8
of C.P.C
ode. And in absence of
             permission of court, the suit of plaintiff is
             barred i.e. prohibited as per Order-1, rule-8(a)
of C.P.C
ode. Herein judgment of Hon'ble Apex
             court in case of Bhagbat v. Gordhan
             reported in AIR 1983 Ori. 50 is relevant
             which says that The provisions of Rule 8 are
             mandatory and they have to be complied
             with. A suit instituted without complying with
             the rule is bad and is not maintainable. Para-9
             of the said judgment says that, "A
             representative suit cannot be said to have
             been validly instituted unless and until the
             mandatory provisions of Order-1, Rule-8 are
             complied with. It is only when action is taken
             under Order-1, Rule-8
of C.P.C
. That the suit is
Page 39 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                 CAV JUDGMENT
properly brought against the defendants."
So, the reason is stated in order below Ex.11 by the
learned 2nd Additional Civil Judge, Bhavnagar to the effect
that the suit is a representative suit and cannot be said
to have been validly instituted and, therefore, the suit is
barred by law.
24. The learned advocate for the appellants has argued
that the suit is not a representative suit because, the
respondent No.1 is making commercial construction
instead of residential construction upon plot No.36 in
collusion with the respondent No.2 and due to such
construction, the present appellants are directly affected
and all the present appellants are holding their plots
surrounding plot No.36 and, therefore, all the appellants
are aggrieved and filed the suit before the Lower Court
and as per law, the aggrieved person can also file the
suit. He has also relied upon the decision of
Hari Ram
v. Jyoti Prasad
, reported in AIR 2011 Supreme Court
952 wherein, the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed and
held as under :
20. The next plea which was raised and
       argued vehemently by the learned senior
       counsel appearing for the appellant was that
       the suit was bad for non-compliance of the
       provisions of
Order 1, Rule 8 of the CPC
. The
       said submission is also found to be without
       any    merit   as    apart   from    being   a
       representative suit, the suit was filed any an
       aggrieved person whose right to use public
       street of 10 feet width was prejudicially
       affected. Since affected person himself has
       filed a suit, therefore, the suit cannot be
       dismissed on the ground of alleged non-
compliance of the provisions of
Order 1, Rule
       8 of the CPC
."
(Para-20)
25. He has also relied upon the decision of
Kalyan
Singh v. Smt.Chhoti
, reported in AIR 1990 Supreme
Court 396(1) wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
observed and held as under :
"The     suit   could        be   instituted        by
Page 40 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                CAV JUDGMENT
representatives of the particular community,
       but that by itself was not sufficient to
       constitute the suit as a representative suit.
       For a representative suit, the Court's
       permission under O.1, R.8 is mandatory. In
       the absence of necessary material the
       conclusion one way or the other as to the are
       of the suit will not be justified."    (Para-
13)

I have gone the abovecited decisions, but the facts of
the cited cases are different than the facts on hand and
for that, I have also gone through the para-1 of the plaint.
The appellants have stated that the act and procedure of
the present respondents are against the public interest
and, therefore, the suit is also having ingredients of
Order-1, Rule-8
of CPC
. The Order-1, Rule-8
of CPC
reads
as under :
8. One person may sue or defend on
       behalf of all in same interest :
(1) Where there are numerous persons
       having the same interest in one suit, -
(a) one or more of such persons may, with
       the permission of the Court, sue or be sued,
       or may defend such sit, on behalf of, or for
       the benefit of, all persons so interested;
(b) the Court may direct that one or more
       of such persons may sue or be sued, or may
       defend such suit, on behalf of, or for the
       benefit of, all persons so interested.
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a
       permission or direction is given under sub-
rule (1), at the plaintiff's expense, give notice
       of the institution of the suit to all persons so
       interested, either by personal service, or,
       where, by reason of the number of persons or
       any other cause, such service is not
       reasonably       practicable,      by      public
       advertisement, as the Court in each case may
       direct.
(3)      Any person on whose behalf, or for
Page 41 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
whose benefit, a suit is instituted, or
       defended, under sub-rule(1), may apply to the
       Court to to made a party to such suit.
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit
       shall be abandoned under sub-rule(1), and no
       such suit shall be withdrawn under sub-
rule(3), of Rule 1 of Order XXIII, and no
       agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall
       be recorded in any such suit under Rule 3 of
       that Order, u8nless the Court has given, at
       the plaintiff's expense, notice to all persons
       so interested in the manner specified in sub-
       rule(2).
(5) Where any person suing or defending in
       any such suit does not proceed with due
       diligence in the suit or defence, the Court
       may substitute in his place any other person
       having the same interest in the suit.
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule
       shall be binding on all persons on whose
       behalf, or for whose benefit, the suit is
       instituted, or defended, as the case may be.
26. So, looking to the above provisions, it appears that
the appellants should take permission from the Court
before filing the suit. In this case, it appears that they
have not taken any permission from he Court before
filing the suit. Moreover, the appellants have not given
any private or public notice of institution of the suit to all
persons, so interested. If the public interest is involved in
the disputed matter, then they have to give notice to
each persons or they have to give public notice before
institution of the suit. But here in this case, the
appellants have not given any private or public notice to
other affected persons nor they have complied the
mandatory provisions of law. Moreover, how many plot-
holders are in that society is also not stated in the plaint.
Whether the other members of the society agree or
disagree for filing the suit is also not mentioned in the
plaint.
27.    Now, going through another point that whether the
Page 42 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
appellants have arisen any cause of action to file the
suit ? first I have gone through para-35 of the plaint
wherein, the appellants have stated that the respondent
No.1 has obtained permission for construction without
converting the land from its original and main purpose
and sanctioned grant permission with condition by the
respondent No.2 and as such, the illegal construction is
required to be restrained. Hence, a question arises that
whatever construction, made by the respondent No.1,
either for residential or commercial, is illegal and without
obtaining any permission ? My answer to the very
question is "no". The respondent No.1 has obtained legal
permission from the respondent No.2 after fully
compliance of necessary fulfillment and as such, how the
appellants can say that the respondent No.1 is making
construction illegally and when the respondent No.2 has
granted sanction for making construction after following
due procedure, how can the appellants can say that the
respondent No.2 has granted sanction with condition. If
the respondent No.2 has granted sanction to respondent
No.1 illegally or without following due procedure of law,
then the appellants should go to the higher authority and
they can challenge the said sanction. Further, out of
corporation limit of Bhavnagar district, the Collector,
Bhavnagar is having power to convert agricultural land
into non-agricultural land, but in the limit of Municipal
Corporation, Bhavnagar, the Municipal Commissioner of
Bhavnagar is having power to any land to convert from
agricultural purpose to other purpose. The disputed plot
No.36 is situated in the limit of Bhavnagar Municipal
Corporation.
28. The learned advocate for the appellants has drawn
my attention to para-17 of the sale-deed, produced by
the appellants vide Mark-14/6 and argued that the said
sale-deed is of respondent No.1. He has purchased the
plot No.36 from the original owner by virtue of said sale-
deed and specific condition mentioned in the sale-deed
that the respondent No.1 shall use the said plot only for
residential purpose and he shall make construction after
passing plan and obtaining necessary permission from
Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation, but the respondent
No.1 has started commercial construction illegally
instead of residential construction.
29.    The appellants have produced plan vide Mark-4/8
Page 43 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                            CAV JUDGMENT
and sanction vide Mark-4/7. Looking to the sanction, it
appears that the Town Development Officer, Bhavnagar
Municipal Corporation has issued sanction to the
respondent No.1 with 4 conditions. The learned advocate
for the appellants has drawn my attention to condition
No.4 and argued that before obtaining Completion
Certificate, the respondent No.1 obtained No Objection
Certificate from the Collector, Bhavnagar and produced
before him. Such type of condition is illegal and not as
per law. Such type of conditional sanction cannot be
issued, but I do not agree with the learned advocate for
the appellants because, there is no any specific provision
in Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 and in any
rule that such type of sanction cannot be issued. If the
appellants aggrieved regarding issuance of sanction,
then they should go before the higher authority and
challenge such sanction. They have not stated that the
respondent No.2 has no power to grant such sanction or
he has utilised his powers beyond limits. He has not
stated that the respondent No.2 has not followed due
procedure before granting such sanction. Therefore, in
my view, the appellants have alternative remedy to
challenge the sanction before the appropriate authority.
If they shall challenged such sanction before the higher
or appropriate authority and higher or appropriate
authority had cancelled such sanction, issued by the
respondent No.2, then in that circumstances, the
respondent would be stopped from making construction.
But at this stage, the respondent No.1 is making
construction by obtaining legal permission from the
respondent No.2 and the respondent No.2 is empowered
to issue such sanction.
30. The respondent No.1 has produced No Objection
Certificate of the Collector, Bhavnagar vide Mark-32/3. As
per condition No.4 of the sanction, issue by the
respondent No.2, the respondent No.1 has obtained such
No Objection Certificate from the Collector, Bhavnagar.
Before issuing No Objection Certificate, the Collector,
Bhavnagar has given full opportunity to the present
appellants. The present appellants have submitted their
written objections on 11-05-2015 and 19-08-2015. Before
the Collector, Bhavnagar, the said written objections
have been produced by the respondent No.1 vide Mark-
32/1 and Mark-32/2 and thenafter, the Collector,
Bhavnagar had rejected the objections, raised by the
Page 44 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
appellants and issued No Objection Certificate to the
respondent No.1. So, in my view, the respondent No.1 is
making construction legally after obtaining necessary
permission and No Objection Certificate.
31. Further, the learned advocate for the respondent
No.2 Mr.UJ Trivedi has argued that the Municipal
Commissioner has power to decide zone within the limit
of Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation. The disputed plot is
situated in the residential zone and as per the
Development Control Regulation, the residential zone
includes residential dwellings play fields, gardens,
gymnasium,       swimming-pool,       shopping/commercial
centre, restaurant, hotel, hostel, indoor hospital, nursing
home, surgical hospital, etc. All these are included in the
residential zone. So, I have gone through the
Development Control Regulations and I agree with the
learned advocate Mr.UJ Trivedi. All things are covered in
the residential zone. Here in this case, which type of
commercial construction is being made by the
respondent No.1 on plot No.36 is not mentioned by the
appellants. But all type of constructions as mentioned in
the Development Control Regulations are included in the
residential zone. Looking to the No Objection Certificate
vide Mark-32/3, the respondent No.1 is making
construction of shops and as per the Development
Control Rules, the shops are included in the residential
zone.
32. Further, learned advocate Mr.UJ Trivedi has also
argued that no cause of action has arisen against the
respondent No.2. Looking to para-35 of the plaint, I agree
with Mr.UJ Trivedi. There is no any cause of action has
arisen against the respondent No.2 because, the
respondent No.2 is having full authority to grant such
sanction. The respondent No.1 has fulfilled all the
requirements for getting such sanction and as such, the
respondent No.2 is duty bound to issue such sanction
and, therefore, the respondent No.2 has not committed
any rule or procedure before granting such sanction and
as such, when the respondent No.2 has performed his
duty as per law, the Civil Court has no any cause to take
action against the opponent No.2 and the jurisdiction of
the Civil Court is barred by section-487 of the
Bombay
Municipal Corporation Act
. In this regard, the section-487
of
The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act
,
Page 45 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
1949 reads as under :
487. Protection of persons acting under this
Act against this Act against suits :
(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Corporation or
against the Commissioner, or the Transport Manager, or
against any municipal officer or servant, in respect of any
act done or purported to be done in pursuance or
execution or intended execution of this Act or in respect
of any alleged neglect or default in the execution of this
Act:-
(a) Until he expiration of one month next after notice in
writing has been, in the case of the Corporation, left at
the chief municipal officer and, in the case of the
Commissioner of the Transport Manager or of a municipal
officer or servant delivered to him or left at his office or
place of abode, stating with reasonable particularity the
cause of action and the name and place of abode of the
intending plaintiff and of his attorney, advocate, pleader
or agent, if any for the purpose of such suit, for
(b) unless it is commended within six months next after
the accrual of the cause of action.
So, section-487 of the
Bombay Provincial Municipal
Corporations Act, 1949
itself is very clear that without
giving notice to respondent No.2, the suit is not
maintainable. Looking to the entire record, the appellants
had enough time for giving notice before filing the suit.
The respondent No.2 has issued sanction for construction
on 09-03-2015 vide Mark-4/7. The appellants have filed
their written objections before the Collector, Bhavnagar
on 11-05-2015 and 19-08-2015 vide Marks-32/1 and 32/2
respectively. The Collector, Bhavnagar has issued NOC
on 03-12-2015 vide Mark-32/3. The appellants filed the
suit before the Trial Court on 26-10-2015. So, from 09-03-
2015 to 26-10-2015, the appellants had sufficient time
for giving notice and file the suit which is clearly breach
of section-487. There is no any specific provision to waive
such notice. The learned advocate for the respondent
No.2 Mr.UJ Trivedi has relied upon the decision of
Arivandanam v. T.V.Satyapal
, reported in AIR 1977
Supreme Court 2421 wherein, the Hon'ble Apex Court
has observed and held as under :
Page 46 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                 CAV JUDGMENT
If on a meaningful - not formal - reading of the plaint it is
manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not
disclosing a clear right to sue, the trial Court should
exercise its power under O.7, R.11,
C.P.C
. Taking care to
see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. The
trial Courts should insist imperatively on examining the
party at the first hearing so that bogus litigation can be
shot down at the earliest stage. The Penal Code is also
resourceful enough to meet such men, (Ch.XI) and must
be triggered against them. (Para-5)
33. So, in view of aforementioned facts and my
discussion as well as provisions of law, the learned Trial
Judge has rightly and properly considered all these
aspects in his order, passed below Ex.11 dated 04-01-
2016. The reasons, assigned by the learned Trial Judge in
his order, are absolutely true and as per law after
evaluating all documentary evidences on record in its
true letter and spirit, produced by either party. Therefore,
in my opinion, the order, delivered by the learned Trial
Judge is legal, proper and in accordance with law and as
such, it cannot be said illegal, improper, perverse and
against the principle of established law. Hence, in view of
my aforementioned discussion and observation, I answer
issue No.1 in the negative and in reply to issue No.2,
pass the following final order in the interest of judgment :
:     ORDER         :
1. The Appeal stands dismissed.
2. The ad interim relief, granted below Ex.10, stands
      vacated.
3. No order as to costs.
4. R & P is ordered to be sent back to the Trial Court
      with a copy of this judgment.
5. Decree to be drawn accordingly.
Pronounced in the open Court today on this 5th day
       of March, 2016."
Page 47 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                     CAV JUDGMENT
28.   Submissions on behalf of the plaintiffs:-
28.1 Mr. Dipen Desai, the learned counsel appearing for the
plaintiffs vehemently submitted that the courts below had
committed a serious error in holding that the suit filed by the
plaintiffs   is not maintainable as the same is barred by the
provision of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
and
Section 487
of the
Act, 1949.       Mr. Desai would submit that there is an error
apparent on the face of the two impugned orders as neither
the plaint could have been rejected on the ground that no prior
permission       was   obtained   for    instituting    the      suit      in     a
representative capacity under the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8
of the CPC
nor on the ground of
Section 487
of the Act, 1949.
28.2 Mr. Desai submitted that the plaint can be rejected, if on
plain reading of any statement made in the plaint, the court
finds the suit to be barred by any provisions of law. According
to Mr. Desai, there is not a single statement in the entire
plaint, on the basis of which, it could be said that the suit is
barred by the provisions of law. He submitted that the defence
of the defendants could not have been made or considered for
rejecting the plaint. Mr. Desai submitted that assuming for the
moment that the suit could be said to have been preferred in a
representative capacity, the plaint could not have been
rejected for want of any permission from the Court because
the plaintiffs themselves are the affected parties. In such
circumstances, they could have preferred the suit even in their
individual capacity.
28.3 Mr. Desai submitted that the Lower Appellate Court
committed a serious error in holding that the suit is barred for
Page 48 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                            CAV JUDGMENT
want of prior notice under
Section 487
of the Act, 1949.
According to Mr. Desai, the Lower Appellate Court could be
said to have adopted a very unprecedented procedure.                      He
submitted that the issue with regard to
Section 487
of the Act,
1949 was not before the Civil Judge.           The defendant No.1,
being a private party, could not have raised the issue as
regards non-compliance of the provisions of
Section 487
of the
Act, 1949. In such circumstances, the Corporation could have
preferred a separate application for rejection of plaint on such
ground. Having not preferred any such application before the
Trial Court, the Lower Appellate Court ought not to have
permitted the Corporation to raise this issue in the course of
the hearing of the appeal preferred by the plaintiffs against
the order passed by the Civil Judge, rejecting the plaint. Mr.
Desai submitted that even, otherwise,
Section 487
of the Act,
1949 has no application to the facts of this case. Mr. Desai
submitted that the entire cause of action was the gross
illegalities committed by the Corporation in sanctioning the
plans put up by the defendant No.1 for construction of
commercial building in a residential area. He submitted that it
is the case of the plaintiffs that all the permissions granted by
the Corporation could be termed as a nullity being absolutely
illegal.       In such circumstances, according to Mr. Desai, it
cannot be said to be "an act done or purported to be done in
pursuance or execution or intended execution of this Act".
28.4 Mr. Desai submitted that whether there was non-
compliance of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
or
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 cannot be said to be the pure
questions of law requiring rejection of the plaint without
pleadings of the other side. In such circumstances
,
referred to
Page 49 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                     CAV JUDGMENT
above
, Mr. Desai prays that there being merit in this second
appeal, the same may be allowed by quashing and setting
aside both the impugned judgments passed by the Lower
Courts.     He submitted that the plaint may be revived and
restored to the original file of the concerned court.
29.     Submissions on behalf of the defendant No.1.
29.1 Mr. M.C. Bhatt, the learned counsel appearing with Mr.
Nisarg H. Vyas, submitted that no error, not to speak of any
error of law, could be said to have been committed by the
courts below in rejecting the plaint. Mr. Bhatt submitted that
once the suit is filed in a representative capacity, then prior
permission of the court under the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8
of the CPC
is mandatory. In the absence of such permission
being granted by the court, the suit could not be said to be
maintainable in law. Mr. Bhatt submitted that once the issue
of public nuisance is raised by the plaintiffs in their plaint, the
action can be maintained only in accordance with the
provisions contained in
Section 91
of the CPC. He submitted
that the suit can be filed by the Advocate General or by two or
more persons           with the    leave      of the   Court.         In such
circumstances, it was incumbent upon the plaintiffs to first
seek appropriate permission from the Court to institute the
suit.   Mr. Bhatt submitted that the words "any act done or
purported to be done in pursuance or execution or intended
execution of this Act or in respect of any alleged neglect or
default in the execution of this Act." in
Section 487
of the Act,
1949 would apply to nonfeasance as well as to misfeasance.
He would submit that the word "act" extends to illegal
omissions. Mr. Bhatt, by placing strong reliance on a decision
Page 50 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Maharashtra &
Ors. vs. Shri Chanderkant, AIR 1977 SC 148, submitted that
no distinction can be made between acts done illegally and in
bad faith and acts done bonafide in the official capacity. Mr.
Bhatt would submit that in such circumstances,
Section 487
of
the Act, 1949 is attracted when any suit is filed against the
Corporation in respect of any act done in pursuance or
execution or intended execution of the Act. Mr. Bhatt
submitted that in the absence of any definite statement in this
regard in the plaint, the suit could not have been entertained
and the plaint has been rightly rejected by the Civil Court. Mr.
Bhatt submitted that this second appeal      has been admitted
only on the limited ground in respect of notice under
section
487
of the Act, 1949. In such circumstances, the plaintiffs are
not justified in seeking leave of this Court to raise the
contentions regarding
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
. In such
circumstances, referred to above, Mr. Bhatt prays that there
being no merit in this second appeal, the same may be
dismissed.
30.   Submissions on behalf of the defendant No.2:
30.1 Mr. Munshaw, the learned counsel appearing for the
Corporation vehemently submitted that the courts below
rightly rejected the plaint as there is no statement in the plaint
with regard to issue of prior notice to the Corporation under
section 487
of the Act, 1949. Mr. Munshaw submitted that as
the plaintiffs have challenged the grant of permissions and
sanctioning of the plans, the same could be said to have been
done in execution of the Act and, therefore, a prior notice
before the execution of the suit was mandatory.                In such
Page 51 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
circumstances, Mr. Munshaw submitted that no error could be
said to have been committed by the Lower Appellate Court in
permitting the Corporation to raise this issue for the first time
in the appeal preferred by the plaintiffs.
31.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the
parties and having gone through the materials on record, the
only question that falls for my consideration is whether the
courts below committed an error in rejecting the plaint.
32.   Let me first consider the substantial question of law with
respect to
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
.
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
reads thus:
"Order 1 Rule 8:-. One person may sue or defend on
      behalf of all in same interest

         (1) Where there are numerous persons having the
         same interest in one suit,--
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the
             permission of the Court, sue or be sued, or may
             defend such suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of,
             all persons so interested;
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such
             persons may sue or be sued, or may defend such
             suit, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons
             so interested.
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission
         or direction is given under sub-rule (1), at the
         plaintiff's expense, give notice of the institution of the
         suit to all persons so interested, either by personal
         service, or, where, by reason of the number of persons
         or any other cause, such service is not reasonably
         practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court in
         each case may direct.
Page 52 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                CAV JUDGMENT
(3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit,
         a suit is instituted, or defended, under sub-rule (1),
         may apply to the Court to be made a party to such
         suit.
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be
         abandoned under sub-rule (1), and no such suit shall
         be withdrawn under sub-rule (3), of rule 1 of Order
         XXIII, and no agreement, compromise or satisfaction
         shall be recorded in any such suit under rule 3 of that
         Order, unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's
         expense, notice to all persons so interested in the
         manner specified in sub-rule (2).
(5) Where any person suing or defending in any such
         suit does not proceed with due diligence in the suit or
         defence, the Court may substitute in his place any
         other person having the same interest in the suit.
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall be
         binding on all persons on whose behalf, or for whose
         benefit, the suit is instituted, or defended, as the case
         may be.
Explanation.--For the purpose of determining whether
         the persons who sue or are sued, or defend, have the
         same interest in one suit, it is not necessary to
         establish that such persons have the same cause of
         action as the persons on whose behalf, or for whose
         benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as
         the case may be."
33.
Section 91
of the CPC reads thus:
"91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting
      the public.-(1) in the case of a public nuisance or other
      wrongful act affecting, or likely to affect, the public, a suit
      for a declaration and injunction or for such other relief as
      may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case,
      may be instituted,-
(a) by the Advocate General, or
Page 53 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
(b) with the leave of the Court, by two or more persons,
      even though no special damage has been caused to such
      persons by reason of such public nuisance or other
      wrongful act.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or
      otherwise affect any right of suit which may exist
      independently of its provision".
34.   The plaintiffs in their pleading in the plaint has made
themselves very clear that the        dispute is directly affecting
them and also the public interest and, in such circumstances,
the suit has few ingredients of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
too.
Thus, this is not a case in which the plaintiffs are absolutely
aliens and have nothing to do with the grievance redressed
against the defendants. Their case is that the area in which
they are residing is declared as a residential zone and the
defendant No.1 having purchased a plot in the very same area
could not have utilized it for any other purpose other than the
residence. The case of the plaintiffs is that the Corporation
could not have granted permission to the defendant No.1 to
put up a commercial building.
35.   I am of the view that as the plaintiffs themselves are
affected by the action of the defendants, the plaint could not
have been rejected on the ground of alleged non-compliance
of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
.
In the aforesaid
context, I may refer to and rely upon a decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of
Hari Ram vs. Jyoti Prasad &
Anr.
, AIR 2011 SC 952. I may quote the relevant observations:
"20. The next plea which was raised and argued
      vehemently by the learned senior counsel appearing for
      the appellant was that the suit was bad for non-
Page 54 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
compliance of the provisions of
Order I Rule 8 of the CPC
.
      The said submission is also found to be without any merit
      as apart from being a representative suit, the suit was
      filed by an aggrieved person whose right to use public
      street of 10 feet width was prejudicially affected. Since
      affected person himself has filed a suit, therefore, the
      suit cannot be dismissed on the ground of alleged non-
      compliance of the provisions of
Order I Rule 8 of the CPC
.
21.
In this connection, we may appropriately refer to a
      judgment of the Supreme in
Kalyan Singh, London
      Trained Cutter, Johri Bazar, Jaipur Vs. Smt. Chhoti and
      Ors.
reported in AIR 1990 SC 396. In paragraph 13 of
the
      said judgment
, this Court has held that suit could be
      instituted by representative of a particular community
      but that by itself was not sufficient to constitute the suit
      as representative suit inasmuch as for a representative
      suit, the permission of Court under
Order I Rule 8 of the
      CPC
is mandatory.
22.
In paragraph 14 of
the said judgment
, it was also held
      that any member of a community may successfully bring
      a suit to assert his right in the community property or for
      protecting such property by seeking removal of
      encroachment therefrom and that in such a suit he need
      not comply with the requirements of
Order I Rule 8 CPC
.
      It was further held in the said case that the suit against
      alleged trespass even if it was not a representative suit
      on behalf of the community could be a suit of this
      category.
23.
In that view of the matter and in the light of the
      aforesaid legal position
laid down by
this Court, we hold
      that the suit filed by the plaintiff/respondent No. 1 was
      maintainable. "
36.   So far as
section 91
of the C.P.C. is concerned, it deals
with "public nuisance" which is the combination of a civil and
criminal characters and no mention need be necessary that
under both the civil and criminal forums, the public nuisance
could be dealt with for actions and prosecutions. "Nuisance" is
an obstruction, risk or injury caused to any person and if the
same is caused in a public place it becomes "public nuisance".
Page 55 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
Such a wrongful act affecting the general public, according to
Section 91
CPC, could be challenged or testified filing a suit for
declaration and injunction and for such other reliefs by the
Advocate General or with the leave of the Court by two or
more persons though no special damage has been caused to
such persons by reason of such public nuisance.
37.   However, clause (2) of
Section 91
C.P.C. makes it clear
that this Section would not limit or otherwise affect any right of
suit which may exist independently of its provisions thereby
meaning that if any individual gets affected by such public
nuisance being caused, he or she, would have the same right
to file a suit for declaration and injunction and for mandatory
injunction and therefore since the plaintiffs are residing in the
same area or rather the society, they are personally affected
by the unlawful construction put up by the defendant No.1 of
a commercial nature. It cannot be said that no individual will
have the right to question the validity of such a wrongful act
alleged to have been committed on the part of the defendants
in view of the fact that
section 91
CPC does not create a bar on
any individual from resorting to the Court for the relief in such
matters and, therefore, this substantial question of law
regarding the capacity of the plaintiffs to maintain a suit of
this character has to be decided only against the defendants.
38.
In
Saina v. Konderi
(1984 KLT 428), it was held that a
citizen has a right to institute a suit if a person constructs a
building in violation of the
Municipalities Act
and Rules. It was
held as follows:-
"Having regard to the peculiar conditions relating to the
Page 56 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                     CAV JUDGMENT
enforcement of well conceived municipal measures, it is
      a liberal view that has to be preferred and the restricted
      view would be a definitely retrograde step. A citizen has
      a right to institute a suit with a view to ensure effective
      implementation of the Municipal Regulations, such as the
      Buildings Rules in the present case, even in the absence
      of a specific personal injury to the person suing".
39.   I may refer to and rely upon one decision of the Kerala
High Court in the case of
D.L. Walton vs. Cochin Stock
Exchange        Ltd.   &   Ors.
,      AIR      1995   Kerala      106.       P.K.
Balasubramaniyan, J. (as his Lordship then was)                     has very
succinctly explained the provisions of Order 1 Rule 8 and
section 79
of the CPC. I quote the relevant observations:
" The present suit is filed by the plaintiff claiming to be a
      recognised Stock Exchange to enforce a right in itself to
      prevent another organisation from carrying on a similar
      business within the area of its operation. The suit is filed
      on the basis that by attempting to carry on similar
      operation within the area of Ernakulam District the
      defendants are violating the provisions of the
Securities
      Contracts (Regulation) Act
and thereby interfering with
      the exclusive right of the plaintiff and that therefore the
      defendants are liable to be restrained by a decree of
      injunction from so doing. It cannot be said that the
      plaintiff is only one among the numerous persons having
      an interest in the subject-matter of the suit. I am not
      therefore in a position to accept the argument based on
Order 1, Rule 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure
to the
      effect that the plaintiff ought to have obtained sanction
      under that provision so as to enable it to maintain the
      suit. The plaintiff is an incorporated company under the
Indian Companies Act
and is suing another incorporated
      company under that Act and its Directors. In my view
      there is no impediment in the plaintiff maintaining the
      suit for itself without recourse to
Order 1, Rule 8 of the
      Code of Civil Procedure
. It is also not possible to accept
      the argument that when the plaintiff is seeking to
      restrain the defendants from running a parallel exchange
      they are claiming an interest in common with others
Page 57 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
within the meaning of
Order 1, Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
      Procedure
. The argument based on
Section 91
of the
      Code of Civil Procedure is also to some extent sought to
      be linked with the contention based on
Order 1, Rule 8 of
      the Code of Civil Procedure
. According to the learned
      counsel when the plaintiff seeks to prevent the
      defendants from carrying on their business they are in
      fact seeking a relief in respect of an act that is likely to
      affect the public. In my view there is no question of any
      public right involved in the nature of the present suit and
      therefore
Section 91(1)
of the Code of Civil Procedure will
      also have no application. On the other hand it appears to
      me that even assuming that Section 91(1) of the Code
      Civil Procedure is attracted this would be a case where
      the plaintiff itself may have a right of suit existing
      independently of
Section 91(1)
of the Code of Civil
      Procedure. I am of the view that in any view this will be a
      case coming under
Section 91(2)
of the Code of Civil
      Procedure and the argument based on
Section 91(1)
of
      the Code of Civil Procedure and
Order 1, Rule 8 of the
      Code of Civil Procedure
have only to be overruled."
40.   Thus, his Lordship took the view that even assuming that
section 91(1)
of the CPC is attracted, that by itself, would not
come in the way for the plaintiff to institute the suit
independently of
section 91(1)
of the CPC.
41.   I may also refer to and rely upon a decision of the Madras
High Court            in the case of
S.K. Murugesa Mudaly vs.
Baruda Arunagiri Mudaly & Ors.
, reported in AIR 1951
Madras 498, wherein, in para-6, his Lordship observed as
under:-
"6. It will be seen, however, on a careful scrutiny of that
      decision that in holding as it does that it is open to an
      individual member of the public to maintain a suit for
      removal of obstruction to a public highway which
      constitutes a nuisance without the sanction of the
      Advocate-General under Section 91, Civil P. C., and even
Page 58 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
without proof of special damage, it founds itself upon a
      prior decision--that of Wadsworth J. to the same effect
      reported in Munuswami v. Kuppusami, I. L. Rule (1939)
      Mad. 870 : (A.i.r. (26) 1939 Mad. 691). The case before
      Wadsworth J. was not itself a case of a suit instituted
      under Order 1, Rule 8, Civil P. C., but only in the
      individual capacity of the plaintiff who was entitled to
      maintain the suit. After all, the provision of Order 1, Rule
      8, is only an enabling provision, and there is no reason
      why merely because the plaintiff happens to share the
      same inconvenience by the obstruction to the highway as
      other people do he should be debarred of his right to
      seek relief, when once in view of the Privy Council
      decision in Manzur Hasan v. Maham-mad Zaman, 47 ALL.
      151 : (A. I. R. (12) 1925 P. C. 36) it is realised that the
      distinction between indictment and action in regard to
      what is done on a highway which is a distinction peculiar
      to English law ought not to be applied to India. I am of
      opinion therefore that even if the damage suffered by the
      plaintiff in the present case is one which is shared by
      other residents of the same locality he is still entitled to
      maintain the present suit.
I am also of opinion that the
      ruling in
Subbamma v. Narayanamurthi
, 1949-1 M. L. J.
      56 : (A. I. R. (86) 1949 Mad. 634) governs the present
      case in so far aa it lays down that even if proof of special
      damage is otherwise necessary in a case of this kind, it
      becomes unnecessary because the wrong complained of
      in the present case does not constitute a public nuisance.
      As pointed out in that decision, once it is appreciated that
      infringement of the rights of the residents of a village in
      respect of a public street does not constitute a public
      nuisance in the sense of a nuisance caused to the public
      in general, such infringement can well be sued upon by
      any member of the public who suffers from the wrong
      complained of. The case cannot, in that view, be
      regarded as one of public nuisance within Section 91,
      Civil P. C., and the sanction of the Advocate-General
      accordingly is not required. Nor is it necessary to compel
      a person that suffers from such wrong to have recourse
      to the procedure prescribed by Order 1, Rule 8, which, as
      already stated, is after all only an enabling and not a
      compulsory provision."
42.   Let me proceed on the footing that the provisions of
Page 59 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
are applicable to the case on hand
and the plaintiffs failed to obtain appropriate permission of the
court to institute the suit. Ordinarily, if the provisions of
Order
1 Rule 8 CPC
are applicable, the plaintiff is obliged to prefer
an application seeking appropriate permission from the Court
to institute the suit. If any such application is preferred, then it
is the duty of the Court to dispose it of.            However, the
important principle of law which the courts below missed to
consider is that the omission to do so can be remedied at any
stage during the trial of the suit. Ordinarily, the leave under
Order 1. Rule 8 should be sought and its grant considered
when the suit is instituted.
But the omission to obtain leave at
the commencement of the suit cannot serve as a reason for
rejecting the plaint. No question of jurisdiction is involved.
Leave can be granted at any stage after the suit has been
filed. That was the view taken by a Full Bench of the Bombay
High Court, in Fernandez v. Rodriques, (1897) JLR 21 Bom 784
(FB), and that view was followed by the Allahabad High Court
in Baldec Bhartbi v. Bir Gir, (1900) ILR 22 All 269, and by the
Madras High .Court in
Chennu Menon v. Krishnan
, (1902) ILR
25 Mad 399.
It was reaffirmed by the Bombay High Court in
Hubli Panjarapole v. Saraswateyya Bayappa Kala Ghatki
, AIR
1953 Bom 334. The rule has been extended even to appeals :
Mookka Pillai v. Valavanda Pillai
, AIR 1947 Mad 205.
43.   I may quote the relevant observations made by Justice
P.B. Gajendragadkar (as his Lordship then was) in
Hubli
Panjarapole
(supra) as under:
"(4) It is true that ordinarily leave has to be and should
      be obtained under Order 1, Rule 8, at the time of, the
Page 60 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                 CAV JUDGMENT
institution of the suit. Where there are numerous persons
      having the same interest in one suit, the Court should be
      invited at the outset to give leave to bring the suit in a
      representative capacity. If there are numerous
      defendants having the same interest, leave has to be
      obtained to bring the suit against them in a
      representative capacity, and when leave is granted,
      notice of the institution has to be issued to all persons as
      may be directed by the Court. Even so, it cannot be
      disputed that the suit would not be dismissed only on the
      ground that the requisite leave has not been obtained
      under Order 1, Rule 8, at the commencement of the
      proceedings; it would be opon to a party to apply for such
      leave and to take such further action as is required by
      Order 1, Rule 8, even during the pendency of the suit. In
--
'Fernandez v. Rodrigues
', 21 Bom 784 (D), a Full Bench
      of this Court has held that the permission requisite under
      Section 30 of the Code of 1882, which corresponds to
      Order 1, Rule 8, can be granted even after the suit was
      filed. The point which was raised before the Full Bench
      was whether there was jurisdiction in the Court to
      entertain a suit where no leave has been obtained
      previously under Section 30 of the old Code, and the Full
      Bench held that there was no question of jurisdiction
      involved and it would be open to the Court to grant leave
      even after the suit is filed. Incidentally we may refer to
      the statement made by Mr. Justice Tyabji in his judgment
      wherein the learned Judge observed (P. 786) :
"It is really a question of adding parties (when leave is
      granted under the said section)."
44.   The object of Rule 1 Rule 8 is only to prevent multiplicity
of litigations. Because when persons seek to represent a
particular community or association, the right and interest of
others have to be taken into account and that is why
publication is ordered and permission is also sought for to
represent others. In such cases,             there is a chance for
multiplicity of litigation by persons who wants to sue others,
instead of the persons who seek to represent others. In a case
of this nature where the plaintiffs are themselves interested
Page 61 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
and are affected parties, there was no necessity to file an
appropriate application seeking permission to obtain leave of
the Court to file the suit in a representative capacity.
45.   Thus, I am convinced that the plaint could not have been
rejected on the ground of noncompliance of the provisions of
Order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC
.
46.   I shall now proceed to deal with the second substantial
question of law with respect to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949.
Section 487 reads thus:
"Section 487:(1) No suit shall be instituted against the
      Corporation or against the Commissioner, or the
      Transport Manager, or against any municipal officer or
      servant, in respect of any act done or purported to be
      done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of
      this Act or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in
      the      execution        of      this    Act      :-
(a) Until the expiration of one month next after notice in
      writing has been, in the case of the Corporation, left at
      the chief municipal office and, in the case of the
      Commissioner or of the Transport Manager or of a
      municipal officer or servant delivered to him or left at his
      office or place of abode, stating with, reasonable
      particularity the cause of action and the name and place
      of abode of the intending plaintiff and of his attorney,
      advocate, pleader or agent, if any, for the purpose of
      such suit, nor
(b) unless it is commenced within six mouths next after
      the accrual of the cause of action.
(2) At the trial of any such suit-(a) the plaintiff shall not
      be permitted to go into evidence of any cause of action
      except such as is set forth in the notice delivered or left
      by him as aforesaid;
(b) the claim, if it be for damages, shall be dismissed if
      tender of, sufficient amends shall have been made before
      the suit was instituted or if, after the institution of the
Page 62 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
suit, a sufficient sum of money is paid into Court with
      cost.
(3) Where the defendant in any such suit is a municipal
      officer or servant, payment of the sum or of any part of
      any sum payable by him in, or in consequence of the suit,
      whether in respect of costs, charges, expenses,
      compensation for damages or otherwise, may be made,
      with the previous sanction of the Standing Committee or
      the Transport Committee from the Municipal Fund or the
      Transport Fund, as the case may be."
47.   Mr. Bhatt submitted that there is no averment in the
plaint with regard to        the service    of prior notice as
contemplated under
section 487
of the Act, 1949. He
submitted that the plaintiffs were obliged in law to specifically
state in the plaint as regards service of notice to the
Corporation under Section 487.
48.   I fail to understand how Mr. Bhatt appearing for the
original defendant No.1 can raise this issue with regard to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949. It is for the Corporation to raise
such issue. However, considering to be a      neat      question of
law, I permitted Mr. Bhatt to make good his case with regard to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949.
49.   In order to appreciate the contention raised by Mr. Bhatt
it will be appropriate to refer to the provisions of Order 6 Rule
6, Order 7 Rule 1, Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code, which are
quoted below:"
"Order 6 Rule 6:
6. Condition precedent:- Any condition precedent, the
      performance or occurrence of which is intended to be
Page 63 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                     CAV JUDGMENT
contested, shall be distinctly specified in his pleading by
the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be; and,
subject thereto, an averment of the performance or
occurrence of all conditions precedent necessary for the
case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be implied in his
pleading.
Order 7 Rule 1:
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint. The plaint shall
contain the following particulars:
[a] the name of the Court in which the suit is brought;
[b] the name, description and place of residence of the
plaintiff;
[c] the name, description and place of residence of the
defendant, so far as they can be ascertained;
[d] where the plaintiff or the defendant is a minor or a
person of unsound mind, a statement to that effect;
[e] the facts constituting the cause of action and when it
arose;
[f] the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction;
[g] the relief which the plaintiff claims;
[h] where the plaintiff has allowed a set off or
relinquished a portion of his claim, the amount so allowed
or relinquished; and

[i] a statement of the value of the subject matter of the
suit for the purposes of jurisdiction and of court fees, so
far as the case admits.
xxx xxx xxx

Order 7 Rule 11:
11. Rejection of plaint:- The           plaint shall be rejected in
the following cases:
[a] where it does not disclose a cause of action;
Page 64 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                CAV JUDGMENT
[b] where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the
      plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct the
      valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to
      do so;
[c] where the relief claimed is properly valued but the
      plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped, and
      the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the
      requisite stamp paper within a time to be fixed by the
      Court, fails to do so;
[d] where the suit appears from the statement in the
      plaint to be barred by any law;
[e] where it is not filed in duplicate;
[f] where the plaintiff fails to comply with the provisions
      of rule 9:
Provided that the time fixed by the Court for the
      correction of the valuation or supplying of the requisite
      stamp paper shall not be extended unless the Court, for
      reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that the plaintiff was
      prevented by any cause of an exceptional nature for
      correcting the valuation or supplying the requisite stamp
      paper, as the case may be, within the time fixed by the
      Court and that refusal to extend such time would cause
      grave injustice to the plaintiff."
50.   I make it plain and I am quite conscious of the position of
law that while considering an application for rejection of plaint
in terms of Order VII Rule 11 of the Code, there is no scope of
considering any of the defence that the defendant can take in
his written statement and the Courts should restrict its scrutiny
only to the averments made in the plaint for ascertaining
whether on the basis of the averments made in the plaint, the
suit is barred by any law for the time being in force. There may
be cases where from the mere perusal of the averments made
in the plaint, the suit may not appear to be barred by any law,
but   after the defence      of    the defendant    is taken into
Page 65 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
consideration which is supported by evidence, the suit may,
ultimately, be found to be barred by law. In those cases,
although there is no scope of rejection of the plaint, yet the
suit may, ultimately, be dismissed.
51.   I, therefore, first propose to consider whether the plaint
should be rejected being barred by
Section 487
of the Act,
1949. To put it in other words, where in the absence of a
specific statement in the plaint as regards the issue of notice
under
section 487
of the Act, 1949, the plaint could have been
rejected.
52.   In the aforesaid context, I may incidentally refer to the
provisions of Section 80 of the Code, which reads thus:
"80. Notice.[1] Save as otherwise provided in subsection
      [2], no suit shall be instituted against the Government
      including the Government of the State of Jammu and
      Kashmir or against a public officer in respect of any act
      purporting to be done by such public officer in his official
      capacity, until the expiration of two months next after
      notice in writing has been delivered to, or left at the
      office of:-
[a] in the case of a suit against the Central Government,
      except where it relates to a railway, a Secretary to that
      Government;
[b] in the case of a suit against the Central Government
      where it relates to
      railway, the General Manager of that railway;
[bb] in the case of a suit against the Government of the
      State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief Secretary to that
      Government or any other officer authorised by that
      Government in this behalf;
[c] in the case of suit against any other State
      Government, a Secretary to that Government or the
      Collector of the district; and, in the case of a public
Page 66 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                               CAV JUDGMENT
officer, delivered to him or left at his office, stating the
      cause of action, the name, description and place of
      residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims;
      and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice
      has been so delivered or left.
[2] A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against
      the Government (including the Government of the State
      of Jammu and Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of
      any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his
      official capacity, may be instituted, with the leave of the
      Court, without serving any notice as required by
      subsection [1]; but the Court shall not grant relief in the
      suit, whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to
      the Government or public officer, as the case may be, a
      reasonable opportunity of showing cause in respect of
      the relief prayed for in the suit:
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after
      hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate relief
      need be granted in the suit, return the plaint for
      presentation to it after complying with the requirements
      of subsection [1].
[3] No suit instituted against the Government or against
      a public officer in respect of any act purporting to be
      done by such public officer in his official capacity shall be
      dismissed merely by reason of any error or defect in the
      notice referred to in subsection [1], if in such notice

      [a] the name, description and the residence of the
      plaintiff had been so given as to enable the appropriate
      authority or the public officer to identify the person
      serving the notice and such notice has been delivered or
      left at the office of the appropriate authority specified in
      subsection[1], and

      [b] the cause of action and the relief claimed by the
      plaintiff had been substantially indicated."
53.   Thus, Section 80 of the code is a peculiar provision which
specifically speaks of a notice mentioned therein as a condition
precedent for filing of suit of the nature indicated therein and
further requires that compliance of the above condition
Page 67 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
precedent must be pleaded.
54.   In
Section 487
of the Act, 1949, the requirement of
pleading of such a condition precedent for filing a suit is not a
mandate of law and, in such circumstances, Order VI Rule 6
of the Code will not be applicable and in the absence of any
pleading as regards      the compliance, the plaint cannot be
rejected.    There is no requirement of a plaintiff to plead the
issue of notice under
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 and a
condition precedent to maintain the suit.
55.   The pith and core of the concept of interpretation of
pleading in all the precedents have been discharged in the
background of the fundamentals in the relevant provisions
of
the C.P.C
. Rules 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10 of Order VI mandatorily
imposes on the parties as to what they are bound to state, and
all other facts or particulars to be stated are either desirable or
useful to settle the issues and to try them to render proper
decision. It is Rule 2 of
Order VI of the Code of Civil Procedure
which mandates that every pleading shall contain and contain
only a statement in concise form of material facts on which the
party pleading relies for his claim or defence, as the case may
be, but not the evidence by which they are to be proved. Rule
6 of Order VI contemplates the condition precedent to plead
the performance of such a condition precedent etc., etc., to be
complied with in the nature of the case. Similarly Rule 8 of
Order VI mandates that where there is a plea of contract, it
must be specifically denied by the opposite party. According to
Rule 10 of Order VI, the plea of malice, fraudulent intention,
knowledge or condition of the mind etc., are mandatorily to be
stated. Wherever, a notice is mandatory, there must be a
Page 68 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
specific plea in the plaint according to Rule 11 of Order VI.
There is no other mandatory requirement in regard to the
pleas or defence in the pleading. They may depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case, wherein the Court may
give directions to the parties to supplement the pleadings to
render full and effective justice. That is why
Order VI, Rule 17
of the Code of Civil Procedure
empowers the Court to amend
the pleading even without the parties desiring or initiating. A
simple and bare reading of the entire
Order VI of the Code of
Civil Procedure
shows that the pleas like adverse possession,
easement etc., need not be specifically pleaded. It is also to be
made very clear in view of Rule 2 of Order VI and other rules
supra
of the Code of Civil Procedure
that the parties will bring
all the necessary facts on record which generates law either in
pure and simple manner or mixed questions of law and facts. It
is for the Courts to evolve such generated results. Possibly the
parties and the learned Advocates representing them will
assist the Court in doing that.
56.   The above takes me now to consider whether the issue
with regard to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 could have been
raised for the purpose of getting the plaint rejected. Section
487 provides for filing of a suit in respect of an act or
purported act to be done in pursuance of or in execution of the
provisions of the Act. Necessarily, all the acts or intended acts
of the Corporation must be lawful acts as permitted by the
provisions of the Act.    Such acts can never cover the ultra
vires of illegal acts because no servants or officer has any
power to commit or conduct action which is not permissible
within the provisions of the Act.
Page 69 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                        CAV JUDGMENT
57.    Again, at the cost of repetition, I state that the case of
the plaintiffs is very specific. The case of the plaintiffs is that
the Corporation granted illegal permissions in favour of the
defendant No.1 for the purpose of putting up the construction
of a commercial nature. The case of the plaintiffs is that the
Corporation acted in bad faith and could not have granted such
permission        and   in   any     circumstances        could       not      have
sanctioned the plans. This part of the case of the plaintiffs has
been elaborately explained in the plaint itself.
58.    I am unable to accede to the suggestion in the present
case that the act of the Corporation can be regarded as done
or purporting to have been done in pursuance of the Act. At
least, at this stage, without evidence being led by both the
sides, the courts could not have rejected                  the plaint on the
premise of
Section 487
of the Act, 1949. The very wordings of
the section does not contemplate                   giving of a notice to the
Corporation if the relief sought against the Corporation is for
omission      of the Corporation to perform its statutory duties.
The issue with regard to application of
section 487
of the Act,
1949 requires leading of evidence on both the sides.                            Only
after appropriate evidence is led that the Court may be able to
reach to an appropriate conclusion whether the suit is liable to
be dismissed for want of any prior notice.
59.
In
Poona City Municipal Corporation vs. Dattatraya
Nagesh Dattatraya Nagesh Deodher
, reported in (1964) 8 SCR
178 while interpreting
Section 487
of the Act, 1949, observed
as under:-
"The benefit of this section would be available to the
Page 70 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                 CAV JUDGMENT
Corporation only if it was held that this deduction of ten
      per cent was "an act done or purported to be done in
      pursuance or execution or intended execution of this Act."
We have already held that this levy was not in pursuance
      or execution of the Act. It is equally clear that in view of
      the provisions of s.l27(4) (to which we have already
      referred) the levy could not be said to be "purported to be
      done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of
      the Act." For, what is plainly prohibited by the Act cannot
      be claimed to be purported to be done in pursuance or
      intended execution of the Act".
60.    Let me look into few decisions on the subject.
61.    In        Khetiwadi   Utpadhan        Bazar      Samiti          vs.
Nitinkumar Maganlal Kalaria, reported in 1995 (1) GLH
1136, a learned Single Judge of this Court had the occasion to
consider
Section 58 (2)
of the Gujarat Agricultural Produce
Market Act, 1963. In the said case also, the issue was whether
the plaint could have been rejected for the          failure to issue
notice under
section 58 (2)
of the Act before the institution of
the suit.      The learned Single Judge, while negativing such
contention, observed as under:-
"The contention now raised in this petition is that there
       was non-compliance of provisions of
Section 58(2)
of the
       Act. Whether the suit is filed within       the period of
       limitation or whether there was requirement of
       compliance of provisions of
Section 58
of the Act, cannot
       be said to be pure questions of law requiring rejection of
       the plaint without pleadings of the other side. On the
       mere fact that plaint para 15 contains that the cause of
       action for filing the suit occurred on 20.1.1995 and the
       suit came to be filed on 30.10.1986, it is contended that
       the suit was barred by limitation in view of
Section 58(L)
of the Act. This submission will assume importance in the
       fact sand circumstances of the case and the nature of
       the dispute between the parties if the court finds that
       the statutory provisions required under
Section 58(1)
of
       the Act in such suit involving the dispute of refund of
       earnest money or recovery of installment after
Page 71 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
cancellation of public auction, whether the cause of
      action mentioned in the plaint attracted provisions of
      Section 58(1) will have to be examined by the Court. It
      cannot be straightway presumed that there was
      statutory bar of provision of Section 58 even in the
      nature of claim or cause of action pleaded in the plaint at
      that stage without filing written statement and raising
      issues based on pleadings. It is a settled proposition of
      law that if the impugned action is without any authority
      of law or illegal or nullity, no notice is required. Whether
      a statutory notice was required or not is a question
      depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case
      and the nature of the dispute between the parties."
62.
In
Patel Meghjibhai Vithalbhai & Co. vs. Khetiwadi
Utpan Bazar Samiti
, reported in 1996 AIHC 370, a learned
Single Judge of this Court had the occasion to consider almost
a similar issue. I may quote the relevant observations:-
"The respondent as the defendant without filing its
      written statement made an application under Order 7
      Rule 11(d) of the Code with a prayer that the present
      petitioner's plaint should be rejected as it was barred by
Section 58
of the Gujarat Agricultural Produce Market
      Act,1963 (the Act for brief) inasmuch as no statutory
      notice as required to be given thereunder was given by
      the present petitioner to the respondent herein before
      institution of the suit in question. That application was
      taken on record at Exh.15. After hearing the parties by
      his order passed on 21st April, 1992 below thereto, the
      learned trial judge accepted the application and rejected
      the plaint. That aggrieved the present petitioner, and as
      such the present revisional application has come to be
      filed questioning the correctness of the impugned order.
3.    Order 7, Rule 11(d) of the Code provide for
      rejection of a plaint on the ground of where the suit
      appears from the statement in the plaints be barred by
      any law.    It thus becomes clear that the condition
      precedent for rejection of the plaint under the aforesaid
      statutory provision is some statement in the plaint
      showing that the suit is barred by some law. With
      respect, the learned trial judge has referred to no
      statement in the plaint showing under what law the suit
Page 72 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
is barred. The condition precedent for exercise of the
      power of rejection of the plaint is thus found not
      satisfied.
4.    it is true that the present respondent wide an
      application inter alia contending that the cognizance of
      the suit was barred under
Section 58
of the Act for
      want of the required statutory notice. The want of
      statutory notice can be a ground of defence to the suit.
      But then, in order to press that ground into service, the
      respondent as the defendant was required to file its
      written statement taking such a defence in black and
      white. It could have thereafter prayed to the Court for
      framing a preliminary issue in tht regard by making the
      necessary application under Order 14, Rule 2 of the
      Code. The respondent could not have and ought not to
      have made any application under Order 7, Rule 11(d) of
      the Code for rejection of the plaint for want of the
      required statutory notice under
Section 58
of the Act.
      Such an application on the part of the respondent herein
      was misconceived. The learned trial Judge had no
      jurisdiction to entertain such misconceived application."
63.
In
Mistri Jayantilal Maganlal Patel vs. Prajapati
Kantilal Haribhai & Anr.
, 2004 AIHC 2268, a learned Single
Judge of this Court had the occasion to consider section 320 of
the Gujarat Panchyat Act (6) of 1962, which is somewhat para
materia to
section 487
of the Act, 1949. I may quote the
relevant observations:-
"6. Mr. V.C.Desai, learned advocate for the petitioner,
      submitted that the lower appellate Court should not have
      reversed the finding of the trial Court, as, according to
      him, it is an admitted fact that no statutory notice was
      served upon respondent No.2-Panchayat by the plaintiff
      before filing of the suit.
7. It is required to be noted that it is an admitted fact
      that the Panchayat has not raised such objection before
      the trial Court that the suit is not maintainable against it
      for want of issuance of the statutory notice. The present
      petitioner was subsequently joined as defendant No.2 at
      his own request. At this stage, reference is required to be
Page 73 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                             CAV JUDGMENT
made to the decision in
Begum Noorbanu and others v.
      Deputy Custodian General of Evacuee Property A.I.R.
1965 SC 1937. The aforesaid case is in connection with
      the
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950
. While
      considering the scheme of the aforesaid Act, the Apex
      Court has held as under :
"The notice contemplated by
S.7
of the Act is in the first
      place intended to provide an opportunity to the person
      whose property is in the opinion of the custodian an
      evacuee property to satisfy the custodian that he is not
      an evacuee as defined in
S. 2 (d)
of the Act. If he is not
      an evacuee his property cannot be declared evacuee
      property. Moreover, it is to afford an opportunity to
      persons who have not migrated to Pakistan to satisfy the
      Custodian that the property which, in the opinion of the
      Custodian, is evacuee property does not belong to an
      evacuee or that an evacuee has no interest therein.
      Once, therefore, a person has been declared an evacuee
      after due notice, it would not be necessary to give notice
      to him thereafter under
S.7
. The earlier notification would
      be conclusive against the evacuee on the question of his
      migration to Pakistan and therefore no purpose will be
      served by issuing such notice. The only person who could
      claim to be interested in the property would, therefore,
      be those who have not migrated to Pakistan and who
      may possibly claim that the property is theirs and did not
      belong to the evacuee. For the purpose of
S.7
it is
      immaterial whether a particular property had actually
      devolved on the evacuee before migration to Pakistan or
      devolved later. Whatever be the point of time at which
      the property devolved on the evacuee it would become
      evacuee property in the sense that it is liable to be
      declared as evacuee property and to vest in the
      Custodian, provided that the devolution occurred before
      the power of the custodian to declare any property as
      evacuee property came to an end under
S.7-A
of the Act.
An objection as to non-service of notice can properly be
      taken not by third parties, but only by the person on
      whom the notice is not served."
64.   Mr. Munshaw, the learned counsel appearing for the
Corporation submitted that
Section 487
of the Act protects
even improper acts. He submitted that in truth no distinction
Page 74 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                   CAV JUDGMENT
can be made between the acts done illegally and in bad faith
and acts done bona fide in the performance of a public duty
imposed upon a public body as in this case. He submitted that
the words "purporting to have been done" will even cover up
the acts which are done mala fide.               In such circumstances,
prior notice was mandatory.
65.     Mr. Bhatt and Mr. Munshaw, both, together, invited the
attention of this Court to a decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of
State of Maharashtra & Anr. vs. Shri Chander
Kant
, reported in           AIR 1977 SC 148 to make good their
submission that
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 would be
attracted even if the act, complained, is done illegally or in bad
faith. It was a case, in which, the respondent Chander Kant
filed a suit against the State of Maharashtra claiming that the
order dated 1st March, 1955 in a revenue case declaring one
Gajanan Maharaj Sansthan to be a public trust be set aside.
The plaint was filed under section 8(1) of the Public Trusts Act
(MP Public Trusts Act, 1951)             against the State of Madhya
Pradesh and the Registrar of the Public Trusts Amraoti. In the
said case, no notice under
section 80
of the CPC was given.
The defendants took the plea that the suit was liable to be
dismissed by reason of no notice under
section 80
of the CPC.
The Addl. District Judge held that a notice under
Section 80
of
the CPC was necessary and the suit was not maintainable and
ordered the dismissal of the suit. The respondent filed an
appeal in the High Court. The learned Single Judge of the High
Court      agreed with the view of the Addl. District Judge. A
Letters Patent Appeal was filed. The matter was placed before
a Full Bench.           The Full Bench held that the provisions of
Section 80
of the CPC had no application to a suit filed under
Page 75 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                  CAV JUDGMENT
Section 8
of the Madhya Pradesh Public Trusts Act, 1951. The
State of Maharashtra, being dissatisfied with the decision of
the Full Bench, challenged the same before the Supreme
Court. The Supreme Court, after looking into the scheme of
the Act and other relevant provisions, observed in paras-13
and 14 as under:-
"13. These provisions indicate that the Registrar is a
      Public Officer. The word? "act purporting to be done in
      official capacity" have been construed to apply to non-
      feasance as well as to misfeasance. The word "act"
extends to illegal omissions. See Prasaddas v.
      Bennerjee(1). No distinction can be made between acts
      done illegally and in bad faith and acts done bona fide in
      official capacity. See Bhagchand Dagadusa's case
      (supra).
Section 80
of the Code of Civil Procedure
      therefore is attracted when any suit is filed against a
      Public Officer in respect of any act pur- porting to be
      done by such Public Officer in his official capacity.
14. The language of section 80 of the Code of Civil
      Proce- dure is that a notice is to be given against not only
      the Government but also against the Public Officer in
      respect of any act purpoting to be done in his official
      capacity. The Registrar is a Public Officer. The order is an
      act purport- ing to be done in his official capacity."
66.   Thus, it appears that the Supreme Court took the view
that as the suit was filed to set aside the order made by a
public officer in respect of an act in the discharge of his official
duties, notice under
section 80
of the CPC was required.
67.   In my view, this principle cannot be made applicable to
the case on hand. The Corporation will have to lead evidence
to establish that the grant of permissions and sanctioning of
the plans was in good faith and was          an act done or purported
to be done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of
Page 76 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                            CAV JUDGMENT
the Act, 1949. What is plainly prohibited by the Act cannot be
claimed to be purported to be done in pursuance or intended
execution of the Act. If it is the case of the plaintiffs that the
sanctioning of the plans and grant of permission to the
defendant No.1 to put up the construction of a commercial
nature in a residential area is illegal and void, then an
opportunity to establish the same must be given to the
plaintiffs and the plaint could not have been rejected at the
threshold.       It is altogether a different thing to say that,
ultimately, if the Corporation is able to establish that the grant
of the permission and the sanctioning of the plans was in
accordance with law and the provisions of the Act, 1949, then
the Court may dismiss the suit for want of notice under
Section
487
of the Act, 1949. However, at the threshold, the plaint
could not have been rejected on such a premise.
68.   I am afraid, it is not possible to accept such a broad
proposition      of   law   and,     more          particularly,   when         I   am
considering the issue with regard to rejection of the plaint at
the threshold.
69.   The scope of Order VII, Rule 7,
C.P.C
. has been
elaborately considered in
Sopan Sukhdeo Sable vs. Asstt.
Charity Commissioner
, (2004) 3 SCC 137 : (AIR 2004 SC
1801), wherein the Supreme Court held as under:
"10.
In
Saleem Bhai v. State of Maharashtra
((2003) 1
      SCC 557) : (AIR 2003 SC 759) it was held with reference
      to Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code that the relevant facts
      which need to be looked into for deciding an application
      thereunder are the averments in the plaint. The trial
      court can exercise the power at any stage of the suit
      before registering the plaint or after issuing summons to
Page 77 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
the defendant at any time before the conclusion of the
      trial. For the purposes of deciding an application under
      clauses (a) and (d) of Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code, the
      averments in the plaint are germane: the pleas taken by
      the defendant in the written statement would be wholly
      irrelevant at that stage."
70.   The above
Sopan Sukhdeo Sable
case, (2004) 3 SCC
137 : (AIR            2004 SC 1801) has been referred to in the
subsequent judgment
Popat and Kotecha Property vs. State
Bank of India Staff Assn.
, (2005) 7 SCC 510.
As held by the
Supreme Court in
Popat and Kotecha Property vs. State Bank
of India Staff Assn.
, (2005) 7 SCC 510), the real object of Order
VII, Rule 11 of the Code is to keep out of courts irresponsible
suits. Therefore, Order 10 of the Code is a tool in the hands of
the courts by resorting to which and by searching examination
of the party in case the court is prima facie of the view that the
suit is an abuse of the process of the court in the sense that it
is a bogus and irresponsible litigation, the jurisdiction under
Order 7, Rule 11 of the Code can be exercised.
71.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am convinced that
the courts below committed a serious error in taking the view
that the plaint was liable to be rejected on the two grounds
discussed above.
71.   Before I close this judgment, I would like to say
something with regard to the procedure adopted by the Lower
Appellate Court while hearing the appeal filed by the plaintiffs
against the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court,
rejecting the plaint. I have already observed in the earlier part
of my judgment that the issue with regard to
Section 487
of
the Act, 1949 was raised by the Corporation for the first time in
the course of the hearing of the first appeal preferred by the
Page 78 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                                  CAV JUDGMENT
plaintiffs. The Lower Appellate Court         thought fit to consider
the issue and answer the same in favour of the Corporation.
Thus, the Lower Appellate Court not only affirmed the
judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court, rejecting the
plaint on the point of
Order 1 Rule 8 CPC
, but in addition to the
same, also took into consideration the point with regard to
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 although this point was not before
the Civil Court.      I assume that the Lower Appellate Court
probably had the provision of
Order 41 Rule 33 of the CPC
in
mind while considering the issue with regard to
Section 487
of
the Act, 1949.        However, I would like to remind the Lower
Appellate Court that it could not have exercised its power
under Order 41 Rule 33       for the purpose of entertaining the
contention raised on behalf of the Corporation as regards
Section 487
of the Act, 1949 because this issue was not before
the Civil Court.
72.   This aspect has been taken care of by the Apex Court in
AIR 1988 SC 54 (
Mahant Dhangir & another vs. Shri Madan
Mohan & others
) and AIR 2000 SC 43(
Delhi Electric Supply
Undertaking vs. Basanti Devi & another
).
In paragraph 15 at
page 58 of the judgment of the Apex Court
Mahant Dhangir
(supra), the provisions of
Order XLI Rule 33 C.P.C
. was
explained.
The law
laid down in
paragraph 15 of the judgment
in Mahant Dhangir with respect to
Order XLI Rule 33 C.P.C
. was
followed by the Apex Court in the
Judgment of Delhi Electric
Supply Undertaking
(supra) and it was observed in paragraph
17 and 18 as under:-
"17. In our approach we can also draw strength from the
      provisions of rule 33 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil
Page 79 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                            CAV JUDGMENT
Procedure which is as under :
"33. Power of court of appeal. - The appellate court shall
have power to pass any decree and make any order
which ought to have been passed or made and to pass or
make such further or other decree or order as the case
may require, and this power may be exercised by the
court notwithstanding
that the appeal is as to part only of the decree and may
be exercised in favour of all or any of the respondents or
parties, although such respondents or parties may not
have filed any appeal or objection and may, where there
have been decrees in cross-suits or where two or more
decrees are passed in one suit, be exercised in respect of
all or any of the decrees, although an appeal may not
have been filed against such decrees :
Provided that the appellate court shall not make any
order under section 35A, in pursuance of any objection
on which the court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred has omitted or refused to make such order."
"18.This provision was explained by this court in
Mahant
Dhangir v. Madan Mohan
1987 Supp(SCC) 528: (AIR 1988
SC 54) in the following words (at page 58 of AIR):
"The sweep of the power under rule 33 is wide enough to
determine any question not only between the appellant
and respondent, but also between respondent and co-
respondents. The appellate court could pass any decree
or order which ought to have been passed in the
circumstances of the case.
The appellate court could also pass such other decree or
order as the case may require. The words 'as the case
may require' used in rule 33 of Order 41 have been put in
wide terms to enable the appellate court to pass any
order or decree to meet the ends of justice. What then
should be the constraint ? We do not find many. We are
not giving any liberal interpretation. The rule itself is
liberal enough. The only constraint that we could see,
may be these: that the parties before the lower court
should be there before the appellate court. The question
raised must properly arise out of the judgment of the
lower court. If these two requirements are there, the
Page 80 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                              CAV JUDGMENT
appellate court could consider any objection against any
      part of the judgment or decree of the lower court. It may
      be urged by any party to the appeal. It is true that the
      power of the appellate court under rule 33 is
      discretionary. But it is a proper exercise of judicial
      discretion to determine
      all questions urged in order to render complete justice
      between the parties. The court should not refuse to
      exercise that discretion on mere technicalities."
73.   A careful reading of provisions of
Order XLI Rule 33 C.P.C
.
and the judgment of the Apex Court shows that the appellate
court could pass any decree or order which ought to have been
in the circumstances of the case.
Order XLII Rule 1 C.P.C
.
provides that the rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may
be, to appeals from appellate decrees. Meaning thereby the
provisions would be applicable to Second Appeal also and the
power to pass proper decree or order as the case may require
also lies     with the second appellate court in order to do
complete justice between the parties. As observed in
Mahant
Dhangir
(supra), the only constraint is that the parties before
the lower court should be there before the appellate court and
the question raised must properly arise out of the judgment of
the lower court. If these two requirements are there, the
appellate court could consider any objections against any part
of the judgment and decree of the lower court. It may be urged
by any party in the appeal. It is further observed that the
power of appellate court under
Order XLI Rule 33 C.P.C
. is
discretionary but it is a proper exercise of judicial discretion to
determine all questions urged in order to render complete
justice between the parties. The Conditions as laid in the
provisions of
Order XLI Rule 33 C.P.C
. are not satisfied in the
present case.
Page 81 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
C/SA/66/2016                            CAV JUDGMENT
74.     In the result, this second appeal succeeds and is hereby
allowed. The impugned judgment and decree of the Trial Court
is quashed and set aside. The judgment and order passed by
the Lower Appellate Court is also quashed and set aside. The
Regular Civil Suit No.704 of 2015 is revived and placed back
before the Trial Court for disposal in accordance with law. I
clarify that I have otherwise not expressed any opinion on the
merits of the suit. All issues which may arise during the course
of the trial shall be decided uninfluenced by any of the
observations made by this Court. Any observations touching
the merits of the case are relevant only for the purpose of
deciding the issue as regards the rejection of the plaint and
shall not be construed in any manner as an expression of the
final opinion in the main matter. Civil Application, if any, stands
disposed of.
(J. B. PARDIWALA, J)



Vahid
Page 82 of 82
Downloaded on : Tue Jun 25 06:37:20 IST 2019
