Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 2 of 2017
Citation: SCC 729.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/103457768/

[Cites
67
, Cited by
1
]
Calcutta High Court
Ifgl Refractories Ltd vs Lindsay International Pvt. Ltd on 22 January, 2019
Author:
Soumen Sen
Bench:
Soumen Sen
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                       Original Civil Jurisdiction
                            ORIGINAL SIDE

BEFORE:
The Hon'ble JUSTICE SOUMEN SEN

                          AP No.413 of 2017

                     IFGL REFRACTORIES LTD.
                              Versus
                 LINDSAY INTERNATIONAL PVT. LTD.


For the Petitioner            : Mr. Anindya Kr. Mitra, Sr. Adv.,
                                Mr. Soumabho Ghose, Adv.,
                                Ms. Anshumala Bansal, Adv.,
                                Mr. Tanmoy Chakravarty, Adv.,
                                Ms. Arti Bhattacharyya, Adv.

For the Respondents           : Mr. S.K. Kapoor, Sr. Adv.,
Mr. Rudraman Bhattacharya, Adv.,
                                Ms. Priyanka Prasad, Adv.,
                                Mr. Ayan Roy, Adv.,
                                Mr. S.R. Kakrania, Adv.
Hearing concluded on          : 11.01.2019

Judgment on                   : 22.01.2019
Soumen Sen, J.:- This is an application under
Section 11
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter "the 1996 Act") for

appointment of an Arbitrator in terms of an agreement dated 1st

September, 2010.
The petitioner claims to be an unpaid vendor. The petitioner

contends that the respondent placed twelve purchase orders on the

petitioner for supply of refractory products along with general terms and
2
conditions governing the same. The consignee to whom such products

were to be delivered would be specified in such purchase orders. The

petitioner has disclosed copies of such purchase orders and the general

terms and conditions of the respondent which were accepted by the

petitioner. It is stated that each and all of the purchase orders disclosed

in the petition expressly refer to the general terms and conditions of

supply of the respondent bearing no. LIPL/IFGL/GCTS/10-01 dated 1st

September, 2010 and amendment no.1 thereto made by the respondent.

The general terms and conditions for supply prepared by the respondent

and which formed part of the contract between the parties, inter alia,

contain an arbitration clause in Clause 19, which reads:
"19.1       In case BUYER and SELLER fails to reach an agreement on

            any dispute, controversy, interpretation of any terms, claim

            arising out of or in connection with General Terms &

            Conditions of Supply and Purchase Order or the breach,

            termination shall be settled by arbitration in accordance

            with the
Rules of Arbitration of the Indian Arbitration &

            Conciliation Act, 1996
.
19.2        Both BUYER and SELLER shall each select an arbitrator and

            the two (2) arbitrators thus chosen shall select an Umpire.
19.3        The award of the arbitrator(s) or Umpire, as the case may be,

            shall be final and binding upon the parties.
3
19.4        The venue of arbitration shall at Kolkata, India and the

            Courts in Kolkata shall have the exclusive jurisdiction.
19.5        Except for the matter which is specifically under arbitration

            the parties shall continue to perform their respective other

            obligations under any and all Purchase Orders."
A certified copy of the agreement dated 1st September, 2010 is

annexed to the petition.
The petitioner contends that it had supplied materials in terms of

the purchase orders supported by bills of lading obtained by the

petitioner from the shipping companies in the name of the respondent as

shipper/consignor and in the name of the party nominated by the

respondent as consignee and other documents, namely, Customs

endorsed invoices-cum-packing list of the respondent, shipping bills,

invoices raised by the petitioner upon the respondent and bill of export

duly endorsed by the Customs Authorities. The petitioner states that the

respondent has accepted each and all of the invoices of the petitioner in

respect of the aforesaid purchase orders without any demur. The prices

mentioned in the purchase orders were mentioned in foreign currency,

mostly Euro and/or Dollars and also other currencies depending on the

country where the goods were supplied. It is stated in the petition that on

comparison between the price at which the respondent received the

export orders from the overseas buyers and the price as quoted in the

purchase orders issued by the respondent on the petitioner, it would
4
appear that the respondent has kept a margin of 4.50% as their profit

and placed purchase orders on the petitioner @ 95.50% of the price at

which the respondent received the export orders from their overseas

buyers.
The petitioner contends that in terms of the purchase orders,

within three working days of receipt of payment by the respondent from

the foreign buyers, the respondent was to effect payment to the petitioner

in Indian rupees equivalent to the amount of foreign currency mentioned

in the purchase orders. The respondent by email sent on 28th October,

2016 has admitted that Rs. 4.21 crore has been received from the

overseas buyers to the account of IFGL Group. Out of the admitted

amount of Rs. 4,21,70,432.21 shown under the heading 'IFGL Account',

a sum of Rs. 207.88 lakh relate to the purchase orders forming the

subject matter of this petition and the balance relate to the supplies

made by IFGL Refractories Ltd. The respondent has received the

aforesaid sum of Rs. 207.88 lakhs out of Rs.4,21,70,432.21 on trust for

the benefit of and for being released to the petitioner company towards

the price of goods supplied by the petitioner against the purchase orders

mentioned in paragraph 3 of the petition. The petitioner contends that

although the respondent had admitted receipt of Rs. 4.21 crore along

with duty draw back amounting to Rs. 42 lakh on account of IFGL

Group, they raised a wrongful plea that the matter should be mutually

settled in terms of the letter dated 25th October, 2016. By the said letter,
5
a case of mutual understanding or implied contract was sought to be

made up wrongfully and falsely.
On 1st August, 2016 the respondent purportedly introduced a new

clause in their purchase orders issued thereafter stating that the seller

would not have direct contract with any Arcelor Mittal plants or Arcelor

Mittal    companies    and   forward   enquiries   received   to   the   buyer

immediately.
The aforesaid purported addition of a new condition in the

purchase orders on and from 1st August, 2016 is not relevant for this

petition inasmuch as all the purchase orders in respect of which a claim

has been made in the petition were issued prior to 1st August, 2016.

None of the purchase orders mentioned in paragraph 3 of the petition

contain the purported new condition.
The petitioner alleged that incorporation of the said new condition

was not immediately brought to the notice of the management of the

petitioner by the ministerial staff who dealt with purchase orders and

shipment as they did not realise the significance thereof. When the said

new condition was brought to the notice of the management of the

petitioner, the petitioner immediately by a letter dated 5th October, 2016

objected to incorporation of such new conditions as the petitioner had

never agreed to them.
After 5th October, 2016, the petitioner did not receive any purchase

order from the respondent.
6
Mr. Anindya Kumar Mitra, the learned Senior Counsel appearing

on behalf of the petitioner, submits that in the present application, the

petitioner has prayed for reference to arbitration of disputes arising out

of 12 purchase orders. The said purchase orders were issued prior to the

filing of the suit and have remained unpaid. The respondent has never

disputed the existence of such purchase orders. In fact, each of the

purchase orders incorporate the general terms and conditions as

suggested by the respondent/buyer. Each of the said purchase orders

contain an arbitration clause. The said 12 purchase orders are all

subject to general terms and conditions containing the arbitration clause

in Clause 19. They were issued by the respondent upon the petitioner

for supply of refractory materials between September, 2015 and June,

2016. Supplies were made under the purchase orders by IFGL. In

October, 2016, payments against the supplies made against the said 12

purchase orders were received by the respondent from the Arcelor Mittal

Companies but in spite thereof price was not paid. In view thereof, on 9th

December, 2016, the petitioner issued a letter referring the disputes to

arbitration under those 12 purchase orders and notice under
Section 21
of the 1996 Act was duly received by the respondent but the respondent

did not respond to the said notice.     Since the amount had remained

outstanding on 12th December, 2016, an application under
Section 9
of

the 1996 Act was filed and in that proceeding, an interim order was

passed on 14th December, 2016. On 9th January, 2017, the respondent
7
along with two others filed a suit being C.S. No.2 of 2017 against 42

parties in which IFGL Exports is arrayed as defendant No.42. Since the

applicant is of the view that the suit cannot proceed in view of the

existence of the arbitration clause, an application under
Section 8
of the

1996 Act was filed on 19th January, 2017. The petitioner on 14th March,

2017 has nominated its arbitrator and communicated the same to the

respondent. The said respondent received the said letter on 16th March,

2017. The time to nominate arbitrator by the respondent expired on 15th

April, 2017 in view thereof on 12th May, 2017, an application has been

filed for appointment of an arbitrator under
Section 11
of the 1996 Act.
Mr. Mitra submits that under the amended provision of
Section 11
of the 1996 Act, the examination of the Court is confined to the existence

of the arbitration agreement and no other matter is relevant.         The

present amendment has been noticed and discussed at length in a fairly

recent decision   in
Duro Felguera, S.A. Vs. Gangavaram Port Ltd.
reported in (2017) 9 SCC 729.
Mr. Mitra submits that in two separate concurring judgments, the

two Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court have dealt with the scope,

width and ambit of the amended provision, namely,
Section 11(6A)
of the

1996 Act and after noticing the amendment which has brought about a

change of law has in no uncertain terms stated that the "intention of the

legislature is crystal clear that the Court should and need only look into

one aspect - the existence of an arbitration agreement".
8
Since all the purchase orders contained an arbitration clause

either in itself or by reference to the general terms and conditions, the

disputes are required to be referred to a panel of three arbitrators. In all

the purchase orders disputes to be determined by the arbitral tribunal

are very similar involving common questions of facts and law. The central

question in all those 12 purchase orders is whether even after receipt of

the full price from the ultimate buyer, the respondent can withhold

release of amounts to the petitioner (supplier) in view of the specific

condition that within three days of receipt of payment form the ultimate

buyer, payment will be made to the supplier of the same goods. The other

11 purchase orders also contain similar condition. Mr. Mitra, however,

submits that the petitioner has no objection in the event a single

arbitrator is appointed in respect of the twelve purchase orders and a

consolidated reference is made to a single arbitrator as it would minimise

time and save expenses.
The respondent has opposed the application.
Mr. S.K. Kapoor, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondent, has submitted that in deciding the present application,

the frame of the suit filed by this respondent against 42 defendants,

which include the present petitioner, is required to be taken into

consideration.
Lindsay and two of its shareholders/directors have filed this suit

against 42 defendants, including 37 companies of the Arcelor Mittal
9
Group and its promoter, Lakshmi Niwas Mittal (LNM). The principal case

in the suit is that Lindsay and the Arcelor Mittal Group were parties to a

binding arrangement under which the Arcelor Mittal Group would act

through Lindsay to source any goods or services which they would

require from India.
The remaining four defendants are Indian companies, viz, Vesuvius

India Limited, TRL Krosaki Refractories Limited, IFGL Refractories

Limited and IFGL Exports Limited (collectively, "the vendors"). The

vendors were parties with whom Lindsay had entered into agreements for

supply of raw material pursuant to its arrangement with the Arcelor

Mittal Group.
LNM filed an application under
Order VII, Rule 11 of the CPC
for

rejection of the plaint, as against himself. This application was dismissed

by the Single Judge and the said order was affirmed by the Hon'ble

Division Bench on 16.01.2018 and Special Leave Petition against the

same was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated

27.04.2018. The Hon'ble Supreme Court however, has observed that the

order of dismissal would not come in the way of LNM making an

application under
Order 1, Rule 10 of the CPC
, which he has

subsequently made and is pending.
The   vendors   have   invoked     arbitration   for   the   purpose   of

adjudicating their alleged claims against Lindsay on account of payment

for goods sold and delivered. They have instituted applications under
10
Section 11(6)
of the 1996 Act before the Calcutta High Court for

appointment of an Arbitrator in view of Lindsay's failure to appoint an

Arbitrator. They also made applications for interim measures under
Section 9
of the 1996 Act in which certain interim arrangements have

been ordered by the High Court.
Mr. Kapoor submits that the disputes concern 45 parties in total

and there is no arbitration agreement covering all the parties. The

disputes raised in the suit are independent and separate disputes which

are not referable to arbitration. It is further submitted that the disputes

between Lindsay and IFGL Exports Ltd. were settled by way of a

Memorandum of Understanding ("MoU") dated 28.10.2016, which does

not have an arbitration clause. Consequently, there is no live dispute in

view of the MoU.
It is submitted that the objections concern the very existence of the

arbitration agreement (for example, regarding the survival of the

arbitration clause by virtue of the MoU dated 28.10.2016). This objection

is still available with the respondent even after the amendment of the

1996 Act.
Moreover, in the present case, Lindsay has filed the suit against 42

defendants, of whom only four have made applications under
Section 8
and there is no allegation that there are arbitration agreements between

Lindsay and the other 38 defendants. The maintainability of such a

multi-party context has been considered by the Supreme Court in
11
Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya and Anr.
reported in

2003 (5) SCC 531. The court held as follows:
"15.The relevant language used in
Section 8
is "in a matter
     which is the subject matter of an arbitration agreement", Court is
     required to refer the parties to arbitration. Therefore, the suit should
     be in respect of 'a matter' which the parties have agreed to refer and
     which comes within the ambit of arbitration agreement. Where,
     however, a suit is commenced - "as to a matter" which lies outside
     the arbitration agreement and is also between some of the parties
     who are not parties to the arbitration agreement, there is no question
     of application of
Section 8
. The words 'a matter' indicates entire
     subject matter of the suit should be subject to arbitration agreement.
16. The next question which requires consideration is even if
     there is no provision for partly referring the dispute to arbitration,
     whether such a course is possible under
Section 8
of the Act? In our
     view, it would be difficult to give an interpretation to
Section 8
under
     which bifurcation of the cause of action that is to say the subject
     matter of the suit or in some cases bifurcation of the suit between
     parties who are parties to the arbitration agreement and others is
     possible. This would be laying down a totally new procedure not
     contemplated under the Act. If bifurcation of the subject matter of a
     suit was contemplated, the legislature would have used appropriate
     language to permit such a course. Since there is no such indication
     in the language, it follows that bifurcation of the subject matter of an
     action brought before a judicial authority is not allowed.
17. Secondly, such bifurcation of suit in two parts, one to be
     decided by the arbitral tribunal and other to be decided by the civil
     court would inevitably delay the proceedings. The whole purpose of
     speedy disposal of dispute and decreasing the cost of litigation
12
would be frustrated by such procedure. It would also increase the
      cost of litigation and harassment to the parties and on occasions
      there is possibility of conflicting judgments and orders by two
      different forums."
The amendment does not appear to alter the existing provision in

this regard, as it continues to apply only in a situation where "an action

is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement".

It is this very phrase that was considered in
Sukanya Holdings
(supra)

and led to the above result.
The 246th Report of the Law Commission

(upon which the 2015 Amendment was based) also referred to
Sukanya

Holdings
(supra) and did not contain any indication that the

Amendment sought to alter the legal position laid down therein.
It may be noted in passing that the amended
Section 8
has also

been considered by the Supreme Court in
Ameet Lalchand Shah &

Ors. v. Rishabh Enterprises & Ors.
reported in 2018 SCC OnLine SC

487 wherein the Court observed as follows:-
"
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
has
      brought in amendment to
Section 8
to make it in line with
Section
      45
of the Act. In view of the observation made in Sukanya Holdings,
      Law Commission has made recommendation for amendment
      to
Section 8
of the Act. Consequent to 2015 Amendment Act,
Section
      8
is amended as under:-
29. "Principally four amendments to
Section 8(1)
have been
      introduced by the 2015 Amendments - (i) the relevant "party" that is
      entitled to apply seeking reference to arbitration has been
      clarified/amplified to include persons claiming "through or under"
13
such a party to the arbitration agreement; (ii) scope of examination
by the judicial authority is restricted to a finding whether "no valid
arbitration agreement exists" and the nature of examination by the
judicial authority is clarified to be on a "prima facie" basis; (iii) the
cut-off date by which an application under
Section 8
is to be
presented has been defined to mean "the date of" submitting the first
statement on the substance of the dispute; and (iv) the amendments
are expressed to apply notwithstanding any prior judicial precedent.
The proviso to
Section 8(2)
has been added to allow a party that
does not possess the original or certified copy of the arbitration
agreement on account of it being retained by the other party, to
nevertheless apply under
Section 8
seeking reference, and call upon
the other party to produce the same." (Ref: Justice R.S. Bachawat's
Law of Arbitration and Conciliation, Sixth Edition, Vol. I (
Sections
1
to
34
) at page 695 published by LexisNexis)."
30. Amendment to
Section 8
by the Act, 2015 are to be seen
in the background of the recommendations set out in the 246 th Law
Commission Report. In its 246th Report, Law Commission, while
recommending the amendment to
Section 8
, made the following
observation/comment:-
"LC Comment: The words "such of the parties.... to the
arbitration agreement" and proviso (i) of the amendment have been
proposed in the context of the decision of the Supreme Court
in
Sukanya Holdings Pvt. Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya and Anr.
(2003)
5 SCC 531,- in cases where all the parties to the dispute are not
parties to the arbitration agreement, the reference is to be rejected
only where such parties are necessary parties to the action - and
not if they are only proper parties, or are otherwise legal strangers
to the action and have been added only to circumvent the arbitration
agreement. Proviso (ii) of the amendment contemplates a two-step
14
process to be adopted by a judicial authority when considering an
application    seeking   the   reference     of   a   pending   action   to
arbitration.The amendment envisages that the judicial authority
shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if it finds that there
does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and void. If
the judicial authority is of the opinion that prima facie the arbitration
agreement exists, then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and
leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally
determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the judicial authority
concludes that the agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will
be final and not prima facie. The amendment also envisages that
there shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the
arbitration agreement is null and void.
31. From the language of amendment to
Section 8
of the Act it
is also clear that the amendment to
Section 8(1)
of the Act would
apply notwithstanding any, judgment, decree or order of the
Supreme Court or any other Court.          The High Court laid emphasis
upon the word ".....unless it finds that prima facie no valid
agreement exists".       The High Court observed that there is no
arbitration agreement between Astonfield and Rishabh.                After
referring to Sukanya Holdings and the amended
Section 8
and
Section 45
of the Act, the High Court pointed out the difference in
language of
Section 8
and
Section 45
of the Act. The High Court
distinguished between Sukanya Holdings and Chloro Controls, and
observed that Sukanya Holdings was not overruled by Chloro
Controls.     In para 23 of the impugned judgment it was held as
under:
"23. ......The change in
Section 8
is that the Court is to - in
cases where arbitration agreements are relied on- to refer the
disputes in the suit, to arbitration, "notwithstanding any judgment,
decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court, refer the parties
15
to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration
      agreement exists". The Court is of opinion that Sukanya is not per se
      overruled, because the exercise of whether an arbitration agreement
      exists between the parties, in relation to the disputes that are the
      subject matter of the suit, has to be carried out. If there are causes
      of action that cannot be subjected to arbitration, or the suit involves
      adjudication of the role played by parties who are not signatories to
      the arbitration agreement, it has to continue because "prima facie no
      valid arbitration agreement exists" between such non parties and
      others, who are parties."
Thus as far as Lindsay's suit is concerned, it is also still open to

Lindsay to resist reference to arbitration on the basis of the reasoning in
Sukanya Holdings
(supra).
Mr. Kapoor submits that
Section 11
of the 1996 Act deals with

appointment of arbitrators. Under
Section 11(6)
, prior to the 2015

amendment, a party was entitled to approach the Chief Justice of the

High Court (or, in the case of an international commercial arbitration,

the Supreme Court) for appointment of an Arbitrator in the event the

other party fails to act as required under the arbitration clause.
The scope of adjudication in an application under
Section 11(6)
was
laid down in
several pre-amendment judgments of the Supreme

Court.   Mr. Kapoor has referred to SBP and Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd.

reported at (2005) 8 SCC 678 and submits that in paragraphs 37, 39

and 47 of the report, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has indicated the

questions to be determined before appointing an arbitrator. It is
16
submitted that paragraphs 39 and 47 of the report would show that it is

the duty of the court to find out where reference has been sought for

after the parties have agreed to a settlement as a corollary to the

questions addressed in these paragraphs. Mr. Kapoor has argued that

since now Memorandum of Settlement has been arrived at between the

parties on 28th October, 2016 with regard to the supplies made by IFGL

pursuant to purchase orders placed by IFGL on the respondent and the

said Memorandum was partly acted upon, the petitioner has given a go-

bye to the arbitration clause in the several purchase orders. The dispute

has arisen subsequent to the MoU and in relation to the said

memorandum of understanding which does not contain any arbitration

clause. In such circumstances, it is the duty of the court to ascertain if

there is a valid and subsisting arbitration agreement between the parties.
Mr. Kapoor has also referred to decision is
National Insurance

Company Limited vs. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd.
reported at (2009) 1

SCC 267 to demonstrate that SBP and Co. (supra) was followed and in

fact it was reiterated that the court has to arrive at a finding that there is

an arbitration agreement.
Mr. Kapoor submits that the 2015 amendment has not caused any

substantive change to the provisions of
Section 11(6)
itself, except that

the reference to "the Chief Justice" have been replaced by reference to

"the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court". However, a
17
new sub-section has been inserted immediately after
Section 11(6)
which

provides as follows:-
"(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court,
      while considering any application under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment,
      decree or order of any Court, confine to the examination of the
      existence of an arbitration agreement." (Emphasis supplied).

      Mr. Kapoor has challenged the vires of
Section 11(6A)
of the 1996

Act by filing a supplementary affidavit. According to the learned Senior

Counsel, the newly inserted
Section 11(6A)
is not sustainable as it is

opposed to the doctrine of separation of power and curtained the role of

judiciary.
The words "notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any

court" contained in
Section 11(6A)
indicates that the intention of the

provision was to alter the prevailing judicial interpretation of
Section

11(6)
. It is settled law that such an exercise of legislative power can be

justified only if it amended the substantive statutory provisions upon

which the judicial construction has been premised.        Conversely, any

purported legislative overruling of judicial decision by mere declaration

(without changing the underlying statutory provision) would be ultra

vires the constitutionally accepted doctrine of separation of powers.
It is submitted that although the provisions of
Section 11(6)
had

never been held to be ultra vires and therefore the Amendment Act is
18
not, strictly speaking a validating legislation, Supreme Court judgment

on the constitutionality of validating Acts provide an analogous

conceptual framework.
Mr. Kapoor has referred
S.S. Bola v. B.D. Sardana
reported in

(1997) 8 SCC 522 and submits that in a similar situation, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has made the following observations:-
"174. At the outset it must be borne in mind that in the case of
     Sehgal [1992 Supp (1) SCC 304 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 675 : (1993) 24
     ATC 559] as well as Chopra [1992 Supp (1) SCC 391 : 1992 SCC
     (L&S) 975 : (1992) 19 ATC 493 this Court had not invalidated any
     provisions of the recruitment rules but merely interpreted some
     provisions of the Rules for determining the inter se seniority between
     the direct recruits and the promotees.
The Act
passed by the
     legislature, therefore, is not a validation Act but merely an Act
     passed by the State Legislature giving it retrospective effect from the
     date the State of Haryana came into existence and consequently
     from the date the service in question came into existence. The power
     of the legislature under
Article 246(3)
of the Constitution to make
     law for the State with respect to the matters enumerated in List II of
     the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution is wide enough to make law
     determining the service conditions of the employees of the State. In
     the case in hand there has been no challenge to the legislative
     competence of the State legislature to enact the legislation in
     question and in our view rightly, nor there has been any challenge
     on the ground of contravention of Part III of the Constitution. Under
     the constitutional scheme the power of the legislature to make law is
     paramount subject to the field of legislation as enumerated in the
     Entries in different Lists.
The function of the judiciary is to interpret
19
the law and to adjudicate the rights of the parties in accordance
     with law made by the legislature. When a particular Rule or the Act
     is interpreted by a Court of law in a specified manner and the law
     making authority forms the opinion that such an interpretation
     would adversely effect the rights of the parties and would be grossly
     inequitious and accordingly a new set of Rule or Law is enacted, it is
     very often challenged as in the present case on the ground that the
     legislatures have usurped the judicial power. In such a case the
     Court has a dedicated function to examine the new set of laws
     enacted by the legislatures and to find out whether in fact the
     legislatures have exercised the legislative power by merely declaring
     an earlier judicial decision to be invalid and ineffective or the
     legislatures have altered and changed the character of the
     legislation which ultimately may render the judicial decision
     ineffective. It cannot be disputed that the legislatures can always
     render a judicial decision ineffective by enacting valid law on the
     topic within its legislative field fundamentally altering or changing
     its character retrospectively as was held by this Court in the case of
Indian Aluminum Company vs. The State of Kerala
(1996) 7
     Supreme Court Cases 637. What is really prohibited is that
     legislature cannot in exercise of its plenary power under
Article 245
and
246
of the Constitution merely declare a decision of a Court of
     Law to be invalid or to be inoperative in which case it would be held
     to be an exercise of judicial power........" (Emphasis supplied).
Similarly, in Indian Aluminium Co. v. State of Kerela reported

in (1996) 7 SCC 637, the Supreme Court stated as follows:
"36. The validity of the validating Act is to be judged by the
     following tests: [i] whether the legislation enacting the validating Act
     has competence over the subject matter; [ii] whether by validation,
20
the legislature has removed the-defect which the court had found in
the previous law [iii] whether the validating law is inconsistent with
the provisions of Chapter III of the Constitution. If tests are satisfied,
the Act can confer jurisdiction upon the Court with retrospective
effect and validate the past transactions which were declared to be
unconstitutional.     The   legislature     cannot    assume       power   of
adjudicating a case by virtue of its enactment of the law without
leaving it to the judiciary to decide it with reference to the law in
force. The legislature also is incompetent to overrule the decision of a
Court without properly removing the base on which the judgment is
founded.
56. From a resume of the above decisions the following
principles would emerge:
[1] The adjudication of the rights of the parties is the essential
judicial function. Legislature has to lay down the norms of conduct
or rules which will govern the parties and the transaction and
require the court to give effect to them;
[2] The Constitution delineated delicate balance in the exercise
of the sovereign power by the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary;
[3] In a democracy governed by rule of law, the Legislature
exercises the power under
Articles 245
and
246
and other
companion Articles read with the entries in the respective Lists in the
Seventh Schedule to make the law which includes power to amend
the law.
[4] Courts in their concern and endeavour to preserve judicial
power equally must be guarded to maintain the delicate balance
devised    by   the    Constitution   between        the   three   sovereign
functionaries. In order that rule of law permeates to fulfil
constitutional objectives of establishing an egalitarian social order,
the respective sovereign functionaries need free-play in their joints
21
so that the march of social progress and order remain unimpeded.
The smooth balance built with delicacy must always be maintained;
[5] In its anxiety to safeguard judicial power, it is unnecessary
to be overjealous and conjure up incursion into the judicial preserve
invalidating the valid law competently made;
[6] The Court, therefore, need to carefully scan the law to find
out: (a) whether the vice pointed out by the Court and invalidity
suffered by previous law is cured complying with the legal and
constitutional    requirements;    (b)   whether   the   Legislature   has
competence to validate the law; (c) whether such validation is
consistent with the rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution.
[7] The Court does not have the power to validate an invalid
law or to legalise impost of tax illegally made and collected or to
remove the norm of invalidation or provide a remedy. These are not
judicial functions but the exclusive province of the legislature.
Therefore they are not encroachment on judicial power.
[8] In exercising legislative power, the legislature by mere
declaration, without anything more, cannot directly overrule revise
or override a judicial decision.         It can render judicial decision
ineffective by enacting valid law on the topic within its legislative
field      fundamentally   altering      or   changing    its   character
retrospectively. The changed or altered conditions are such that the
previous decision would not have been rendered by the Court, if
those conditions had existed at the time of declaring the law as
invalid.     It is also empowered to give effect to retrospective
legislation with a deeming date or with effect from a particular date.
The legislature can change the character of the tax or duty from
impermissible to permissible tax but the tax or levy should answer
such character and the legislature is competent to recover the invalid
tax validating such a tax on removing the invalid base for recovery
from the subject or render the recovery from the State ineffectual. It
22
is competent for the legislature to enact the law with retrospective
      effect and authorise its agencies to levy and collect the tax on that
      basis, make the imposition of levy collected and recovery of the tax
      made valid, notwithstanding the declaration by the court or the
      direction given for recovery thereof.
[9] The consistent thread that runs through all the decisions of
      this Court is that the legislature cannot directly overrule the decision
      or make a direction as not binding on it but has power to make the
      decision ineffective by removing the base on which the decision was
      rendered, consistent with the law of the Constitution and the
      legislature must have competence to do the same." (Emphasis
      supplied).
In
Jaora Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. v. State of M.P.
reported in AIR

1966 SC 416, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that a parliamentary

legislation which sought to validate a state statute (which had been held

to be ultra vires the legislative competence of the State) would itself be

ultra vires. However, if the parliamentary legislation made substantive

provisions, that were within legislative competence of parliament, and

gave the same retrospective effect, such an act would be valid even if it

had the effect of validating action taken under the invalid state

legislation.
In
State of T. N. v. State of Kerala
reported in (2014) 12 SCC

696, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has held as follows:
"126. On deep reflection of the above discussion, in our
      opinion, the constitutional principles in the context of Indian
23
Constitution relating to separation of powers between legislature,
executive and judiciary may, in brief, be summarized thus :
126.5 The doctrine of separation of powers applies to the final
judgments of the courts. Legislature cannot declare any decision of a
court of law to be void or of no effect. It can, however, pass an
amending Act to remedy the defects pointed out by a court of law or
on coming to know of it aliunde. In other words, a court's decision
must always bind unless the conditions on which it is based are so
fundamentally altered that the decision could not have been given in
the altered circumstances.
126.6 If the legislature has the power over the subject-matter
and competence to make a validating law, it can at any time make
such a validating law and make it retrospective. The validity of a
validating law, therefore, depends upon whether the legislature
possesses the competence which it claims over the subject-matter
and whether in making the validation law it removes the defect
which the courts had found in the existing law.
126.7 The law enacted by the legislature may apparently
seem to be within its competence but yet in substance if it is shown
as an attempt to interfere with the judicial process, such law may be
invalidated being in breach of doctrine of separation of powers. In
such situation, the legal effect of the law on a judgment or a judicial
proceeding must be examined closely, having regard to legislative
prescription or direction. The questions to be asked are, (i) Does the
legislative prescription or legislative direction interfere with the
judicial functions? (ii) Is the legislation targeted at the decided case
or whether impugned law requires its application to a case already
finally decided? (iii) What are the terms of law; the issues with
which it deals and the nature of the judgment that has attained
finality? If the answer to (i) to (ii) is in the affirmative and the
consideration   of   aspects   noted   in   question   (iii)   sufficiently
24
establishes that the impugned law interferes with the judicial
      functions, the Court may declare the law unconstitutional.
157.The question whether or not the legislature has usurped
      the judicial power or enacted a law in breach of separation of
      powers principle would depend on facts of each case after
      considering the real effect of law on a judgment or a judicial
      proceeding. One of the tests for determining whether a judgment is
      nullified is to see whether the law and the judgment are inconsistent
      and irreconcilable so that both cannot stand together. ... When the
      impugned law is not a validation law, there is no question of the
      legislature removing the defect, as the Court has not found any vice
      in the existing law and declared such law to be bad." (emphasis
      supplied)


      Applying these principles to the present case, it is submitted that
Section 11(6A)
should be regarded as ultra-vires since it is clearly

overruling judicial pronouncements without making any substantive

alternation to the law.
It is submitted that
Section 11(6A)
has been considered by the

Supreme Court in
Duro Felguera
(supra). Paragraph 20 is referred to in

which Justice Banumathi held -
"..........as per [
Section 11(6A)
] which the power of the court is
      confined only to examine the existence of the arbitration agreement"
(emphasis supplied).
Mr. Kapoor has referred to Paragraphs 48 and 59 in the concurring

opinion by Justice Kurian Joseph, which reads:-
"48.
Section 11
(6-A) added by the 2015 Amendment, reads
      as follows:
25
....... From a reading of
Section 11(6A)
, the intention of the
     legislature is crystal clear i.e. the Court should and need only look
     into one aspect- the existence of an arbitration agreement. What are
     the factors for deciding as to whether there is an arbitration
     agreement is the next question. The resolution to that is simple - it
     needs to be seen if the agreement contains a clause which provides
     for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between
     the parties to the agreement.
59. The scope of the power under Section 11 (6) of the 1996
     Act was considerably wide in view of the decisions in SBP and Co.
(SBP and Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. (2005) 8 SCC 618) and Boghara
     Polyfab [National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd.
     (2009) 1 SCC 267: (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 117]. This position continued
     till the amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all
     that the Courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement
     exists - nothing more, nothing less. The legislative policy and
     purpose is essentially to minimize the Court's intervention at the
     stage of appointing the arbitrator and this intention as incorporated
     in
Section 11 (6A)
ought to be respected." (Emphasis supplied).
It is submitted that in
Duro Felguera
(supra), neither side offered

any argument at all about the vires of the section or the other

constitutional aspects and due to absence of argument both the learned

Judges only examined the issue as to whether or not there was novation

in the facts and circumstances of that case. In other words both judges

looked beyond the question of existence of an arbitration agreement,

which inference is elsewhere discussed in the judgment. The reference to

text books made by the learned Judge was not cited by counsel.
26
Mr. Kapoor makes a valiant attempt to persuade this court to hold

that such stray sentences like, "the court should look at the existence of

an arbitration agreement" is an obiter dicta and not binding upon this

court. It is submitted that in
Duro Felguera
(supra), the observations

on the scope and ambit of the new provision were not called for and no

adjudication about the same was in issue or sought by either side. In

this regard Mr. Kapoor has placed reliance on the following decisions:-
i.
Janapada Sabha Chhindwara v. Central Provinces
             Syndicate Ltd. and Anr.
reported in 1970 (1) SCC 509
             para 10 [5 Judges]
       ii.   Kunjukutty Sahib v. State of Kerela and Anr. reported in
             1972 (2) SCC 364 para 27 [5 Judges]
      iii.
Raval and Co. v. K.G. Ramachandran and Ors.
reported
             in 1974 (1) SCC 424 para 25 [5 Judges]
      iv.    ADM, Jabalpur v. Shivkant Shukla reported in 1976 (2)
             SCC 521 [5 Judges]
       v.    Vijay Kumar Sharma and Ors. v. State of Karnataka
             and Ors. reported in 1990 (2) SCC 562 para 38 [3 Judges]
      vi.
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. and
             Anr.
reported in 2005 (7) SCC 234 para 69
     vii.
Girnar Traders v. State of Maharashtra and Ors
.
reported in 2007 (7) SCC 555 para 53
     viii.
Official Liquidator v. Dayanand and Ors.
reported in
             2008 (10) SCC 1 para 77
      ix.
Subhash    Chandra    and    Anr.   v.   Delhi   Subordinate
             Services Selection Board and Ors.
reported in 2009 (15)
             SCC 458 para 110
27
x.
K.P.   Manu    v.   Chairman,    Scrutiny    Committee
for
            Verification of Community Certificate reported in 2015
            (4) SCC 1 para 19, 21, 37
      xi.
Fibre Boards Pvt. Ltd. v. CIT Bangalore
reported in 2015
            (10) SCC 333 para 31
     xii.
Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association and
            Anr. v. Union of India
reported in 2016 (5) SCC 1 para
            817, 882


      It is submitted that where words in a statute have received an

authoritative exposition by the superior court use of the same words in a

similar context in a later statute gives rise to a strong presumption that

Parliament intended that the same interpretation should be followed for

construction of those words in a later statute. In the instant case, the

words in sub-
sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
7
have not been changed. They must

therefore receive the same interpretation as before. Moreover, the same

earlier decisions still continue to be followed in cases decided after the

amendment.
SBP and Co. (supra),
Boghara Polyfab
(supra),
Sukanya

Holdings
(supra) and other cases are all still good law and applied and

followed by the Supreme Court itself. Therefore, the law stated in these

decisions must be regarded as good law and binding precedents for the

purpose of any ongoing litigation.
The ratio in
Sukanya Holdings
(supra) still holds the field and no attempt has been made to take away

the substratum of
the said decision
. Therefore at any rate the same cases

should be applied in deciding the present case also.
28
Mr. Kapoor has relied upon a Supreme Court decision in
Ameet

Lalchand
(supra) and submits that the decision of
Sukanya Holdings
(supra) was noticed, considered and approved.
Mr. Kapoor has argued that the reliefs against IFGL in the suit,

namely, prayer (B), (E), (H), (O), (R), (T) and (V) cannot be the subject of

arbitration. Moreover, the Courts have consistently held that bifurcation

and splitting of causes of action is not permissible. In this case, each

purchase order contains a very restricted arbitration clause that can be

related only to the particular order in question and nothing more than

that. In other words, the arbitration clause has a limited ambit and

scope. In this case only a minuscule part, if at all, is referable under the

limited arbitration agreement. The Courts have recognized that there is

no scope to bifurcate the suit into two parts, i.e. to refer a part of the

disputes to be decided by the arbitrator leaving the bulk of disputes to be

decided by the Hon'ble Court. The majority of claims against IFGL per

se, and ignoring the tortious claims involving several third parties, are

not referable to arbitration at all. In this regard, Mr. Kapoor has relied

upon the following decisions:-
i)     Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. v. Jayesh H.           Pandya and
             Anr.
reported in 2003 (5) SCC 531
ii)    Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. and Anr. v. Verma Transport
             Co.
reported in 2006(7) SCC 275
iii)   India Household and Healthcare Ltd. v. LG Household
             and Healthcare Ltd.
reported in 2007 (5) SCC 510
29
iv)      Tulip Hotels Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. Trade Wings Ltd. and
               Ors.
reported in (2010) 2 Arb LR 286 (Bom)
v)       Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd. and
               Ors.
reported in 2011 (5) SCC 532.
Mr. Kapoor has argued that the MoU already fully covers all

disputes about the amounts receivable under the purchase orders.

Therefore, the arbitration agreement in this case stands extinguished.

There was compete novation; followed by a fresh accord and there was

also satisfaction in part. The MoU resolved all issues and it contained no

arbitration clause.    Therefore, the right to arbitration was abandoned

and is gone.
Moreover, of critical importance is the fact that taking advantage of

the four orders of Court, the claims were substantially recovered. The

MoU supersedes the Purchase orders and there is not even a whisper as

to incorporating the arbitration clause by reference.
Mr. Kapoor has argued that the petitioner has obtained huge

benefits under the interlocutory orders and, therefore, elected to go by

way of suit and abjured arbitration. In this connection, Mr. Kapoor has

relied upon the following decisions:-
i)       Mussammat Gulab Koer v. Badshah Bahadur
reported in
               10 CLJ 420: 13 CWN 1197
ii)      Mani Lal Guzrati v. Harendra Lal Roy reported in (1910)
               12 CLJ 556
iii)     Scarf v. Jardine reported in 1882 (7) AC 345
30
iv)    Jai Singh v. Union of India and Ors.
reported in 1977 (1)
             SCC 1
v)     Delhi Gate Auto Service Station and Anr. v. Bharat
             Petroleum Corportation Ltd., Agra and Ors.
reported in
             2009(16) SCC 766
vi)    Mumbai International Airport vs M/S Golden Chariot
             Airport & Anr
reported in 2010 (10) SCC 422
vii)   Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd. and
             Ors.
reported in 2011 (5) SCC 532



      It is submitted that if both the arbitration as well as the suit are

allowed to proceed, there is every likelihood of a conflict of decisions.
Moreover, in view of the allegations or fraud in the plaint the disputes are

not referable to arbitration. On such considerations, Mr. Kapoor has

prayed for dismissal of the petition.
In reply, Mr. Mitra has submitted that although it is argued that

there has been novation of arbitration agreement by the MoU dated

28.10.2016, this case has not been made out in and is really contrary to

the   affidavit-in-opposition   of   the     respondent.   In   the   affidavit-in-

opposition, specific case has been made out that the said MoU is an

independent agreement. Therefore, no case of arbitration agreement

being novated by the independent MOU can be considered.
After amendment of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
made with effect from 24th October, 2015, sub-
section 6(A)
has been

incorporated into
Section 11
. Under this sub-
section 6(A)
, the court is to
31
confine its consideration only to existence of the arbitration agreement as
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case reported in
Duro

Felguera
(supra). The existence of the arbitration agreement is not

disputed in this case. Therefore, reference should be made without

further consideration.
Mr. Mitra strenuously argued that question of

ultra vires in this case should not be allowed to be raised in view of clear

judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court on sub-
section 6(A)
in
Duro

Felguera
(supra).     There are two separate judgments by two learned

Judges but both the learned Judges have concurred and have clearly laid

down the law after introduction of sub-
section 6(A)
.      Both the learned

Judges have held that after
Section 11 (6A)
being introduced, the court is

only to see the existence of the arbitration agreement and if the

arbitration agreement exists, matter is to be referred to arbitration. Thus

it is implicit in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that sub-

section (6A) is valid and intra vires. Therefore, the question of validity of

sub-section (6A) cannot be raised before High Court.
In this context,

reliance is placed upon
Ballabhadas Mathurdas Lakhani and Ors. v.

Municipal Committee, MalKapoor
reported in (1970) 2 SCC 267: AIR

1970 SC 1002.
The argument that the law as
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in judgment reported in
Duro Felguera
(supra) regarding sub-

section (6A) is merely obiter dicta, is without any merit and should not be

entertained at all.
32
Firstly, it is not obiter. The Supreme Court very clearly considered

sub-section (6A) and gave its interpretation of this sub-section and then

both the learned Judges have laid down the law that in considering an

application under
Section 11
- only existence of arbitration agreement is

to be seen. It is the ratio decidendi. Mr. Mitra has referred to paragraphs

18, 48 and 56 of the report in support of his submission. Secondly, in

any event, obiter dicta of Supreme Court judgment is binding on High

Courts. The learned Senior Counsel in this regard has relied upon
Palitana Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
reported in (2004) 12 SCC 645 (paragraph 62) and submits that in
the

said decision
the Supreme Court has laid down that if High Court

ignores an observation of Supreme Court on the ground that it is obiter,

that will amount to contempt of Supreme Court. Thirdly, it is not obiter

because   interpretation   of   sub-section   (6A)   was   necessary    for

determination of scope and ambit of the application under
Section 11
of

the Arbitration and Conciliation Act which was being considered by the

Hon'ble Supreme Court.      It was necessary for the Supreme Court to

consider the effect of this sub-section (6A) which Supreme Court has

done after considering and referring to two previous judgments on
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act delivered prior to the

amendment of 2015.
After considering the decisions in
S.B.P. & Co vs

Patel Engineering Ltd. & Anr.
reported in (
2005) 8 SCC 618 and

National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd.
reported in
33
(2009) 1 SCC 267      the Supreme Court
laid down in
Duro Felguera
(supra) that the position of law as
laid down in
SBP and Co. (supra) and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) continued till the amendment was brought

about in 2015 and "after amendment the court needs to see whether an

arbitration agreement exists - nothing more, nothing less. The legislative

policy and purpose is essentially to limit the court's intervention at the

stage of appointment of arbitrator and this intention is incorporated in

sub-section (6A) ought to be respected".
The Supreme Court has explained that the legislative

amendment of the 1996 Act by the Act of 2015 is essentially to minimize

court's intervention at the stage of appointing arbitrator, and this

intention ought to be respected. The decision in SBP and Co. (supra)

and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) case have not at all been overruled. The

ratio of those two judgments will continue to govern the applications

made under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act until 24th

October, 2015 when the Amendment Act came into effect.                The

Amendment Act of 2015 has changed the basis of law and has laid down

that consideration of applications under
Section 11
of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act should be made only by considering the question of

existence of the arbitration agreement. This is to minimize the court's

interference at the stage of initiation of arbitration proceedings under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
34
The judgments referred to by the respondent all lay down the

proposition that it is settled law that "legislature is incompetent to

overrule a decision of a court without properly removing the base on

which the judgment is founded." But in this case, the basis of law has

been changed not retrospectively but prospectively with effect from the

date of commencement of the Amendment Act namely 24th October,

2015. The Supreme Court has explained in
Duro Felguera
(supra) that

the view of the decisions in SBP and Co. (supra) and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) is continued till the amendment brought about in 2015 and after

the amendment, all that the court needs to see is whether an arbitration

agreement exists, nothing more nothing less. The legislature has not at

all overruled any of the said earlier judgments but only amended the

basis of law for consideration of applications under
Section 11
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
It is to be borne in mind that this Amendment Act 3 of 2016 which

replaced the ordinance is an amendment of a piece of legislation. It is

not a validating Act. This Amendment Act does not seek to validate any

act or decision enacted or delivered prior to 24th October, 2015 in a

manner inconsistent with the earlier judgments reported in SBP and Co.

(supra) and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra). A number of judgments referred

to by the respondent referring to Validating Acts have no relevance. In

fact, the judgments cited by the respondent will support the proposition

that the legislature by way of amendment has taken away the base of law
35
as
laid down by
the previous judgments. It is most important to note that

this Amendment Act is prospective i.e. effective from the date of the

ordinance and not retrospective at all.
The judgments on the proposition that obiter dicta are not binding

does not deal with the question as to whether obiter of Supreme Court is

binding on High Courts. All these judgments merely deal with a situation

when the Supreme Court was considering the previous judgments of the

Supreme Court and whether those observations are obiter or not. In the

instant case, that question does not arise.      It is submitted that in

paragraph 62 of
Palitana Sugar Mills
(supra), the Supreme Court has

clearly held that a High Court cannot ignore even an obiter dicta of the

Supreme Court. If law is
laid down by
Supreme Court by way of obiter

dicta, it will be binding on the High Court.
The decision of the Supreme

Court in
Duro Felguera
(supra) is cannot be said to be an obiter. It is

ratio decidendi.
It is further submitted by the petitioner that the reference made to

the judgment in
Sukanya Holdings
(supra) is unnecessary as it is a

case under
Section 8
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. Arguments

made by the respondent regarding
Section 8
of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, which is wholly unnecessary and it is contended that

this will only confuse the issue. A separate application under
Section 8
of

the Arbitration and Conciliation Act is pending for hearing. In the instant

application under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, no
36
prayer has at all been made for reference of CS No. 2 of 2017 or any suit

to arbitration. It is submitted that there is a clear distinction between
Section 8
and
11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act and any attempt

to confuse the issue should be avoided.
The question of an appointment of an arbitrator under sub-section

6A of
Section 11
of the Act needs to be considered on the basis of the

objections raised by Mr. Kapoor. The said Section is a departure from the

earlier Section relating to appointment of arbitrators. In fact, a

substantial part of
Section 11
was amended by insertion of various sub-

sections including sub-section (6A) by the
Arbitration and Conciliation

Amendment Act, 2015
with effect from 23rd October, 2015. The amended

Section reads:-
"
S.11(6A)
- The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High

      Court, while considering any application under sub-section (4) or

      sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any

      judgment, decree or order of any Court, confine to the examination of

      the existence of an arbitration agreement."
There have been significant changes brought about to the Act by

the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
with effect from

23rd October, 2015. The object of the amendment is to ensure minimum

intervention of the court in arbitration proceedings. The experience in the

past showed that considerable time was consumed in court before

commencement of arbitration proceedings under the unamended Act,
37
although the said Act was enacted for speedy disposal of arbitration

matters with least intervention of the court. In order to reassure and

reaffirm that the party must respect, be bound by and adhere to the

agreement by which they have agreed to resolve their dispute by

arbitration with least intervention by court, significant changes have

been introduced in the Act.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons enumerated under the

Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is reproduced

herein below:-
"STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
      The general law relating to arbitration is contained in the
Arbitration
      and Conciliation Act, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The
      Act
, which is based on the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
      Commercial Arbitration, as adopted in 1985 by the United Nations
      Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), applies to both
      international as well to domestic arbitration.
2.
The Act
was enacted to provide for speedy disposal of cases
      relating to arbitration with least court intervention. With the passage
      of time, some difficulties in the applicability of the Act have been
      noticed. Interpretation of the provisions of the Act by courts in some
      cases have resulted in delay of disposal of arbitration proceedings
      and increase in interference of courts in arbitration matters, which
      tend to defeat the object of the Act. With a view to overcome the
      difficulties, the matter was referred to the Law Commission of India,
      which examined the issue in detail and submitted its 176th Report.
      On the basis of the said report, the Arbitration and Conciliation
      (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 22nd
      December, 2003. The said Bill was referred to the Department-
38
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice for examination and Report. The said
Committee, submitted its Report to the Parliament on 4th August,
2005, wherein the Committee recommended that since many
provisions of the said Bill were contentious, the Bill may be
withdrawn and a fresh legislation may be brought after considering
its recommendations. Accordingly, the said Bill was withdrawn from
the Rajya Sabha.
3. On a reference made again in pursuance of the above, the Law
Commission    examined     and        submitted   its   246th   Report   on
"
Amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
" in
August, 2014 and recommended various amendments in the Act.
The proposed amendments to the Act would facilitate and encourage
Alternative Dispute Mechanism, especially arbitration, for settlement
of disputes in a more user-friendly, cost effective and expeditious
disposal of cases since India is committed to improve its legal
framework to obviate in disposal of cases.
4. As India has been ranked at 178 out of 189 nations in the world
in contract enforcement, it is high time that urgent steps are taken to
facilitate quick enforcement of contracts, easy recovery of monetary
claims and award of just compensation for damages suffered and
reduce the pendency of cases in courts and hasten the process of
dispute resolution through arbitration, so as to encourage investment
and economic activity.
5. As Parliament was not in session and immediate steps were
required to be taken to make necessary amendments to the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
to attract foreign investment
by projecting India as an investor friendly country having a sound
legal framework, the President was pleased to promulgate the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015.
39
6. It is proposed to introduce the Arbitration and Conciliation
      (Amendment) Bill, 2015, to replace the Arbitration and Conciliation
      (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, which inter alia, provides for the
      following, namely:--
xxx xxx xxx
(iv) to provide that while considering any application for appointment
      of arbitrator, the High Court or the Supreme Court shall examine the
      existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement and not other
      issues;
xxx xxx xxx
7. The amendments proposed in the Bill will ensure that arbitration
      process becomes more user-friendly, cost effective and lead to
      expeditious disposal of cases.......
8. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance."
      NOTES ON CLAUSES
      xxx xxx xxx
      Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend
section 8
of the principal Act to

specify that the judicial authority shall refer the parties to arbitration

unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exits. A

proviso below sub-section (2) is inserted to provide that where the original

arbitration agreement or certified copy thereof is not available with the

party who apply under sub-section (1), and is retained by the other party,

such party shall file a copy of the arbitration agreement along with

application under sub-section (1) praying the Court to call upon the other

party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its duly certified

copy before the Court." (emphasis supplied)
40
Prior to the amendment of
Section 11
of the Act by which
Section

11(6A)
was inserted, two decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court were

ruling the field. The first decision is SBP and Co. (supra) and the second

decision in
Boghara Polyfab
(supra).
In SBP & Co. (supra) under the unamended provision, a seven-

Judge Constitution Bench has laid down the considerations for

appointment of an arbitrator      by the Chief Justice or designate in

paragraphs 37, 39 and 47 which state:-
"37.   .......    There   have   been   cases   where   claims   for
      appointment of an arbitrator based on an arbitration agreement are
      made ten or twenty years after the period of the contract has come
      to an end. There have been cases where the appointment of an
      arbitrator has been sought, after the parties had settled the
      accounts and the concerned party had certified that he had no
      further claims against the other contracting party. In other words,
      there have been occasions when dead claims are sought to be
      resurrected. There have been cases where assertions are made of
      the existence of arbitration agreements when, in fact, such existence
      is strongly disputed by the other side who appears on issuance of
      notice. Controversies are also raised as to whether the claim that is
      sought to be put forward comes within the purview of the concerned
      arbitration clause at all. The Chief Justice has necessarily to apply
      his mind to these aspects before coming to a conclusion one way or
      the other and before proceeding to appoint an arbitrator or declining
      to appoint an arbitrator.
39. It is necessary to define what exactly the Chief Justice,
      approached with an application under
Section 11
of the Act, is to
      decide at that stage. Obviously, he has to decide his own jurisdiction
41
in the sense, whether the party making the motion has approached
      the right High Court. He has to decide whether there is an
      arbitration agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the person
      who has made the request before him, is a party to such an
      agreement. It is necessary to indicate that he can also decide the
      question whether the claim was a dead one; or a long barred claim
      that was sought to be resurrected and whether the parties have
      concluded the transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual
      rights and obligations or by receiving the final payment without
      objection. It may not be possible at that stage, to decide whether a
      live claim made, is one which comes within the purview of the
      arbitration clause. It will be appropriate to leave that question to be
      decided by the arbitral tribunal on taking evidence, along with the
      merits of the claims involved in the arbitration.
47. (iv) The Chief Justice or the designated judge will have the
      right to decide the preliminary aspects as indicated in the earlier
      part of this judgment. These will be, his own jurisdiction, to entertain
      the request, the existence of a valid arbitration agreement, the
      existence or otherwise of a live claim, the existence of the condition
      for the exercise of his power and on the qualifications of the
      arbitrator or arbitrators."
The judgment in SBP & Co. (supra) was later on considered in
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) where the Supreme Court formulated the

following three categories of adjudication:-
"The issues (first category) which Chief Justice/his designate
            will have to decide are:
(a) Whether the party making the application has
                   approached the appropriate High Court.
42
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and
                    whether the party who has applied under
Section 11
of
                    the Act, is a party to such an agreement.
The issues (second category) which the Chief Justice/his
            designate may choose to decide (or leave them to the decision
            of the arbitral tribunal) are:
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long barred) claim or a
                    live claim.
(b) Whether the parties have concluded the contract/
                    transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual
                    rights and obligation or by receiving the final payment
                    without objection.
The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his
            designate should leave exclusively to the arbitral tribunal are:
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration
                    clause (as for example, a matter which is reserved for
                    final decision of a departmental authority and excepted
                    or excluded from arbitration).
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration."
In a fairly recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Duro

Felguera
(supra), it was observed that the position of law as
laid down in
SBP & Co. (supra) and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra) shall continue till the

amendment was brought about in 2015 and "after the amendment, all

that the courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement exists -

nothing more, nothing less. The legislative policy and purpose is

essentially to minimize the Court's intervention at the stage of appointing

the arbitrator and this intention as incorporated in
Section 11
(6-A) ought

to be respected".
43
The scope and extent of the power of the High Court and the

Supreme Court under
section 11(6)
and
11
(6-
A) of the Act
has been

discussed in
Duro Felgura
(supra) upon taking into consideration the

Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amendment Bill of 2015.
On a plain reading of the said Section it appears that in

considering any application for appointment of an arbitrator under sub-
section 4
or 5 or sub-
section 6
of
Section 11
, the High Court shall

notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court confine its

examination to the existence of an arbitration agreement.      The said

Section completely excludes the examination by a Court of any judgment,

decree or order of any Court between the parties and the only scope of

enquiry is to find out if there is existence of an arbitration agreement.

Mr. Kapoor during his argument has relied upon a three-Bench

judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
United India Insurance Co.

Ltd. Vs. Hyundai Engineering and Construction Co. Ltd.
reported in

2018 SCC Online SC 1045 where in Paragraph 12 of
the said decision
while making a reference to
Duro Felguera
(supra), the Hon'ble Supreme

Court has stated that the exposition of
the said decision
is a general

observation about the effect of the amended provision and not specific to

the issue under consideration.
The said decision, in my view, does not in

any manner assist the respondent as it was noticed that a similar clause

in the insurance policy came up for consideration before a three-Judge

Bench of the Supreme Court in
Oriented Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
44
Narbheram Power and Steel Private Ltd.
reported in (2018) 6 SCC

943 following the exposition in Vulcan Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Maharaja

Singh reported in (1976) 1 SCC 943 which again is a three-Judge

Bench decision, having construed clause similar to the said clause of the

insurance policy held that there can be no arbitration in cases where the

insurance company disputes or does not accept liability under or in

respect of the policy which, however, is not the case here. In the said

decision, the arbitration clause which is Clause 7, inter alia, clearly

stipulated that no difference or dispute shall be referable to the

arbitration if the company has disputed or not accepted liability under or

in respect of the policy. On the face of it, there is a clear bar to refer any

dispute if the insurance company has disputed or not accepted the

liability.
The decision in
United India Insurance Co.
(supra) does not

apply in the present scenario since the arbitration clause in the said case

was a conditional clause, which would not apply if the insurance

company disputed or did not accept the liability, whereas in the present

scenario, the arbitration clause is absolute and all disputes under it is

required to be referred to arbitration.
Seen in this light, the arbitration

clause in the present case is similar to the clause in
Duro Felguera
(supra) which also contained a clause that was absolute, and therefore

this Court ought to follow the guideline
laid down in
the concurring

opinions in
Duro Felguera
(supra) that the Court ought to limit its

examination to the existence of an arbitration agreement.
45
In the instant case, the defence that by reason of MoU dated 28th

October, 2016, the disputes between Lindsay and IFGL was settled and

any dispute arising out of the MoU needs to be decided in the suit and

not by arbitration as the MoU does not contain any arbitration clause is

not a matter to be gone into or required to be decided at this stage having

regard to a clear and specific direction in the Section itself that the Court

shall confine its examination as to the existence of an arbitration

agreement. It cannot be said that the dispute is ex facie not referable to

arbitration as there is no such clause similar to
United Insurance

Company Ltd.
(supra).
In
Duro Felguera
(supra), in two concurring

judgments, the Hon'ble Judges have discussed the scope, ambit and

width of
Section 11(6A)
. Justice Banumathi has noticed the changes

brought about by the
Arbitration and Conciliation Amendment Act, 2015
in Paragraphs 18 to 20. In paragraph 18 of the report, it is inter alia

stated - "Now as far as sub-section (6-A) of
section 11
, the power of the

court has now been restricted only to see whether there exists an

arbitration agreement". In paragraph 19 of the report, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has agreed with the view of as expressed the textbook

"Law Relating to Arbitration and Conciliation" by Dr. P.C. Markanda,

which inter alia reads:
"The changes made by the
Amending Act
are as follows:
1. The words 'Chief Justice or any person or institution designated
      by him' shall be substituted by the words 'the Supreme Court or, as
      the case may be, the High Court or any person or institution
46
designated by such Court'. Thus, now it is not only the Chief Justice
      who can hear applications under
Section 11
, the power can be
      delegated to any judge as well.
2. As per sub-section (6-A), the power of the Court has now been
      restricted only to examination of the existence of an arbitration
      agreement. Earlier, the Chief Justice had been given the power to
      examine other aspects as well, i.e. limitation, whether the claims
      were referable for arbitration etc. in terms of the judgments of the
      Supreme Court in SBP and Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd., (2005) 8
      SCC 618; and
National Insurance Co. Ltd. V. Boghara Polyfab Pvt
.
Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267. Now all preliminary issues have been left for
      the arbitral tribunal to decide in terms of
Section 16
of the Act."
      (emphasis supplied)


      In paragraph 20 of the report, it is reiterated that "since the dispute

between the parties arose in 2016, the amended provision of sub-section

(6-A) of
Section 11
shall govern the issue, as per which the power of the

Court is confined only to examine the existence of the arbitration

agreement". (emphasis supplied)

      In
the said judgment
, it is stated that all preliminary issues

including the plea of limitation have been left for the arbitral tribunal to

decide in terms of
Section 16
of the Act has been approved.             In a

concurring judgment, Justice Kurian Joseph has clearly stated that from

a reading of
Section 11
(6-A), the intention of the legislature is crystal

clear i.e. the court should and need only look into one aspect - the

existence of an arbitration agreement. What are the factors for deciding

as to whether there is an arbitration agreement is the next question. The
47
resolution to that is simple - it needs to be seen if the agreement

contains a clause which provides for arbitration pertaining to the

disputes which have arisen between the parties to the agreement.
In Paragraph 56 onwards, the cases of
Section 11
(6-A) of the 1996

Act was discussed in which it is stated:-
"56.   Having said that, this being one of the first cases on
Section
      11(6A)
of the 1996 Act before this Court, I feel it appropriate to
      briefly outline the scope and extent of the power of the High Court
      and the Supreme Court under
Sections 11(6)
and
11(6A)
.
57.    This Court in
S.B.P & Co v. Patel Engineering Ltd and Another
reported in (2005) 8 SCC 618 overruled
Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd.
      and others v. Mehul Construction Co.
; (2000) 7 SCC 201 and
      Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. & another. v. Rani Construction Pvt.
      Ltd.; (2002) 2 SCC 388 to hold that the power to appoint an
      arbitrator under
Section 11
is a judicial power and not a mere
      administrative   function.   The    conclusion   in   the   decision   as
      summarized by Balasubramanyan, J. speaking for the majority
      reads as follows:
"47. We, therefore, sum up our conclusions as follows:
(i) The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the High
                   Court or the Chief Justice of India under
Section 11(6)
of
                   the Act is not an administrative power. It is a judicial
                   power.
(ii) The power under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, in its
                   entirety, could be delegated, by the Chief Justice of the
                   High Court only to another Judge of that Court and by
                   the Chief Justice of India to another Judge of the
                   Supreme Court.
48
(iii) In case of designation of a Judge of the High Court
or of the Supreme Court, the power that is exercised by
the designated Judge would be that of the Chief Justice
as conferred by the statute.
(iv) The Chief Justice or the designated Judge will have
the right to decide the preliminary aspects as indicated
in the earlier part of this judgment. These will be his
own jurisdiction to entertain the request, the existence
of a valid arbitration agreement, the existence or
otherwise of a live claim, the existence of the condition
for the exercise of his power and on the qualifications of
the arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the
designated Judge would be entitled to seek the opinion
of an institution in the matter of nominating an
arbitrator qualified in terms of
Section 11(8)
of the Act if
the need arises but the order appointing the arbitrator
could only be that of the Chief Justice or the designated
Judge.
(v) Designation of a District Judge as the authority
under
Section 11(6)
of the Act by the Chief Justice of the
High Court is not warranted on the scheme of the Act.
(vi) Once the matter reaches the Arbitral Tribunal or the
sole arbitrator, the High Court would not interfere with
the orders passed by the arbitrator or the Arbitral
Tribunal   during        the   course   of   the   arbitration
proceedings and the parties could approach the Court
only in terms of
Section 37
of the Act or in terms
of
Section 34
of the Act.
(vii) Since an order passed by the Chief Justice of the
High Court or by the designated Judge of that Court is a
judicial order, an appeal will lie against that order only
49
under
Article 136
of the Constitution to the Supreme
Court.
(viii) There can be no appeal against an order of the
Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court
designated by him while entertaining an application
under
Section 11(6)
of the Act.
(ix) In a case where an Arbitral Tribunal has been
constituted by the parties without having recourse
to
Section 11(6)
of the Act, the Arbitral Tribunal will
have     the   jurisdiction   to   decide   all   matters   as
contemplated by
Section 16
of the Act.
(x) Since all were guided by the decision of this Court in
Konkan Rly.
Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P) Ltd
.
and orders under
Section 11(6)
of the Act have been
made based on the position adopted in that decision,
we clarify that appointments of arbitrators or Arbitral
Tribunals thus far made, are to be treated as valid, all
objections being left to be decided under
Section 16
of
the Act. As and from this date, the position as adopted
in this judgment will govern even pending applications
under
Section 11(6)
of the Act.
(xi) Where District Judges had been designated by the
Chief Justice of the High Court under
Section 11(6)
of
the Act, the appointment orders thus far made by them
will be treated as valid; but applications if any pending
before them as on this date will stand transferred, to be
dealt with by the Chief Justice of the High Court
concerned or a Judge of that Court designated by the
Chief Justice.
(xii) The decision in Konkan Rly.
Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani
Construction (P) Ltd
is overruled." (Emphasis Supplied)
50
58. This position was further clarified in
National Insurance
Company Limited v. Boghara Polyfab Private Limited
; (2009) 1
SCC 267. To quote:
"22. Where the intervention of the court is sought
      for appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal under
Section
      11
, the duty of the Chief Justice or his designate is
      defined in SBP & Co. This Court identified and
      segregated the preliminary issues that may arise for
      consideration in an application under
Section 11
of the
      Act into three categories, that is, (i) issues which the
      Chief Justice or his designate is bound to decide; (ii)
      issues which he can also decide, that is, issues which
      he may choose to decide; and (iii) issues which should
      be left to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
22.1. The issues (first category) which the Chief
      Justice/his designate will have to decide are:
(a) Whether the party making the application has
      approached the appropriate High Court.
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and
      whether the party who has applied under
Section 11of
the Act, is a party to such an agreement.
22.2. The issues (second category) which the Chief
Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or leave them to
the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are:
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long-barred)
      claim or a live claim.
(b) Whether the parties have concluded the
      contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their
      mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final
      payment without objection.
51
22.3. The issues (third category) which the Chief
            Justice/his designate should leave exclusively to the Arbitral
            Tribunal are:
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the
                   arbitration clause (as for example, a matter which is
                   reserved for final decision of a departmental authority
                   and excepted or excluded from arbitration).
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration."
59.The scope of the power under
Section 11 (6)
of the 1996 Act
      was considerably wide in view of the decisions in SBP and Co.
      (supra) and
Boghara Polyfab
(supra). This position continued till the
      amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all that
      the Courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement exists -
      nothing more, nothing less. The legislative policy and purpose is
      essentially to minimize the Court's intervention at the stage of
      appointing   the   arbitrator   and   this intention   as incorporated
      in
Section 11 (6A)
ought to be respected."
The views of the Judges are quite clear that the Court needs to see

whether an arbitration agreement exists. Whether there has been any

novation to the original contract, it is a matter for the arbitrator to decide

in the said proceeding.
In this context, it is apposite to refer to the

decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd.

v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.
reported in (2013) 1 SCC 641,

which although was rendered in relation with
section 45
of the

unamended Act, considered the jurisdiction of the Court in relation to a

dispute in paragraphs 83-85, which read:-
52
"83. Where the Court which, on its judicial side, is seized of an
action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an
arbitration agreement, once the required ingredients are satisfied, it
would refer the parties to arbitration but for the situation where it
comes to the conclusion that the agreement is null and void,
inoperative or incapable of being performed. These expressions have
to be construed somewhat strictly so as to ensure that the Court
returns a finding with certainty and on the correct premise of law
and fact as it has the effect of depriving the party of its right of
reference to arbitration. But once the Court finds that the agreement
is valid then it must make the reference, without any further
exercise of discretion {refer
General Electric Co. v. Renusagar Power
Co.
[(1987) 4 SCC 137]}. These are the issues which go to the root of
the matter and their determination at the threshold would prevent
multiplicity of litigation and would even prevent futile exercise of
proceedings before the arbitral tribunal.
84. The issue of whether the courts are empowered to review the
existence and validity of the arbitration agreement prior to reference
is more controversial. A majority of the countries admit to the
positive effect of kompetenz kompetenz principle, which requires that
the arbitral tribunal must exercise jurisdiction over the dispute under
the arbitration agreement. Thus, challenge to the existence or
validity of the arbitration agreement will not prevent the arbitral
tribunal from proceeding      with   hearing   and ruling upon its
jurisdiction. If it retains jurisdiction, making of an award on the
substance of the dispute would be permissible without waiting for
the outcome of any court action aimed at deciding the issue of the
jurisdiction. The negative effect of the kompetenz kompetenz
principle is that arbitrators are entitled to be the first to determine
their jurisdiction which is later reviewable by the court, when there
is action to enforce or set aside the arbitral award. Where the
53
dispute is not before an arbitral tribunal, the Court must also decline
     jurisdiction unless the arbitration agreement is patently void,
     inoperative or incapable of being performed.
85. This is the position of law in France and in some other countries,
     but as far as the Indian Law is concerned,
Section 45
is a legislative
     mandate and does not admit of any ambiguity. We must take note of
     the aspect of Indian law that Chapter I of Part II of the 1996 Act
     does not contain any provision analogous to
Section 8(3)
under
Part I
     of the Act
. In other words, under the Indian Law, greater obligation
     is cast upon the Courts to determine whether the agreement is valid,
     operative and capable of being performed at the threshold itself.
     Such challenge has to be a serious challenge to the substantive
     contract or to the agreement, as in the absence of such challenge, it
     has to be found that the agreement was valid, operative and
     capable of being performed; the dispute would be referred to
     arbitration. [
State of Orissa v. Klockner and Company & Ors.
(AIR
     1996 SC 2140)]."
The scheme of the
Arbitration Act, 1940
and the 1996 Act before

the recent amendment has been considered in
Kalpana Kothary v.

Sudha Yadav
reported at (2002) 1 SCC 203, where it is observed -
" 8........ In striking contrast to the said scheme underlying the
     provisions of the 1940 Act, in the new 1996 Act, there is no provision
     corresponding to
Section 34
of the old Act and
Section 8
of the Act
     mandates that the Judicial Authority before which an action has
     been brought in respect of a matter, which is the subject-matter of an
     arbitration agreement, shall refer the parties to arbitration if a party
     to such an agreement applies not later than when submitting his
     first statement. The provisions of the Act do not envisage the specific
54
obtaining of any stay as under the 1940 Act, for the reason that not
      only the direction to make reference is mandatory but not
      withstanding the pendency of the proceedings before the Judicial
      Authority or the making of an application under
Section 8 (1)
of the
      Act, the arbitration proceedings are enabled, under
Section 8 (3)
of
      the Act to be commenced or continued and an arbitral award also
      made unhampered by such pendency. We have to test the order
      under appeal on this basis." (emphasis supplied)



      The unamended
sections 8
and
11
of the Act came up for

consideration in
Praveen Enterprises
(supra). In paragraphs 13 and 39

of the report, the distinction has been explained in the following words:
"13. `Reference to arbitration' can be in respect of reference of
      disputes between the parties to arbitration, or may simply mean
      referring the parties to arbitration.
Section 8
of the Act is an example
      of referring the parties to arbitration. While
section 11
contemplates
      appointment of arbitrator [vide sub-sections (4), (5) and (9)] or taking
      necessary measure as per the appointment procedure under the
      arbitration agreement [vide sub-section (6)],
section 8
of the Act does
      not provide for appointment of an arbitrator, nor referring of any
      disputes to arbitration, but merely requires the judicial authority
      before whom an action is brought in a matter in regard to which
      there is an arbitration agreement, to refer the parties to arbitration.
      When the judicial authority finds that the subject matter of the suit
      is covered by a valid arbitration agreement between the parties to
      the suit, it will refer the parties to arbitration, by refusing to decide
      the action brought before it and leaving it to the parties to have
      recourse to their remedies by arbitration. When such an order is
      made, parties may either agree upon an arbitrator and refer their
55
disputes to him, or failing agreement, file an application under
section 11
of the Act for appointment of an arbitrator. The judicial
authority `referring the parties to arbitration' under
section 8
of the
Act, has no power to appoint an arbitrator. It may however record
the consent of parties to appoint an agreed arbitrator.
39. Reliance was placed upon certain observations in the decision of
the House of Lords in Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.-- 1942 AC 356. We
extract below the paragraph containing the relied upon observations:
"The law permits the parties to a contract to include in it as
      one of its terms an agreement to refer to arbitration disputes
      which may arise in connection with it, and the court of
      England enforce such a reference by staying legal proceedings
      in respect of any matter agreed to be referred "if satisfied that
      there is no sufficient reason why the matter should not be
      referred in accordance with the submission." Arbitration Act,
      1889,
sec. 4
. Where proceedings at law are instituted by one
      of the parties to a contract containing an arbitration clause
      and the other party, founding on the clause, applies for a stay,
      the first thing to be ascertained is the precise nature of the
      dispute which has arisen The next question is whether the
      dispute is one which falls within the terms of the arbitration
      clause. Then sometimes the question is raised whether the
      arbitration clause is still effective or whether something has
      happened to render it no longer operative. Finally, the nature
      of the dispute being ascertained, it having been held to fall
      within the terms of the arbitration clause, and the clause
      having been found to be still effective, there remains for the
      court the question whether there is any sufficient reason why
      the   matter   in   dispute    should   not   be    referred   to
      arbitration."(emphasis supplied)
56
40. The said observations were made while examining whether a
      suit should be stayed at the instance of the defendant on the ground
      that there was an arbitration agreement between the parties. If a
      party to an arbitration agreement files a civil suit and the defendant
      contends that the suit should be stayed and the parties should be
      referred to arbitration, necessarily, the court will have to find out
      what exactly is the subject matter of the suit, whether it would fall
      within the scope of the arbitration clause, whether the arbitration
      clause was valid and effective and lastly whether there was
      sufficient reason as to why the subject matter of the suit should not
      be referred to arbitration. The observations made in Heymen, in the
      context of an application seeking stay of further proceedings in a
      suit, are not relevant in respect of an application under
section 11
of
      the Act. This Court has repeatedly held that the questions for
      consideration in an application under
section 8
by a civil court in a
      suit are different from the questions for consideration under
section
      11
of the Act. The said decision is therefore of no assistance."
Section 8(3)
of the Act permits commencement or continuation of

an arbitral proceeding notwithstanding pendency of any application

under
Section 8
of the Act.
Section 8(3)
of the Act came up for

consideration in
Vijay Kumar Sharma vs. Raghunandan Sharma
reported at (2010) 2 SCC 486, where it is observed -
"It is evident from sub-section (3) of
section 8
that the pendency of

      an application under
section 8
before any court will not come in the

      way of an arbitration being commenced or continued and an arbitral

      award being made. The obvious intention of this provision is that
57
neither the filing of any suit by any party to the arbitration

      agreement nor any application being made by the other party

      under
section 8
to the court, should obstruct or preclude a party from

      initiating any proceedings for appointment of an arbitrator or

      proceeding with the arbitration before the Arbitral Tribunal. Having

      regard to the specific provision in
section 8(3)
providing that the

      pendency of an application under
section 8(1)
will not come in the

      way of an arbitration being commenced or continued, we are of the

      view that an application under
section 11
or
section 15(2)
of the Act,

      for appointment of an arbitrator, will not be barred by pendency of

      an application under
Section 8
of the Act in any suit, nor will the

      Designate of the Chief Justice be precluded from considering and

      disposing of an application under
Section 11
or 15(2) of the

      Act." (emphasis supplied)

      Recently
Section 8
of the Act has undergone an amendment.
Section 8(1)
of the Act, after amendment reads:-
"A judicial authority, before which an action is brought in a matter
      which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party to
      the arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under
      him, so applies not later than the date of submitting his first
      statement on the substance of the dispute, then, notwithstanding
      any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court,
      refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no
      valid arbitration agreement exists."
58
The earlier
Section 8(1)
of the Act read:-
"A judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter
      which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party so
      applies not later than when submitting his first statement on the
      substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration."
The amended provision came up for consideration in
Ameet

Lalchand Shah and others vs. Rishabh Enterpirses and another
reported in 2018 SCC Online SC 487.
The decision in
Sukanya

Holding
(supra) was considered in the light of the aforesaid amendment.

On consideration of the amended
Section 8
of the Act, it was held:
"29.   Principally   four   amendments       to
Section   8(1)
have   been
      introduced by the 2015 Amendments - (i) the relevant "party" that is
      entitled to apply seeking reference to arbitration has been
      clarified/amplified to include persons claiming "through or under"
such a party to the arbitration agreement; (ii) scope of examination
      by the judicial authority is restricted to a finding whether "no valid
      arbitration agreement exists" and the nature of examination by the
      judicial authority is clarified to be on a "prima facie" basis; (iii) the
      cut-off date by which an application under
Section 8
is to be
      presented has been defined to mean "the date of" submitting the first
      statement on the substance of the dispute; and (iv) the amendments
      are expressed to apply notwithstanding any prior judicial precedent.
      The proviso to
Section 8(2)
has been added to allow a party that
      does not possess the original or certified copy of the arbitration
      agreement on account of it being retained by the other party, to
      nevertheless apply under
Section 8
seeking reference, and call upon
59
the other party to produce the same." (Ref: Justice R.S. Bachawat's
Law of Arbitration and Conciliation, Sixth Edition, Vol. I (
Sections
1
to
34
) at page 695 published by LexisNexis).
30. Amendment to
Section 8
by the Act, 2015 are to be seen in the
background of the recommendations set out in the 246 th Law
Commission Report. In its 246th Report, Law Commission, while
recommending the amendment to
Section 8
, made the following
observation/comment:-
"LC Comment: The words "such of the parties.... to the
      arbitration agreement" and proviso (i) of the amendment have
      been proposed in the context of the decision of the Supreme
      Court in
Sukanya Holdings Pvt. Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya and
      Anr.
(2003) 5 SCC 531,- in cases where all the parties to the
      dispute are not parties to the arbitration agreement, the
      reference is to be rejected only where such parties are
      necessary parties to the action - and not if they are only
      proper parties, or are otherwise legal strangers to the action
      and have been added only to circumvent the arbitration
      agreement. Proviso (ii) of the amendment contemplates a two-
      step process to be adopted by a judicial authority when
      considering an application seeking the reference of a pending
      action to arbitration. The amendment envisages that the
      judicial authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration only
      if it finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement or
      that it is null and void. If the judicial authority is of the opinion
      that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, then it shall
      refer the dispute to arbitration, and leave the existence of the
      arbitration agreement to be finally determined by the arbitral
      tribunal. However, if the judicial authority concludes that the
      agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will be final and
60
not prima facie. The amendment also envisages that there
            shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the
            arbitration agreement is null and void.
xxx
31. The language of amendment to
Section 8
of the Act is clear that
      the   amendment     to
Section        8(1)
of   the   Act   would   apply
      notwithstanding any prayer, judgment, decree or order of the
      Supreme Court or any other Court." (emphasis supplied)

            The reference to
Section 8
of the Act and the decisions on the

      said Section have been referred to only for the limited purpose of

      understanding whether the considerations for referring the dispute

      of the parties to arbitration is the same as that of a proceeding

      under
section 11
of the Act. The considerations are completely

      different.
At this stage, it is not necessary to consider whether there has

been a novation of contract or the entire disputes between the parties

have been settled by way of a MoU.            The bifurcation of the disputes

between the parties is also not a matter to be considered in an

application under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

1996. There is no dispute between the parties that a valid arbitration

agreement exists between the parties. The existence of the arbitration

agreements is admitted. The respondent is resisting the reference on

other grounds, namely, that the majority of claims against IFGL per se,

ignoring the tortious claims involving several parties are not referable to
61
arbitration. The principal claim against IFGL is that IFGL has acted

contrary to the understanding between the parties and on and from

September, 2016 has illegally sought to enter into a contract with Arcelor

Mittal Companies in breach of obligations. This is, in my view, not a

factor to be considered at this stage.
The argument of Mr. Kapoor that sub-section 6A of
section 11
of

the Act is ultra vires as as it is opposed to the doctrine of separation of

power and curtailed the role of the judiciary cannot be gone into at this

stage in view of the fact that in
Duro Felguero
(supra), in paragraphs 18,

19, 20, 47, 48, 56, 57 and 59, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the

changes brought about by the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment)

Act, 2015
, amongst others, in relation to appointment of an arbitrator

under
section 11
of the 1996 Act; and
the said judgment
is binding on

this Court.
Although Mr. Kapoor has contended that the pronouncement

in
Duro Felguero
(supra) - that the Court ought to confine its

examination to the existence of an arbitration agreement - is obiter and

not binding on this Court, the said argument cannot be accepted in view

of the discussion made above inasmuch as even an obiter of a Supreme

Court is binding on the High Court, as held in
Palitana Sugar Mills
(supra), where it is stated -
"62. It is well settled that the judgments of this Court are binding on
      all the authorities under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India and
      it is not open to any authority to ignore a binding judgment of this
      Court on the ground that the full facts had not been placed before
62
this court and/or the judgment of this Court in the earlier
      proceedings had only collaterally or incidentally decided the issues
      raised in the show cause notices. Such an attempt to belittle the
      judgments and the orders of this Court, to say the least, is plainly
      perverse and amounts to gross contempt of this Court. We are
      pained to say that the then Deputy Collector has scant respect for
      the orders passed by the Apex Court."
Under such circumstances, the application is allowed.

      Hon'ble Justice Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, former Chief Justice,

High Court, Calcutta is appointed as the sole arbitrator. The Hon'ble

Justice Bhattacharya is requested to fix commensurate remuneration, at

the fist sitting of the parties, to be shared by the parties in equal

measure at the first instance, subject to the directions as to the costs as

may be contained in the final Award. The learned arbitrator is requested

to conclude the reference within a period of twelve months of the

statement of claim being lodged before him.
Urgent Photostat certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be

given to the parties on an usual undertaking.
(Soumen Sen, J.)




      Later:
Mr. Rudraman Bhattacharya, learned Counsel for the

respondent has prayed for stay of operation of the order.
63
The order shall remain stayed for a period of two weeks from

date.
(Soumen Sen, J.)
