Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 45 of 1860
Citation: SCC OnLine Del 383 (dated 25.01.2023) to be adhered
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/104061976/

[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Minor S Thr Mother M vs The State Nct Of Delhi And Anr on 29 May, 2025
Author:
Swarana Kanta Sharma
Bench:
Swarana Kanta Sharma
$~85
                          *          IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                          %                                                                        Date of decision: 29.05.2025
                          +          W.P. (CRL.) 1804/2025
                                     MINOR S (THR. MOTHER M)                                                                     .....Petitioner
                                                                       Through:               Mr.     Anwesh       Madhukar
                                                                                              (DHCLSC), Ms. Prachi Nirwan
                                                                                              Mr. Ishat Singh Mr. Pranjal
                                                                                              Shekhar, Advocates, along with
                                                                                              mother of the minor/petitioner.
                                                                       versus
                                     STATE & ANR.                                                                          .....Respondents
                                                                       Through:               Mr. Amol Sinha, ASC (Crl.),
                                                                                              Mr. Ashvini Kumar and Mr.
                                                                                              Kshitiz Garg, Advocates.
                                                                                              Mr. Satya Ranjan Swain (Panel
                                                                                              Counsel-AIIMS) with Dr Swati
                                                                                              Tomar, AIIMS / R-2

                          CORAM:
                          HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE SWARANA KANTA SHARMA
                                                                        JUDGMENT
INDEX TO THE JUDGMENT
                          INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................2
                          FACTUAL BACKGROUND .............................................................................3
                          PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT .....................................................6
                          ANALYSIS & FINDINGS ............................................................................... 12
(A) The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
: The Statutory
                                Framework ........................................................................................................... 13
                              (B)       Medical Termination of Pregnancy of beyond 24 weeks of a Rape
                                        Victim: Law and the Judicial Precedents ......................................................... 17
                              (C)        Directions & Guidelines Issued by this Bench: Summed Up ..................... 18
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                                                       Page 1 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
(i)    Decision in
Minor R Through Mother H v. State (NCT of Delhi
) and
                                            its Compliance ................................................................................................... 18
(ii)   Decision in
Minor L Through Guardian J v. State & Anr.
.............................. 23
(iii) Decision in
Minor S Through Father B v. State & Anr
.................................... 24
                               (D)     The Present Case: Undue Delay in Carrying out MTP ................................. 26
                               (E)     Issue Regarding Identity Proof for Ultrasound in Cases Involving Rape
                                       Victims.................................................................................................................. 28
                               (F)     Issue Regarding Determination of Age of the Victim - Medical Opinion
                                       Versus Official Record ....................................................................................... 31
                               (G)     Delay in Constitution of Medical Board Despite this Court's Directions . 33
                               (H)     Discrepancy in Determination of Gestational Age........................................ 35
                               (I)     Incomplete or Silent Report of the Medical Board: The information
                                       required................................................................................................................. 37
                               (J)     Comprehensive Directions and Guidelines ..................................................... 38
                               (K)     Directions for Circulation and Implementation of Directions .................... 43
                          CONCLUSION ............................................................................................... 45


                          DR. SWARANA KANTA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)
                          INTRODUCTION
1.         This Court has once again been called upon, by way of the
                          present writ petition preferred by a minor sexual assault victim
                          through her mother, who is presently admitted and confined within
                          the four walls of a hospital ward - carrying the enormous burden not
                          only of a pregnancy resulting from sexual assault, but also of the
                          memories associated with such trauma.
2.         The victim's statement to the doctor who conducted her
                          medico-legal examination, and the medical records itself revealed
                          additional shocking details, i.e. that the victim was burnt by the
                          accused with a lighter at different places on her body. As if the
                          physical injuries and sexual assault were not enough to traumatize
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                                                                Page 2 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
her, the indifference shown by the medical staff has only compounded
                          her suffering. The doctors chose not to perform her ultrasound on the
                          first day she was brought to the hospital solely because she did not
                          possess an identity card.
3.     This is also, yet another unfortunate occasion where this Court
                          is confronted with the distressing reality of a minor rape victim, aged
                          about 17 years, seeking medical termination of pregnancy [hereafter
                          also referred to as ‗MTP'], only to be turned away by the hospital
                          authorities on the ground that an order of this Court is first required
                          before any medical assessment could be carried out by the Medical
                          Board.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
4.     The facts, as they unfold from the perusal of the petition, are
                          that an FIR bearing no. 335/2025 was registered at Police Station
                          Fatehpur Beri, Delhi on 11.05.2025, for commission of offence
                          punishable under Section 64(1) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
                          and
Section 6
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
                          2012, on the statement of minor victim S, who alleged that the
                          accused ‗A' had committed sexual assault with her on several
                          occasions on the false promise of marriage, due to which he had
                          become pregnant.
5.     On the same date, the victim was taken to All India Institute of
                          Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Delhi for her medical examination. The
                          Medico-Legal Certificate (MLC) was prepared, which recorded a
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                        Page 3 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
positive Urine Pregnancy Test (UPT). However, the MLC also notes
                          that the petitioner declined to undergo any gynaecological
                          examination or provide her biological samples. She also, on that day,
                          refused to get her pregnancy terminated. It is further recorded that the
                          victim informed the examining doctor that she had been subjected to
                          physical violence, including being burnt at multiple places on her
                          body with a lighter by the accused.
6.     However, despite the urgency of the situation and clinical
                          indications (pregnant abdomen examination) suggesting a pregnancy
                          of about 20 weeks, the attending medical personnel at the Hospital
                          declined to conduct an ultrasound examination. In this regard, one
                          Form F had been filled up, however, it was mentioned on the same
                          that no identity card of the victim was available, and thus, citing the
                          absence of a valid identity proof, her ultrasound was not conducted.
                          This was so even though the petitioner had been brought by an
                          investigating officer of the Delhi Police with the official case file,
                          pursuant to registration of the FIR.
7.     Subsequently, the matter was placed before the Child Welfare
                          Committee (CWC) on 13.05.2025. The CWC, upon interacting with
                          the victim child and her mother, both of whom expressed consent for
                          going ahead with the MTP, directed the Investigating Officer to
                          ensure that the procedure was carried out at AIIMS, Delhi, without
                          delay and called upon the Hospital to comply and submit a status
                          report.
8.     However, despite the CWC's clear directions, the Investigating
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 4 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
Officer has informed this Court that on 14.05.2025, the petitioner was
                          taken to AIIMS, Delhi by Constable Yogita, regarding which DD
                          entry No 103-A was recorded, again turned away by the attending
                          doctors at the Hospital, who reiterated their refusal to conduct the
                          ultrasound or proceed with MTP in the absence of identity documents
                          of the petitioner. The CWC was apprised of the same through a status
                          report dated 22.05.2025. The said report reveals that even after being
                          handed over a copy of the CWC's order, the doctors at AIIMS, Delhi
                          declined to proceed with the required ultrasound, insisting upon
                          identity proof and age verification through an ossification test. It is a
                          matter of deep concern that despite being fully aware of the
                          petitioner's pregnancy, the hospital authorities insisted on conducting
                          an ossification test, which involves radiological procedures that are
                          generally contraindicated during pregnancy. An application for the
                          same was moved before the learned Trial Court and the date for the
                          test was fixed as 26.05.2025.
9.     It is pointed out that on 22.05.2025, following a telephonic
                          request from a CWC member to the concerned medical personnel, the
                          Investigating Officer had once again approached the Hospital
                          concerned. The Hospital, however, scheduled the petitioner's
                          ultrasound only on 24.05.2025. On that day, the ultrasound was
                          finally conducted. The doctor's order dated 24.05.2025 clearly
                          records that the victim had no ID card due to which her ultrasound
                          had not been conducted earlier, but conducted today. The said
                          ultrasound, conducted on 24.05.2025, revealed that the petitioner was
                          carrying a pregnancy of about 25 weeks and 4 days.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 5 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
10.    However, thereafter, the victim was not examined by a Medical
                          Board as it was opined by the doctor concerned that a court order was
                          required since the pregnancy exceeded 24 weeks. The doctor's order
                          dated 24.05.2025 is as follows:
11.    It is in this background that the petitioner was compelled to
                          approach this Court.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
12.    On 27.05.2025, when the matter came before this Court for the
                          first time at 4 PM, the Investigating Officer, who was present before
                          this Court, stated that though the victim child is currently admitted at
                          AIIMS, Delhi, the attending doctor has insisted that, since the
                          pregnancy is of more than 24 weeks, unless an order is obtained from
                          this Court, they would not medically examine the child and provide
                          their report regarding the medical assessment as to whether MTP can
                          be safely conducted or not.
13.    This Court had, vide order dated 27.05.2025, directed that the
                          petitioner be medically examined/assessed by the Medical Board of
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 6 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
respondent no. 2 immediately, and that a report regarding the
                          feasibility and safety of MTP be placed before this Court on the very
                          next day. The relevant portion of the said order is extracted hereunder:
―3. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits
                                     that the petitioner is a minor victim of rape, who seeks to get
                                     her pregnancy medically terminated. However, it is pointed out
                                     that the victim has yet not been examined (as per provisions of
                                     the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
) by the
                                     Medical Board of respondent no. 2.
4. The matter has been heard at length today. Certain lapses on
                                     the part of respondent no. 2 have been pointed out by the
                                     learned counsel for the petitioner.
5. Be that as it may, considering the urgency in the matter, it is
                                     directed that the petitioner herein shall be medically
                                     examined/assessed by the Medical Board of respondent no. 2,
                                     immediately. The assistance given by Mr. Satya Ranjan Swain,
                                     the Standing Counsel for AIIMS, who came to the Court to
                                     assist in the matter, is appreciated, who has coordinated and
                                     sought instructions on phone from the Private Secretary of
                                     Medical Superintendent, AIIMS, Delhi and has assured this
                                     Court that a Medical Board will be constituted by the
                                     respondent no. 2 today itself, and after the medical
                                     examination/ assessment of the petitioner, a report in this
                                     regard will be placed before this Court tomorrow morning i.e.
                                     28.05.2025.
6. Accordingly, list the matter tomorrow i.e. 28.05.2025.‖
14.    When the matter was taken up on 28.05.2025, a report prepared
                          by the 7-member Medical Board of AIIMS, Delhi, had been received,
                          wherein it was mentioned that upon conducting the ultrasound of the
                          victim, it was found that the gestational age of the foetus was 23
                          weeks and 4 days. This contradicted the Hospital's own record
                          dated 24.05.2025, which mentioned the gestational age as 25 weeks
                          and 4 days. No explanation was offered for this inconsistency. It was
                          also surprising that a doctor, appearing via video-conferencing,
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                    Page 7 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
submitted that no court order was now needed since the gestation
                          period was under 24 weeks - despite the Hospital earlier insisting the
                          victim, her family and the I.O. on obtaining a court order. In view of
                          these contradictions and the absence of a clear opinion, a clarification
                          report was sought from AIIMS, Delhi, specifically stating whether
                          MTP would pose any risk to the life of the minor victim, vide order
                          dated 28.05.2025. The relevant portion of the said order reads as
                          under:
―4. The matter has been taken up again today. A report dated
                                     28.05.2025, prepared by the Medical Board, has now been
                                     placed on record.
5. While several submissions have been made, which are not
                                     being discussed in this order, this Court, considering the
                                     urgency, finds it necessary to note with concern that despite the
                                     constitution of the Medical Board, the report submitted today
                                     fails to provide any clear opinion as to whether the medical
                                     termination of pregnancy (MTP) can be safely performed on
                                     the minor rape victim without posing a risk to her life. The
                                     relevant portion of the opinion reads as follows:
―After due consideration, it was observed that the
                                         chronological age of the mother is 17 years and 6 months
                                         (report attached), and the gestational age of the fetus is 23
                                         weeks and 4 days as on 28.05.2025. As this falls under the
MTP Act
(minor category for 20-24 weeks), MTP may be
                                         permitted without the need for Medical Board.‖
6. It is also strange that today it has been stated that the
                                     gestation period is 23 weeks and 4 days, whereas in the
                                     Hospital's own prior record dated 24.05.2025 (Doctor's
                                     Order), it was noted that the gestational age was 25 weeks and
                                     4 days. There is no explanation for this discrepancy in the
                                     reports within a span of just four days.
7. It must be emphasized that the purpose of seeking a report
                                     from the Medical Superintendent, based on the findings of a
                                     Medical Board, is to enable the Court to pass an order based on
                                     expert medical opinion -- particularly as to whether the
                                     procedure will endanger the minor victim's life. Unfortunately,
                                     the report is completely silent on this vital aspect.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                      Page 8 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
8. It is also surprising that during the hearing today, it was
                                     submitted by one of the doctors, who appeared through video-
                                     conferencing, that a court order is no longer required since the
                                     gestation period is less than 24 weeks, whereas their own
                                     record dated 24.05.2025 specifically mentioned that an order
                                     from the Court is required for conducting the MTP in this case.
9. In view of the above inconsistencies and lack of a conclusive
                                     opinion, let a clarification report be filed by the Medical Board.
                                     Additionally, a specific opinion, as required for submission to a
                                     Court of law, shall be furnished clearly stating whether, in the
                                     expert view of the Medical Board, conducting MTP in the
                                     present case would pose any threat to the life of the child
                                     victim.
10.    List   this   matter    tomorrow      i.e.   29.05.2025.‖
15.    On 29.05.2025, i.e, today, a clarification report has been
                          received from the Medical Board of AIIMS, Delhi explaining the
                          discrepancy in gestational age, and further, it has now been opined
                          that the minor was physically and mentally fit for medical termination
                          of pregnancy, and the same would not endanger her life. Given the
                          contradictory submissions regarding the necessity of a court order and
                          to avoid any confusion, and also upon such a request being made on
                          behalf of the Hospital, this Court has passed a specific order directing
                          AIIMS, Delhi to conduct MTP of the minor rape victim on
                          30.05.2025. It was also clarified in the order passed today that a
                          reasoned judgment, addressing the procedural lapses and systemic
                          issues, would follow separately. The relevant portion of the said order
                          reads as under:
―5. This Court, vide order dated 28.05.2025, had expressed its
                                     displeasure regarding the inconsistent medical opinions and
                                     contradictory stands taken by the respondent no. 2 Hospital,
                                     regarding the requirement of a court order for conducting
                                     Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP), and had called for a
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                    Page 9 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
clarification from the Hospital in the following terms:
―8. It is also surprising that during the hearing today, it was
                                         submitted by one of the doctors, who appeared through video-
                                         conferencing, that a court order is no longer required since the
                                         gestation period is less than 24 weeks, whereas their own record
                                         dated 24.05.2025 specifically mentioned that an order from the
                                         Court is required for conducting the MTP in this case.
9. In view of the above inconsistencies and lack of a conclusive
                                         opinion, let a clarification report be filed by the Medical Board.
Additionally, a specific opinion, as required for submission to a
                                         Court of law, shall be furnished clearly stating whether, in the
                                         expert view of the Medical Board, conducting MTP in the present
                                         case would pose any threat to the life of the child victim.‖
6. Today, a report has been placed before this Court wherein an
                                     explanation has been provided for the discrepancy in the
                                     gestational age recorded in the earlier medical documents vis-à-
                                     vis the later Medical Board report. It has also been opined today
                                     that ―the minor is physically and mentally fit to undergo
                                     termination of pregnancy and it will not endanger the minor
                                     victim's life.‖
7. As already noted in the previous order dated 28.05.2025, the
                                     doctor's order dated 24.05.2025 issued by respondent no. 2
                                     Hospital had opined that the pregnancy of the minor rape victim
                                     was of 25 weeks and 4 days, which being beyond 24 weeks,
                                     would require a court order under the
MTP Act
. Conversely, in
                                     the Medical Board report dated 28.05.2025, it was stated that
                                     the gestational age was 23 weeks and 4 days, and hence, a court
                                     order was not required.
8. Today, in the forenoon, it was submitted before this Court
                                     that no court order was required for conducting the MTP,
                                     considering the revised gestational age of the fetus. However, in
                                     the afternoon, it was submitted on behalf of respondent no. 2
                                     that a court order may be passed.
9. In view of these submissions, and for the sake of clarity and
                                     to avoid any further confusion, taking into account the earlier
                                     report of hospital - which recorded the gestational age to be 25
                                     weeks and 4 days - and also considering that by tomorrow, even
                                     as per the opinion dated 28.05.2025 of medical board, the
                                     gestational age shall be 24 weeks, this Court deems it
                                     appropriate to pass specific directions for the medical
                                     termination of pregnancy of the petitioner/minor rape victim,
                                     aged about 17 years:
i. The petitioner/victim, the Court is informed, is admitted in
                                           the hospital/respondent no. 2. The competent authority of
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                           Page 10 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
AIIMS, New Delhi shall make necessary arrangements for
                                           medical termination of pregnancy of the victim which has
                                           resulted due to alleged rape committed upon her, tomorrow i.e.
                                           30th May, 2025, subject to all necessary medical precautions
                                           and procedures etc.;
ii. The Superintendent, AIIMS, New Delhi, and the Medical
                                           Board will ensure that the termination of pregnancy of the
                                           minor victim/petitioner is undertaken by competent doctors in
                                           accordance with the provisions of the
MTP Act
, its rules and all
                                           other rules, regulations and guidelines prescribed for the
                                           purpose;
iii. A complete record of the procedure which will be performed
                                           on the petitioner for termination of her pregnancy shall be
                                           maintained by the Medical Board;
iv. The doctors concerned shall also preserve the tissue of the
                                           fetus as the same may be necessary for DNA identification and
                                           other purposes, in reference to the criminal case which stands
                                           registered against the accused by the petitioner/victim;
                                           v. The State shall bear all the expenses necessary for the
                                           termination of the pregnancy of the petitioner, her medicines,
                                           food etc.;
vi. If the child is born alive, the Superintendent, AIIMS, New
                                           Delhi, shall ensure that everything, which is reasonably possible
                                           and feasible in the circumstances is offered to such child, and
                                           the Child Welfare Committee concerned shall do the needful in
                                           accordance with law.
10. This Court has passed the aforesaid directions after it was
                                     brought to the notice of the Court that the informed consent of
                                     the guardian of the minor victim has been obtained in this case,
                                     the statement made by the mother of the victim, who is present
                                     before the Court, and after perusing the opinion of Medical
                                     Board of AIIMS, New Delhi. Needless to say, the doctors
                                     concerned while performing the procedure for medical
                                     termination of pregnancy of the victim herein are expected to
                                     keep every safety aspect in view.
11. The present order is being passed considering the urgency
                                     involved in this case. However, the detailed reasons for passing
                                     the order, along with certain guidelines and directions - in light
                                     of the various procedural and systemic issues, lapses and non-
                                     compliance of judicial orders that have pointed out and argued
                                     before this Court - shall be dealt with in extenso in a separate,
                                     reasoned judgment of even date...‖
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                       Page 11 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
16.    It is in this backdrop that the present judgment is being
                          authored, primarily, to address certain procedural lapses, conflicting
                          medical opinions, shifting stands taken before this Court, and the lack
                          of institutional clarity in cases involving medical termination of
                          pregnancy of minor victims of sexual assault.
17.    The present case has brought to fore the systemic shortcomings
                          that require judicial attention, not only to ensure that justice is done in
                          the individual case but also to lay down necessary safeguards and
                          guidelines for the future, so that similarly placed victims are not left
                          in a state of confusion, delay, or distress at such a critical juncture.
ANALYSIS & FINDINGS
18.    Before delving into the merits of the present case, this Court
                          finds it apposite to first examine the legal framework governing
                          medical termination of pregnancy in India, particularly in the context
                          of victims of sexual assault. It is also necessary to revisit earlier
                          decisions rendered by this Court wherein detailed directions were
                          issued from time to time to streamline the procedure to be followed in
                          cases where the pregnancy of a rape victim exceeds the statutory
                          gestational limit of 24 weeks.
19.    In the present case, the respondent Hospital, AIIMS, Delhi,
                          sought to justify its insistence on the production of an identification
                          document by the victim before conducting an ultrasound, by citing the
                          requirements under the
Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic
                          Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994
[hereafter
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                             Page 12 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
‗PC&PNDT Act'] and the Rules made thereunder. It was submitted
                          that as per the said Act and Rules, a Form F is required to be filled
                          prior to conducting any ultrasound, and for this purpose, as per their
                          institutional protocol, a copy of the victim's ID card is to be attached.
20.    Initially, this Court was not inclined to pass a detailed
                          judgment, particularly in view of the comprehensive statutory
                          provisions under the
MTP Act
, and catena of judicial precedents
                          that have already clarified the protocol to be followed in cases
                          involving pregnancy of a sexual assault victim. However, during
                          the proceedings, the concerned doctor once again reiterated that there
                          existed some degree of confusion regarding the applicable protocol. It
                          was also submitted that while AIIMS, Delhi, had its own internal
                          protocol for dealing with such cases, there was not sufficient
                          awareness about the specific directions already
laid down by
this
                          Court in earlier judgments, i.e., the directions which had been duly
                          communicated to all the Hospitals in Delhi and a compliance affidavit
                          in respect thereof had also been filed.
21.    In light of the aforesaid submissions, and the unfortunate
                          events that happened in this case, it has become necessary for this
                          Court to once again clarify and reiterate the directions to be
                          followed in such cases.
(A) The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
: The
                          Statutory Framework
22.    In India, the termination of pregnancy is governed by the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                           Page 13 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
, which lays down the
                          legal framework under which registered medical practitioners may
                          lawfully terminate certain pregnancies. Initially, the Act permitted
                          termination of pregnancy up to 12 weeks with the opinion of one
                          registered medical practitioner, and between 12 to 20 weeks with the
                          opinion of two such practitioners formed in good faith. However, it
                          was    amended         by   the
Medical      Termination      of    Pregnancy
                          (Amendment) Act, 2021
, which extended the upper gestational limit
                          to 20 weeks with the opinion of one registered medical practitioner,
                          and further permitting termination between 20 to 24 weeks in certain
                          specified categories, with the opinion of two practitioners. It also
                          introduced new sub-sections i.e.
Sections 3(2A)
to
3(2D)
. The
                          amended
Section 3
of MTP Act, as it stands today, reads as under:
―3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered
                                     medical practitioners.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Penal
                                     Code
(45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner shall not
                                     be guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law
                                     for the time being in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by
                                     him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
                                     (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy
                                     may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner,-
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty
                                     weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks
                                     but does not exceed twenty-four weeks in case of such category
                                     of woman as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act,
                                     if not less than two registered medical practitioners are,
                                     of the opinion, formed in good faith, that--
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the
                                     life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or
                                     mental health; or
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                  Page 14 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it
                                     would suffer from any serious physical or mental abnormality.
Explanation 1.--For the purposes of clause (a), where any
                                     pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or method
                                     used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting
                                     the number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish
                                     caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a
                                     grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
                                     Explanation 2.--For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b), where
                                     any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been
                                     caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be
                                     presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of
                                     the pregnant woman.
(2A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose
                                     opinion is required for termination of pregnancy at different
                                     gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules
                                     made under this Act.
(2B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of
                                     the pregnancy shall not apply to the termination of pregnancy
                                     by the medical practitioner where such termination is
                                     necessitated by the diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal
                                     abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.
(2C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case
                                     may be, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
                                     a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this
                                     Act to exercise such powers and functions as may be
                                     prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following,
                                     namely:
(a) a Gynaecologist;
(b) a Paediatrician;
(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and
(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the
                                     Official Gazette by the State Government or Union territory, as
                                     the case may be.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy
                                     would involve such risk of injury to the health as is mentioned
                                     in sub-section (2), account may be taken of the pregnant
                                     womans actual or reasonably foreseeable environment.
                                     (4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                    Page 15 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
of eighteen years, or, who having attained the age of eighteen
                                     years, is a 2[mentally ill person], shall be terminated except
                                     with the consent in writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy
                                     shall be terminated except with the consent of the pregnant
                                     woman.‖
23.    The statute permits termination of pregnancy where a registered
                          medical practitioner, or practitioners, form the opinion that -
                          continuation of the pregnancy would pose a risk to the life of the
                          woman, or cause serious harm to her physical or mental health. In
                          cases where the gestational period is between 20 and 24 weeks, the
                          specific categories of women eligible for termination have been
                          notified by the Central Government under the Medical Termination of
                          Pregnancy Rules, 2003, as amended by the Medical Termination of
                          Pregnancy (Amendment) Rules, 2021. Rule 3B enumerates seven
                          distinct categories of women who are eligible for termination of
                          pregnancy up to 24 weeks. In the said Rule, clause (a) relates to
                          victims of sexual assault, rape or incest and clause (b) relates to
                          minors.
24.    Notably, Explanation 2 appended to the
Section 3
of MTP Act
                          provides that in cases where the pregnancy is alleged to have resulted
                          from rape, the mental anguish suffered by the woman shall be
                          presumed to amount to grave injury to her mental health for the
                          purposes of
Section 3(2)(i)
of the MTP Act. Therefore, it is not in
                          dispute that in case of a minor victim who is alleged to be sexually
                          assaulted or raped and as a consequence thereof she has conceived,
                          the injury that is caused to her mental health is presumed even
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                Page 16 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
statutorily.
(B) Medical Termination of Pregnancy of beyond 24 weeks of a
                          Rape Victim: Law and the Judicial Precedents
25.    As evident from above, the statute does not provide for
                          termination of pregnancies over the gestational age of 24 weeks
                          except in case of detection of substantial foetal abnormalities, the
                          provision with regard to it is laid down under
Section 3(2B)
of MTP
                          Act, or in a case where the medical practitioner is of opinion, formed
                          in good faith, that the termination of such pregnancy is immediately
                          necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman (as per
Section 5
of
                          MTP Act).
26.    However, it is now well-recognized that the extraordinary
                          jurisdiction of Constitutional Courts can be invoked in exceptional
                          circumstances to permit termination even beyond the statutory upper
                          limit for medical termination of pregnancy. This power has been
                          acknowledged and exercised by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as
                          various High Courts in appropriate cases. This is so because in
                          instances of sexual assault, compelling a woman to continue with an
                          unwanted pregnancy and imposing upon her the burden of
                          motherhood can amount to violation of her fundamental right to live
                          with dignity. Such a right necessarily encompasses the autonomy to
                          make reproductive choices, including the decision to continue or
                          terminate a pregnancy.
Section 3(2)
of the MTP Act reinforces this
                          principle by recognising the importance of protecting not only the
                          physical but also the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 17 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
27.    This position was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
                          case of
A (Mother of X) v. State of Maharashtra & Anr.
: Civil
                          Appeal No. 5194 of 2024, wherein the Court had allowed termination
                          of pregnancy of more than 29 weeks being carried by a rape victim.
Prior thereto also, in case of
Venkatalakshmi v. State of Karnataka &
                          Ors.
: Civil Appeal No. 15378 of 2017, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
                          had permitted termination of a pregnancy at 26 weeks on the basis of
                          severe mental trauma caused by rape.
28.    This Court, including this Bench, has passed similar directions
                          in other similar cases, where continuation of pregnancy beyond 24
                          weeks posed serious risks to the mental or physical health of the
                          woman, especially in cases arising from sexual assault.
(C)    Directions & Guidelines Issued by this Bench: Summed Up
(i)    Decision in
Minor R Through Mother H v. State (NCT of Delhi
)
                          and its Compliance
29.    As early as January 2023, this Bench was faced with a
                          distressing situation involving a 14-year-old minor rape victim who
                          was carrying a pregnancy of about 25 weeks. On 24.01.2023, this
                          Court had directed the constitution of a Medical Board at the
                          concerned Hospital to examine the victim and opine whether it was
                          medically safe to terminate the pregnancy. The very next day, on
                          25.01.2023, a detailed judgment was passed, directing the medical
                          termination of pregnancy.
30.    However, this Court was deeply concerned to note the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                       Page 18 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
considerable delay that routinely occurred in such cases, particularly
                          when the gestational period exceeded 24 weeks. It was brought to the
                          notice of this Court that Hospitals used to frequently decline to
                          conduct either medical examination or the termination itself without a
                          court order. This delay used to affect minor victims, many of whom
                          came from economically disadvantaged backgrounds and were thus
                          compelled to first seek legal assistance, get a petition filed, and await
                          listing before the Court, by which time several critical days were lost.
                          Further aggravating the issue was the absence of permanent Medical
                          Boards in most hospitals across Delhi, except a few. The Court in
                          such cases were first required to pass directions for constitution of a
                          Medical Board and await its report before passing any order for
                          termination of pregnancy. Recognizing the urgency of such matters
                          and the undue hardship being caused to victims, this Court issued a
                          set of guidelines in
Minor R Through Mother H v. State (NCT of
                          Delhi
): 2023 SCC OnLine Del 383 (dated 25.01.2023) to be adhered
                          to by investigating officers and hospitals in all cases involving
                          pregnancies beyond 24 weeks. These directions were as follows:
―24. It is also pertinent to note that the victim child was
                                     carrying pregnancy of 25 weeks when she was produced before
                                     this Court. Due to financial constraints, they were able to file a
                                     writ petition only through Delhi High Court Legal Services
                                     Committee. In these circumstances, this Court feels that crucial
                                     time is lost in the process of passing orders for medical
                                     examination of victim by a board in case of 24 weeks or above
                                     of pregnancy due to sexual assault which further endangers her
                                     life.
24.1. Considering the same, this Court passes the following
                                     guidelines to be followed by the investigating officers, in cases
                                     where pregnancy exceeds 24 weeks, which will be circulated
                                     through the Commissioner of Police to all investigating
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                    Page 19 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
officers concerned:
i. At the time of medical examination of a victim of
                                            sexual assault, it will be mandatory to conduct a Urine
                                            Pregnancy Test, as in many cases, this Court has noticed
                                            that such test is not conducted.
ii. Upon the victim being found pregnant due to sexual
                                            assault, and in case the victim is major gives her consent
                                            and expresses her desire for conducting medical
                                            termination of pregnancy, the concerned investigating
                                            officer will ensure that on the same day, the victim will
                                            be produced before such Medical Board envisaged under
Section 3
of MTP Act, which this Court has been
                                            informed is constituted in following four hospitals in
                                            Delhi: (i) All India Institute of Medical Sciences
                                            (AIIMS), New Delhi, (ii) Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia
                                            Hospital, New Delhi, (iii) Safdarjung Hospital, New
                                            Delhi, and (iv) Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital,
                                            New Delhi.
iii. In case a minor victim of sexual assault is carrying
                                            pregnancy, upon the consent of her legal guardian and
                                            desire of such legal guardian for termination of
                                            pregnancy, the victim will be produced before such
                                            Board.
iv. In case a minor victim is examined by such Board,
                                            appropriate report will be placed before concerned
                                            authorities, so that if an order is being sought regarding
                                            termination of pregnancy from the Courts, the Court
                                            concerned does not lose any more time and is in a
                                            position to pass an order on the same expeditiously.
                                            v. As per
Section 3(2C)
and
3(2D)
of MTP Act, it is
                                            mandated that the State Government or Union Territory
                                            has to ensure that the Medical Boards are to be
                                            constituted in the hospitals. The Court is informed that
                                            such boards are not available in hospitals in each district,
                                            causing inconvenience to the Investigating Officers as
                                            well as to the victim at times who has to be taken for
                                            MTP and for further examination. Thus, State
                                            Government/Union Territory should ensure that such
                                            mandate of
Section 3(2C)
and
3(2D)
of MTP Act, are
                                            complied with and such Boards are constituted in all
                                            Government Hospitals which have proper MTP Centres
                                            and it should be mandatory to have such Boards
                                            constituted before hand.‖
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                     Page 20 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
Compliance of these Directions
31.    The matter was subsequently taken up for compliance on
                          01.08.2023. Pursuant to this Court's directions, the Union of India
                          submitted a compliance report dated 17.08.2023, wherein it was
                          informed that:
"i. the Govt. of NCT of Delhi vide Notification dated
                                     03.04.2023 has constituted the Medical Boards in several
                                     Hospitals in Delhi;
ii. in compliance of the order of this Court, Union of India vide
                                     its letter dated 11.08.2023 had directed the concerned
                                     Department of Govt. of NCT of Delhi to comply with the
                                     directions of this Court as contained in the judgment dated
                                     25.01.2023;
iii. pursuant to aforesaid letter issued by Union of India, the
                                     concerned Department of Govt. of NCT of Delhi has furnished
                                     an action taken report dated 14.08.2023‖
32.    In light of this, it was noted that the judgment had been
                          circulated across all hospitals in Delhi for their information and
                          compliance. Furthermore, the Government of NCT of Delhi had
                          issued a Notification dated 03.04.2023 constituting permanent
                          Medical Boards under
Section 3
of the MTP Act in 13 hospitals
                          across Delhi. While disposing of the said matter on 21.08.2023, this
                          Court had observed as under:
―4. This Court takes note of the fact that the concerned
                                     Department of       NCT of Delhi has complied with the
                                     order/directions of this Court dated 25.01.2023 in its letter and
                                     spirit. This Court expresses appreciation for the concerned
                                     authorities/Union of India that they have taken note of the
                                     emergent situation regarding termination of pregnancy of
                                     the victims wherein the pregnancy period exceeds 24 weeks
                                     and have included all the directions of this Court in the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                   Page 21 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
notification which was circulated, as reproduced above,
                                     after constituting the medical boards as required under
                                     law.
5. This Court further hopes that the Delhi Police and the
                                     doctors concerned will diligently follow the directions
                                     which have now been circulated vide notification dated
                                     03.04.2023. The notification also notifies the Government and
                                     Private hospitals and the medical boards constituted therein in
                                     compliance of the order of this Court.
6. With this, the compliance of the order dated 25.01.2023
                                     has been made which will ensure that a victim carrying
                                     pregnancy of period of more than 24 weeks, will face no
                                     problem when she is produced before the Court seeking
                                     appropriate directions for termination of pregnancy, so that
                                     crucial time is not lost in the process of passing orders for
                                     medical examination of victim by a medical board in case of
                                     pregnancy due to sexual assault which further endangers her
                                     life.‖
33.    The core objective behind the issuance of these guidelines was
                          clear - to ensure that the medical examination of a minor rape victim
                          carrying pregnancy of more than 24 weeks is conducted immediately
                          in terms of the
MTP Act
, and a report is prepared and placed before
                          appropriate authorities. This would allow the concerned court, when
                          approached by the victim or someone on her behalf, to pass
                          appropriate directions for termination without unnecessary delay.
34.    Following the constitution of permanent Medical Boards in 8
                          government hospitals (both Central and State-run) and 5 private
                          hospitals, it was expected that these Boards would not insist on a
                          court order prior to conducting a medical examination or preparing a
                          report when the victim expresses desire to terminate pregnancy
                          resulting from rape. The purpose was to ensure that a court is
                          equipped to issue necessary directions on the very first date of
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                 Page 22 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
hearing.
(ii)   Decision in
Minor L Through Guardian J v. State & Anr
.
35.    Despite the aforementioned directions, this Bench was once
                          again faced with a similar situation in November 2023 in
Minor L
                          Through Guardian J v. State & Anr.
: 2023 SCC OnLine Del 7159
                          (dated 03.11.2023). In that case, the concerned hospital had refused to
                          conduct medical examination of the minor rape victim without a court
                          order.
This Bench had recorded its strong displeasure, noting that
                          while the directions issued in
Minor R Through Mother H
(supra)
                          had been acknowledged and appeared to have been complied with on
                          paper, the ground reality was markedly different. The directions were
                          not being implemented by the hospitals. This Court expressly
                          observed that future lapses of this nature would be viewed seriously,
                          given the grave risk such delays pose to the physical and mental well-
being of the minor victim, and the diminishing feasibility of
                          conducting an MTP with each passing day.
36.    The order dated 04.11.2023 in the said case, also directed that
                          in all such cases, the Medical Board as well as the investigating police
                          officer must explain the implications of medical termination of
                          pregnancy to the minor victim and her guardian(s), in Hindi (or any
                          other language understood by them) or English, as applicable. It was
                          observed that medical termination of pregnancy has enduring mental
                          and physical repercussions, and hence, the process must be carried out
                          with sensitivity, not as a mere procedural formality.
37.    The judgment was directed to be circulated to the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 23 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
Commissioner of Police, Delhi; Secretaries of the Ministry of Health
                          and Family Welfare, GNCTD and Government of India; and the Delhi
                          State Legal Services Authority.
(iii)   Decision in
Minor S Through Father B v. State & Anr
.
38.
In the year 2025, yet again, a similar issue arose before this
                          Bench in
Minor S Through Father B v. State & Anr.
: 2025 SCC
                          OnLine Del 2506. The minor rape victim, aged around 15 years, was
                          carrying pregnancy of over 24 weeks. Despite the Child Welfare
                          Committee (CWC) having passed appropriate directions, the Medical
                          Board of the Hospital concerned had initially refused to examine the
                          victim without a court order. Thereafter, due to lack of awareness of
                          legal remedies, the victim was only able to approach this Court after a
                          delay of about one week. By the time the matter was heard, the
                          Medical Board had finally commenced examination, but only after an
                          unjustified delay. In response, this Court had sought an explanation
                          from the Medical Superintendent of the concerned hospital as to why,
                          despite the victim having been presented in compliance with the
                          CWC's direction and despite clear judicial guidelines already in place,
                          there had been a delay of more than a week in the examination and
                          preparation of the medical report.
39.     In the said case, taking note of the fact that, another issue, i.e.
                          lack of legal awareness among the victims of sexual assault as to
                          which Court they had to approach for seeking permission for MTP,
                          this Court had found it necessary to issue certain directions to ensure
                          that the rights of such victims are protected without any delay or
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                            Page 24 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
confusion. Therefore, in its order dated 17.04.2023, the following
                          directions were issued by this Court:
―32. Accordingly, in order to ensure that such confusion or
                                     delay is avoided in the future, and that victims of sexual assault
                                     are provided prompt and appropriate legal guidance and
                                     medical support, the following directions are issued:
i. Whenever a minor victim of sexual assault, who is found
                                     pregnant with a gestational period of pregnancy exceeding 24
                                     weeks, is produced before the CWC and is referred to a
                                     hospital for medical examination or medical termination of
                                     pregnancy, the concerned CWC shall forthwith inform the
                                     Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee (DHCLSC)
                                     regarding the case, since in case, medical termination of
                                     pregnancy is sought and consent is given by the victim or her
                                     family, as the case may be, an urgent order from a Court of law
                                     will be required for such medical termination of pregnancy.
                                     The communication shall include the details of the victim as
                                     permitted under law (without disclosing the identity of the
                                     victim), the order passed by CWC, the copy of the FIR which
                                     is placed before CWC, when the victim is produced before it,
                                     by the IO and any other document relevant for filing a petition
                                     before the competent Court.
ii. Upon receiving such information, DHCLSC shall
                                     immediately take appropriate steps to assess whether any legal
                                     intervention is required, including the need to approach the
                                     competent Court seeking an order for medical termination of
                                     pregnancy which is beyond 24 weeks in case of a rape victim
                                     where she or her guardian seek medical termination of
                                     pregnancy. This will enable DHCLSC to take timely action,
                                     and where necessary, ensure that the matter is brought before
                                     the competent court without delay.
iii. The above direction shall be circulated to all CWCs
                                     functioning in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and shall
                                     be scrupulously followed.
iv. To conclude, this Court reiterates that, as directed in the
                                     judgment titled Minor R Thr.
Mother H v. State (NCT of
                                     Delhi
) (supra) dated 25.01.2023, as well as in the judgment
                                     titled Minor L Thr.
Guardian J v. State & Anr.
(supra) dated
                                     03.11.2023, the medical examination of a minor rape victim
                                     carrying a pregnancy beyond 24 weeks must be conducted
                                     immediately by the Medical Board of the concerned Hospital
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                    Page 25 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
in terms of the
MTP Act
, and the report be prepared and kept
                                      ready, without insisting the victim to first approach a Court of
                                      law for obtaining an order for medical examination by the
                                      Board.‖
40.    Lest one wonders, as to why, the directions issued in the
                          aforesaid three decisions are being reiterated in the present judgment,
                          it is important to clarify that their reiteration has been necessitated by
                          the repeated instances of their non-compliance that have come to the
                          notice of this Court. Despite earlier decisions laying down clear
                          procedural safeguards and guidelines for conducting MTP of a rape
                          victim carrying pregnancy of more than 24 weeks, cases continue to
                          surface where these directions are either overlooked or inadequately
                          implemented, to the serious prejudice of the minor rape victims
                          involved.
(D)    The Present Case: Undue Delay in Carrying out MTP
41.    In the present case, the chain of events reveals a troubling
                          picture of delay, miscommunication, and lack of clarity on the
                          part of hospital authorities, all of which culminated in a significant
                          lapse in providing timely medical care to a 17-year-old rape survivor.
                          The FIR in the present case was registered on 11.05.2025, and the
                          minor victim was taken the same day to AIIMS, Delhi, where a Urine
                          Pregnancy Test confirmed that she was pregnant. Clinically, the
                          pregnancy appeared to be around 20 weeks. However, despite this, the
                          doctors on duty refused to conduct an ultrasound, stating that an
                          identity card had not been produced. This insistence is difficult to
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                                   Page 26 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
understand, especially when the victim was accompanied by the
                          Investigating Officer, a Sub-Inspector of Delhi Police, who had
                          brought the official case file. In the facts of the present case, such
                          insistence on documentation, when the presence of law enforcement
                          and official papers should have sufficed, appears unnecessary and has
                          only contributed to delay without any justification.
42.    The matter was again taken to the CWC by the IO, which, after
                          interacting with the victim and her mother, both of whom
                          unequivocally consented to medical termination of pregnancy,
                          directed on 13.05.2025 that the MTP be carried out without delay.
                          Yet, even with this categorical direction and official communication
                          in hand, the doctors at the Hospital concerned persisted in their
                          refusal, reiterating their demand for ID proof, and going so far as to
                          recommend an ossification test to verify the victim's age.
43.    Despite repeated efforts by the Investigating Officer, and even
                          intervention by a CWC member, it was only on 24.05.2025 - thirteen
                          days after the first hospital visit - that the ultrasound was finally
                          conducted. By then, the petitioner's pregnancy had reportedly crossed
                          25 weeks, which had placed her beyond the statutory limit under the
MTP Act
. Even then, no Medical Board was constituted, as the doctor
                          concerned had opined that a judicial order was necessary before
                          proceeding further [order extracted in paragraph 10 of this judgment].
44.    This entire sequence of events reflects an unfortunate and
                          avoidable situation, where legal formalities, administrative confusion,
                          and lack of clarity took precedence over immediate medical needs and
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 27 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
basic humanitarian concern, moreso, since the medical record reveal
                          as recorded earlier also that the victim had undergone brutal sexual
                          assault and was burnt with a lighter by the accused at different places
                          of her body, as mentioned in the MLC of the victim also.
45.      As noted above, the victim was kept waiting for several days in
                          the hospital, unable to undergo an essential medical procedure, and
                          the reason, as emerged from the record and submissions, was
                          confusion among the hospital authorities, regarding whether a court
                          order was necessary, what documentation was sufficient, and whether
                          an ultrasound could be conducted in absence of the victim's identity
                          proof.
(E)      Issue Regarding Identity Proof for Ultrasound in Cases
                                   Involving Rape Victims
46.      In the present case, it is an admitted position that the minor
                          victim was taken to AIIMS, Delhi by the Investigating Officer on the
                          same day the FIR was registered, for her medical examination. The
                          MLC was duly prepared, noting that the victim was pregnant and had
                          suffered physical violence. However, despite clear clinical indications
                          and an urgent need to assess the stage of pregnancy, the hospital
                          authorities declined to perform an ultrasound. The stated reason was
                          the absence of an identity document of the minor. This insistence on
                          formal identification resulted in a critical delay in the assessment of
                          the pregnancy and, consequently, the necessary medical and legal
                          procedures required for medical termination.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 28 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
47.    The hospital's contention was that, under the PC&PNDT Act, a
                          Form ‗F' must be filled before conducting any ultrasound, and as per
                          the protocol of the Hospital, an identity card of the patient must be
                          annexed with the said form. The doctor concerned submitted before
                          this Court that this is standard protocol followed in all pregnancy-
                          related ultrasound procedures. However, this Court finds it necessary
                          to underline that the present matter does not concern a routine case of
                          pregnancy. It involved a minor girl who had become pregnant due to
                          sexual assault, a fact already recorded in the FIR, supported by the
                          statement of the victim, and the presence of the Investigating Officer
                          who had formally brought her to the hospital for examination and a
                          formal application in this regard enlisting the FIR number and other
                          details of the offence were already before the concerned doctor.
48.    This distinction, in this Court' view, goes to the very heart of
                          the matter. In cases of sexual assault, especially where the victim is a
                          minor, the standard procedural safeguards that apply to routine
                          diagnostic cases cannot be applied in a rigid or mechanical manner.
                          The need to conduct an ultrasound in such cases is not optional or
                          elective, but an essential one. Any delay in conducting an ultrasound
                          would not only prolong the physical and emotional distress of the
                          victim but also risk breaching the statutory limits for termination of
                          pregnancy under the
MTP Act
, particularly in view of the 24-week
                          upper limit.
49.    In the considered opinion of this Court, once the Investigating
                          Officer produces a victim of sexual assault before the medical
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 29 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
authorities for examination, with the official case file and the details
                          of the FIR, the procedural requirement of identity verification through
                          separate documents can be dispensed with. In fact, a similar approach
                          is followed in other sensitive proceedings, such as when the victim's
                          statement is recorded under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. before the
                          Magistrate, where no insistence on an identity card is made, and
                          identification by the Investigating Officer is considered sufficient.
                          Interestingly, if the MLC of the victim could have been prepared and
                          the history of sexual assault given by her could have been recorded
                          therein on the basis of identification by the IO on 11.05.2025, while
                          the USG of the same victim could not have been conducted on her
                          identification is not clear nor sufficiently or satisfactorily accounted
                          for, by the hospital authorities.
50.    It is also noteworthy that, in the present case, Form F was in
                          fact filled, and the only missing item was the attachment of the
                          identity document of the victim. Yet, despite the Investigating
                          Officer's presence and the filling of all other relevant information, the
                          ultrasound was deferred. What makes this more perplexing as already
                          discussed above that the MLC was prepared without insisting on
                          identity proof, suggesting that the same officer's identification was
                          sufficient for general medical examination, but somehow deemed
                          insufficient for conducting an ultrasound. Such a dichotomy in
                          approach is difficult to justify and only adds to the confusion and
                          delay faced by victims in such cases.
51.    In this Court's view, the refusal to proceed with the ultrasound
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 30 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
in such circumstances reflects a rigid adherence to the standard
                          operating procedures without accommodating the specific nature of
                          the case. However, hospitals and medical institutions must be
                          sensitised to the fact that cases involving victims of sexual assault,
                          especially minor girls, require a more responsive and sensitive
                          approach. The medical protocols must align not just with statutory
                          obligations, but also with compassion, practicality, and an
                          understanding of the unique challenges that victims of sexual violence
                          face.
52.     Therefore, while the requirement of an identity card may be a
                          valid protocol in routine pregnancy cases to ensure compliance with
                          the PC&PNDT Act, since identity verification is necessary to ensure
                          accountability, proper record-keeping, and compliance with legal
                          safeguards, no such insistence should be made when a rape victim is
                          brought for medical examination and ultrasound by the Investigating
                          Officer after the registration of an FIR.
(F)     Issue Regarding Determination of Age of the Victim -
Medical Opinion Versus Official Record
53.     One of the concerning aspects that emerged in the present case
                          is the manner in which the issue of age of the victim was dealt with by
                          the doctors concerned. The Investigating Officer had produced the
                          minor victim before the concerned doctor for medical examination,
                          along with the official case file and a copy of the FIR, which recorded
                          her age as 17 years. The attending doctor on the other hand recorded
                          the victim's age as 18 years on the basis of the statement of the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                        Page 31 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
victim, and thereafter prepared her MLC.
54.    Now, since in this case, there was no identity proof available
                          with the victim, the doctor went ahead and recommended ossification
                          tests, including X-rays of the chest, wrist, and elbow joints, apparently
                          for the purpose of age determination. This was done without any
                          formal request from the I.O. or the victim. Thus, even though the
                          minor child in this case was a victim of alleged sexual assault, who
                          was carrying pregnancy of about 20 weeks as per the own opinion of
                          the doctors, the doctors concerned were opining that X-rays of the
                          child be conducted to determine her age.
55.    This is a matter of concern since the entire focus was now on
                          determining the age of the victim, despite the FIR clearly stating that
                          she was 17 years old, while the victim herself stated that she was 18.
                          To resolve this difference, the doctors recommended an ossification
                          test. However, it appears to have been overlooked that ossification
                          tests only provide an approximate age range, and even then, they
                          carry a margin of error of up to two years. In such serious
                          circumstances, where the age difference in question was merely one
                          year i.e. between 17 and 18, the utility of such a test is questionable
                          itself. More importantly, the central issue should not have been
                          whether the victim was 17 or 18 years of age, but rather the need to
                          conduct her ultrasound without delay, determine the gestational age of
                          the foetus, and assess whether the pregnancy could and should be
                          medically terminated. Unfortunately, the time spent in this avoidable
                          and confusing exercise led to a further delay in initiating essential
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 32 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
medical steps, including the ultrasound and consultations needed to
                          proceed with care.
(G)    Delay in Constitution of Medical Board Despite this Court's
                                 Directions
56.    On 24.05.2025, the ultrasound of the minor victim was finally
                          conducted, and it was recorded that the pregnancy had advanced to 25
                          weeks and 4 days. However, the doctor concerned insisted on
                          obtaining a court order before proceeding any further, as evident from
                          doctor's order dated 24.05.2025, and no medical board was
                          constituted to examine/assess the victim for the purpose of
                          considering medical termination of pregnancy, as it was stated before
                          this Court on 27.05.2025 that a medical Board was yet to be
                          constituted to do the needful. Strange though, a permanent medical
                          board already exists for this purpose in AIIMS, as per compliance
                          report filed before this Court, pursuant to judgment passed by this
                          Court, in which this Court's attention was brought to the following
                          notification:
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                       Page 33 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
57.    Thus, the omission on the part of respondent Hospital is
                          contrary and in contempt of the directions issued by this Court in case
                          of
Minor R Through Mother H v. State (NCT of Delhi
) (supra),
                          wherein it had been clearly directed that once the gestational age is
                          determined to be over 24 weeks and the pregnancy is a result of
                          sexual assault, the Medical Board in terms of
MTP Act
must be
                          constituted without delay to assess the possibility of termination. In
                          addition, it is also contrary to the compliance report filed before this
                          Court regarding adherence to these directions filed by the Union of
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 34 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
India, wherein it was submitted that
the said decision
had been
                          circulated to all the Hospitals in Delhi for necessary information and
                          compliance and a list as mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
(H) Discrepancy in Determination of Gestational Age
58.    Another serious issue that emerged during the course of this
                          matter was the conflicting assessments regarding the gestational age
                          of the foetus. On 24.05.2025, when the first ultrasound was
                          conducted, the pregnancy was opined to be 25 weeks and 4 days. The
                          doctor had opined that a Court order was required for conducting
                          medical termination of pregnancy. However, just four days later, on
                          28.05.2025, following this Court's direction, a second ultrasound was
                          performed on the victim, and the pregnancy was then stated to be 23
                          weeks and 4 days and the doctor opined that the order of this Court
                          was not required. The difference between the two reports was not
                          minor - there was a gap of 18 days, which is substantial given the
                          critical stage of the pregnancy and the legal consequences tied to it.
                          Resultantly, it was the victim who suffered silently admitted in the
                          hospital as one report on 25.04.2025 opined that MTP can be
                          conducted only after Court order and therefore was not conducted in
                          absence of order of this Court. On the other hand, a legal battle in the
                          Court ensued on 27.05.2025, till when, even a medical board was not
                          constituted. On 28.05.2025, it was stated, contrary to its own report
                          dated 24.05.2025 seeking an order of this Court that now no Court
                          order was required as the ultrasound conducted on 28.05.2025 reveal
                          the gestational period of pregnancy lesser than 25 weeks.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 35 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
59.    In response to this discrepancy, a clarification was sought by
                          this Court. AIIMS, Delhi in its written explanation, stated that a
                          variation of 10 to 14 days is medically acceptable while calculating
                          gestational age through ultrasound. Disturbing is the fact that this
                          variation of 10-14 days will be critical in a case of medical
                          termination of pregnancy of a sexual assault victim, as to whether, a
                          Court order to conduct MTP will be required or not. In absence of any
                          clear report, how will then a MTP be conducted either with or without
                          an order of the Court. However, it was not explained how the
                          difference in the present case went beyond that accepted range. This
                          Court was further informed during the course of hearing that the
                          second ultrasound conducted on 28.05.2025 was performed by a
                          senior and experienced doctor, and hence, that assessment should be
                          relied upon. If that is to be accepted, it naturally raises a concerning
                          question: was the first ultrasound conducted by an inexperienced
                          doctor? or whether the initial report was prepared in haste or without
                          due attention? Necessarily, this Court asks a question as to on which
                          reports, the Court should rely on to base their orders? Should the
                          Courts now ask for a certificate so that the medical reports can be
                          relied upon for passing an order? When a medical report is placed
                          before a Court of law, the Courts presume that the reports are correct
                          and can be relied upon and therefore a duty is cast on the hospitals
                          and the doctors to send the reports in cases as the present one where
                          variations of even a few days will materially alter an order are sent
                          with due care. In case, the gestational period of the pregnancy, on the
                          day the first ultrasound was conducted on 24.05.2025, was less than
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 36 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
25 weeks since the second ultrasound conducted after four days state
                          so and the doctor concerned opined that they did not need a Court
                          order, it would mean that the MTP could have been conducted on
                          24.05.2025 itself without Court order. However, since the earlier
                          ultrasound opined categorically without any margin of error
                          mentioned in the report and specifically asked for a Court order, the
                          Court had no other option but to believe that indeed, a Court order
                          was required for conducting MTP since the gestational period was
                          more than 25 weeks and the report of the medical board was
                          mandatorily required for the same.
(I)    Incomplete or Silent Report of the Medical Board: The
                                 information required
60.    Another serious issue in this case was that the report tendered
                          before this Court on 28.05.2025, of the Medical Board that had
                          examined the victim of sexual assault, which reads as under:
―After due consideration, it was observed that the
                                     chronological age of the mother is 17 years and 6 months
                                     (report attached), and the gestational age of the fetus is 23
                                     weeks and 4 days as on 28.05.2025. As this falls under the
MTP Act
(minor category for 20-24 weeks), MTP may be
                                     permitted without the need for Medical Board.‖
61.    However, the information and opinion a Court requires for
                          passing an order for medical termination of pregnancy is as follows:
(i) The exact gestational period of the pregnancy of the victim.
(ii) Whether the victim is physically fit to undergo MTP?
(iii) Whether the victim is mentally fit to undergo MTP?
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                               Page 37 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
(iv) Whether it will pose risk to the life of the victim in case of
                                MTP?
62.    However, the report tendered by the medical board in the
                          present case was silent on the above three aspects. Thus, compelling
                          this Court to direct that the report of the medical board in such cases
                          must adhere to the basic information qua the victim mentioned above,
                          in addition to any other information that the doctor concerned or the
                          medical board may deem necessary.
63.    In any case, the Court at present is more concerned about
                          ensuring that the victim receives appropriate medical care and that no
                          further delay is caused in processing her case. At the same time, it
                          must be ensured that in future, victims of sexual assault are not
                          subjected to such uncertainty and confusion at the hands of the
                          medical system. The manner in which this victim was dealt with,
                          particularly the conflicting reports regarding a matter as crucial as
                          gestational age, making the victim wait from 13.05.2025 to
                          27.05.2025 for conducting an MTP despite order of CWC, reflects a
                          troubling lack of coordination and seriousness. The hospital
                          authorities of all hospitals where such victims are brought are directed
                          to take this as a reminder of the sensitivity and care such cases
                          demand.
(J)    Comprehensive Directions and Guidelines
64.    The present case has brought to light the pressing need for
                          medical protocols that are clear, practical, and sensitive when it comes
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 38 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
to victims of sexual assault, especially those who are minor pregnant
                          and seek medical help. The lack of clarity on procedures, the
                          insistence on identity documents, and the delay in carrying out
                          necessary medical examinations like ultrasounds have all contributed
                          to the further distress of the victim in this case. Doctors and medical
                          staff must have well-defined instructions on how to proceed in such
                          cases, and these must clearly distinguish between routine medical
                          terminations and those involving victims of sexual violence. These
                          instructions should be easily accessible in emergency rooms and
                          gynecology departments, and medical professionals should be trained
                          to handle such situations with the urgency and sensitivity they
                          demand. This Court is, therefore, of the view that directions are
                          necessary so that no other victim is left to suffer due to procedural
                          confusion or lack of preparedness in the medical response system.
65.    For the convenience of all stakeholders involved, and to ensure
                          clarity and uniformity in handling cases of sexual assault where the
                          victim is found to be pregnant, it is directed that the following
                          directions shall henceforth be strictly followed, which are to be read
                          in addition to any earlier directions issued by this Court:
A. In all cases where a victim of rape/sexual assault is found to be

                                 pregnant, a comprehensive medical examination shall be
                                 conducted without any delay by the Hospital and doctor
                                 concerned. Relevant provisions of law, including
Section 164A
of Cr.P.C./Section 184 of BNSS,
Section 27
of POCSO Act,
                                 etc., as well as other medical protocols and judicial precedents
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 39 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
in this regard shall be followed.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Investigating Officer to

                                 identify the victim, and ensure that when the victim is produced
                                 before the concerned doctor, Hospital or Medical Board,
                                 necessary documents, case file, etc. pertaining to the rape
                                 victim are carried by the Investigating Officer.
C. Where the victim of sexual assault (major or minor) is

                                 accompanied by the Investigating Officer or has been produced
                                 pursuant to direction of a Court or CWC, identification
                                 proof/identity card of the victim shall not be insisted upon by
                                 Hospital and doctor concerned for the purpose of conducting
                                 ultrasound or any relevant/necessary diagnostic procedure. The
                                 identification by the IO will suffice in such cases.
D. In cases of rape victims, where the gestational period exceeds

                                 24 weeks, the Medical Board shall be constituted immediately,
                                 and without waiting for any specific direction from the Court,
                                 the Board shall conduct the necessary medical examination and
                                 prepare an appropriate report at the earliest and place before
                                 appropriate authorities, so that an order may be passed without
                                 delay when a victim approaches this Court for passing of
                                 directions for medical termination of pregnancy [Ref: Judgment
                                 dated 25.01.2023 in
Minor R Through Mother H v. State
                                 (NCT of Delhi
), (supra)].
E. This Court also notes that there continues to be some lack of

                                 coordination among the CWC, Investigating Officers, and the
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 40 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
legal aid authorities (DHCLSC), as far as approaching this
                                 Court for seeking an order for MTP of a rape victim is
                                 concerned.
In this regard, detailed directions issued by this
                                 Court in judgment dated 17.04.2025 in
Minor S Through
                                 Father B v. State & Anr.
(supra), which have been reiterated in
                                 paragraph 39 of this judgment, shall be adhered to by CWC and
                                 DHCLSC.
F.   In all cases where MTP is conducted of a rape victim, the
                                 foetus shall be preserved properly, as per law, so that it may be
                                 sent in future for DNA analysis or other forensic purposes, for
                                 the purpose of investigation.
G. The consent for medical termination of pregnancy shall be

                                 obtained (from the victim or her guardian, as the case may be)
                                 in the vernacular language understood by them, such as in
                                 Hindi or English, after explaining them the implications of
                                 conducting the MTP [Ref: Order dated 04.11.2023 in
Minor L
                                 Through Guardian J v. State & Anr.
(supra)].
66.    In addition to the above directions, and to ensure that the same
                          are followed and complied with in their letter and spirit, this Court
                          also deems it appropriate to frame following guidelines:
A. The Hospital administration is directed to make available the

                                 latest, updated Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) and
                                 relevant legal guidelines in both Emergency and Gynaecology
                                 Departments, and to ensure that duty doctors are briefed and
                                 sensitised regularly regarding their obligations under the MTP
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 41 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
Act, POCSO Act
, and guidelines
laid down by
the Supreme
                                 Court and High Courts.
B. Training programs for doctors, medical staff, and legal officers

                                 attached to all Hospitals be conducted quarterly in collaboration
                                 with DSLSA/ DHCLSC or any such designated body, to equip
                                 them with legal and procedural awareness necessary for
                                 handling such cases sensitively and efficiently.
C. A dedicated nodal officer may be designated in every

                                 Government hospital, specifically trained and empowered to
                                 coordinate MTP and medico-legal processes for victims of
                                 sexual assault. This officer may act as the single point of
                                 contact for Investigating Officers, CWC, and Courts, and
                                 maintain a checklist to ensure that no procedural formality
                                 causes undue delay, and his name and contact details be
                                 mentioned on the website of all hospitals for easy accessibility
                                 of the victims and the IO.
D. A standardised format for MTP request, consent, ultrasound

                                 requisition, and medical opinion may be developed and made
                                 available in both English and Hindi in all emergency and
                                 gynaecology units. This will ensure that doctors and medical
                                 staff can respond uniformly to such cases without legal
                                 confusion.
E. The Delhi Police shall ensure that Investigating Officers

                                 dealing with POCSO and sexual assault cases undergo
                                 mandatory training every six months, with a focus on MTP
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                         Page 42 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
procedures, court orders, and coordination with medical and
                                 welfare authorities. Certificates of completion shall be
                                 maintained in the officers' service record.
F.   The directions in the preceding paragraph shall be incorporated
                                 in the medico-legal manuals issued by hospitals and health
                                 departments, and the same shall be annexed with induction
                                 materials for new resident doctors, forensic experts, and
                                 gynaecologists.
(K)    Directions for Circulation and Implementation of Directions
67.    It is directed that this judgment be circulated and implemented
                          in the following manner to ensure its strict and uniform compliance,
                          while dealing with cases of sexual assault:
I.   The learned Registrar General of this Court is directed to
                                 forward a copy of this order to the following authorities for
                                 their information and immediate necessary action: (a)
                                 Secretary, DHCLSC; (b) Commissioner of Police, Delhi; (c)
                                 Secretary,      Department   of   Health   &   Family     Welfare,
                                 Government of NCT of Delhi; and (d) Secretary, Ministry of
                                 Health & Family Welfare, Government of India.
                           II.   These authorities shall take steps to ensure that the directions
                                 and protocols contained in this judgment are disseminated and
                                 complied with by all relevant stakeholders.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                           Page 43 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
III.   This judgment, which compiles the Standard Operating
                                 Procedures (SOPs) and relevant guidelines shall be circulated
                                 to:
a. Heads of Departments (HoDs) of Emergency, Gynaecology,
                                       and Obstetrics in government and private hospitals,
                                       especially those having permanent medical boards;
                                 b. All medical professionals likely to handle cases of sexual
                                       assault, especially those involving minors;
                          IV.    The Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government of
                                 NCT of Delhi; and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
                                 Government of India shall:
a. Ensure state-wide distribution of the protocols to all relevant
                                       medical institutions;
b. Facilitate translation into Hindi language to ensure
                                       accessibility and comprehension by frontline healthcare
                                       personnel.
V.    The Commissioner of Delhi Police shall:
a. Circulate the protocols to all police stations, Special
                                       Juvenile Police Units (SJPUs), and relevant units through
                                       formal       departmental     communication,        including
                                       electronically on the official e-mail IDs of the concerned
                                       officials;
b. Ensure that translated version is made available and
                                       incorporated into the regular training curriculum at the
                                       Police Training Academies.
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 44 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
VI.    Copy of this judgment, including the protocols and list of
                                 hospitals having permanent medical boards for the purpose of
                                 conducting assessment requirement for the purpose of carrying
                                 out MTP of a sexual assault victim with or without a Court
                                 order, as the case may be, shall be kept physically available at
                                 all times in the Emergency Departments and Gynaecology &
                                 Obstetrics Departments of hospitals for ready reference by
                                 attending doctors.
CONCLUSION
68.    This case serves as an important reminder that a victim of
                          sexual assault carrying the burden of an unwanted pregnancy
                          may need more sensitivity to deal with as in many cases, such
                          victims are under deep distress unable to process their situation
                          and life. Further, each day's delay in such cases in conducting
                          MTP puts the victim under enhanced potential danger to her life.
                          The system's failure to respond with clarity, sensitivity, and urgency
                          in such cases will only deepen the trauma and suffering of a young
                          girl who should have been met with care, not delay. This judgment,
                          therefore, is an attempt to resolve the issues which were pointed out
                          before this Court, and also to ensure that in future, no victim of sexual
                          assault, carrying an unwanted pregnancy, is left adrift in a maze of
                          confusion.
69.    Before parting with this case, this Court places on record its
                          appreciation for the learned counsels appearing for the victim, learned
                          counsel for the hospital and the learned ASC for the State for
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                          Page 45 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
contributing in the formulation of fresh guidelines.
70.     The present writ petition is disposed of with above directions.
71.     However, the Registry is directed to list this matter for filing of
                          compliance reports by (a) Commissioner of Police, Delhi, (b) Health
                          & Family Welfare, Government of NCT of Delhi, and (c) Ministry of
                          Health & Family Welfare, Government of India on 16.07.2025.
72.     The Registrar General of this Court is also requested to get this
                          judgment translated into Hindi through the concerned Committee of
                          this Court, and get the same uploaded in the judgment section of the
                          website.
73.     The judgment be uploaded on the website forthwith.
DR. SWARANA KANTA SHARMA, J
                          MAY 29, 2025/ns
                          TS/TD
Signature Not Verified
W.P.(CRL.) 1804/2025                                            Page 46 of 46
Digitally Signed
By:ZEENAT PRAVEEN
Signing Date:31.05.2025
20:44:06
