Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 26 of 2013
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2018 DEL 2257
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/107112661/

[Cites
37
, Cited by
71
]
Delhi High Court
Gurtej Singh Batth vs State on 27 November, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 DEL 2257
Author:
C. Hari Shankar
Bench:
C. Hari Shankar
$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                  Reserved on : 29th September, 2018
                               Pronounced on : 27th November, 2018
+       Crl.A.39/2015

        GURTEJ SINGH BATTH                           ..... Appellant
                      Through:        Ms. Saahila Lamba, Adv.

                          versus

        STATE                                     . ..... Respondent
                          Through:    Mr. Satish Aggarwala, Adv.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE C. HARI SHANKAR

                          JUDGMENT
1.      This appeal assails judgment, dated 14th August, 2014, passed
by the learned Special Judge (NDPS), whereby the appellant stands
convicted of having committed the offences contemplated under
Section 21(c) and 23(c) read with
Section 28
of the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the
"
NDPS Act
"), and the consequent order, dated 19th August, 2014,
whereby the appellant stands sentenced, for the said offence, to 10
years‟ rigorous imprisonment with fine of ₹ 1 lakh and default simple
imprisonment of 3 months, for each of the aforementioned offences,
the sentences being directed to run concurrently.
2.      The issue in controversy stands covered by the judgment in
Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab
, (2018) SCC OnLine SC 974 and Arif
Crl.A. 39/2015                                               Page 1 of 25
Khan v. State of Uttarakhand, (2018) SCC OnLine SC 459. As such,
it is not necessary to dwell deep into the facts of the case. An overall
view, thereof, to the extent it is necessary to justify the present
judgment, would suffice.
3.      The case of the prosecution may be set out thus.
4.      PW-1 Rajendra Verma, Intelligence Officer in the Directorate
of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) received intelligence, on 12 th April,
2010, to the effect that the petitioner would be travelling from Delhi to
Toronto by Air India Flight No. AI 187, on 13th April, 2010, and
would be carrying narcotics in his baggage. The said information was
reduced, by PW-1, into writing, and put up to his immediate superior
Man Singh Yadav (PW-6), who after discussing the matter with his
senior officer, directed PW-1 to form a team and act on the
information. Consequent thereto, a team of DRI officers, led by the
I/O Rajendra Verma (PW-1) reached the departure hall of the Indira
Gandhi International Airport, accompanied by two independent panch
witnesses. The appellant, who was spotted near the Air India check-in
counter, was intercepted before he could check-in to the flight. Two
suitcases of the appellant, which had already been checked in were
withdrawn. The appellant was also carrying one hand baggage.
5.      The appellant was, thereafter, taken to the traffic office of Air
India, where a written notice under
Section 50
of the NDPS Act (Ex.
PW-1/A) was served on him, informing him of his right to be searched
before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer, to which the appellant
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                  Page 2 of 25
replied, in writing, on the body of the said notice itself, agreeing for
his search to be conducted by the raiding officers.
6.      Consequent thereto, the appellant was searched by the DRI
Officers. The two checked-in baggages of the appellant were also
searched. On opening them, the rear walls of the suitcases were found
to have wooden frames, behind which, cavities, containing transparent
plastic polythene packets, were seen. One such packet was recovered
from the grey suitcase of the appellant, and marked „A‟ and three
packets were recovered from the black suitcase of the appellant and
marked „B‟, „C‟ and „D‟. These packets, on being opened, were found
to contain an off white coloured powdery substance, which, on being
tested with the Field Testing Kit carried by the officials, tested
positive for heroin. The net weight of the packets came to 2.960 kg,
0.956 kg, 1.004 kg, 1.033 kg, working out to be a total net weight of
5.923 kg of heroin, valued at around ₹ 6 crores.
7.      Two samples of 5gm each were retrieved from the above
mentioned four packets, and transferred to 8 separate transparent
polythene pouches, individually marked.       The said pouches were
seized and, after following due procedure, transported and deposited
in the Central Revenues Control Laboratory (CRCL), which returned a
finding to the effect that the packets contained heroin of 65.8% to
84.8% purity.
8.      Summons, under
Section 67
of the NDPS Act, were served on
the appellant by the I/O Rajendra Verma (PW-1), in consequence
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                 Page 3 of 25
whereof, the statement of the appellant (Ex. PW-1/H) was recorded in
the DRI office. The appellant admitted, in the said statement, to
having sought to export heroin, and also disclosed the circumstances
in which he had been driven to do so. He named one Bhupender, a
truck driver, as having intoxicated him into the said trade and stated
that the heroin had been handed over to him by another person in
Jalandhar named Bhajji.
9.      It is not necessary for the limited purpose of this judgment, to
dwell into further particulars of the statement of the appellant under
Section 67 of the NPDS Act.
10.     Suffice it to state that the appellant was arrested on 13 th April,
2010 and, on 7th October, 2010, a criminal complaint was filed,
against the appellant, before the learned Special Judge, by PW-1
Rajendra Verma, the I/O. Charge was framed, against the appellant,
on 5th March, 2011, whereafter trial commenced.
11.     The prosecution/DRI cited ten witnesses.
12.     PW-1 Rajendra Verma, who was the I/O in the case and was an
Intelligence Officer in the DRI, testified to having received secret
intelligence, reduced it to writing and having headed the raiding team
of the DRI, which apprehended the appellant from the Airport and
recovered contraband material from the suitcase in his possession.
This testimony was corroborated by the evidence of PW-4 Pramod
Kumar, Assistant Manager, Security, Air India and, PW 10 Sonaram
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                   Page 4 of 25
Chaudhary, Customer Agent of Air India, who were the two
independent panch witnesses. The interception of the appellant, his
search and the recovery of heroin from the suitcase in his possession,
were also testified by PW-6 Man Singh Yadav, Deputy Director, DRI,
who also claimed to have been part of the raiding team.
13.     PW-2 Lakhi Ram, PW-3 K.P. Singh, PW-5 Rohitash Pandey
and PW-8 Sanjay Kumar, all from the DRI, testified regarding the
recovery of samples of the powder and the depositimg, thereof with
the CRCL. PW-7, Dr. Rajkumar, of the CRCL, confirmed that the
sample, deposited with the CRCL, tested positive for heroin.
14.     Pursuant to the recording of the evidence of the above
prosecution witnesses, the statement of the appellant was recorded
under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The appellant
claimed complete innocence and stated that he had been falsely
implicated in the case.     He admitted the fact that he had been
intercepted at the Air India check-in counter but denied that any
heroin or other contraband substance have been recovered from his
checked-in baggage. He further submitted that no search or seizure
proceedings were conducted in his presence and that he had been
made to wait outside a room, and, after some time, had been taken
inside and confronted with the packets, stated to be containing heroin.
He completely disowned any connection with the said packets.
15.     The appellant also led the evidence of his wife Kuldeep Kaur as
DW-1, which was insubstantial.
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                 Page 5 of 25
16.     The learned Special Judge relied on the statement of the
appellant under
Section 67
of the NDPS Act, as well as the deposition
of various prosecution witnesses, as confirming the recovery of heroin
from the appellant. A specific submission was raised, before the
learned Special Judge, to the effect that the proceedings stood vitiated
because the I/O (PW-1) was the complainant; however, the learned
Special Judge dismissed the said submission, holding that the I/O
Rajendra Verma had filed the complaint in his official capacity. A
detailed analysis of the evidence of various prosecution witnesses is
contained in the impugned judgment, which, consequent thereto, holds
the charge of commission of offence by the appellant under
Section 23
of the NDPS Act to have been established.
17.     The appellant is in appeal thereagainst.
18.     I have heard Ms. Saahila Lamba appearing for the appellant and
Mr. Satish Aggarwala, learned counsel for the DRI. Mr. Aggarwala
has also filed written submissions.
19.     Ms. Saahila Lamba, appearing for the appellant, advanced only
two submissions, highlighting two infirmities in the proceedings,
which in her submission, vitiated them in their entirety. The first was
that the I/O and the complainant happened to be one and the same
person, namely PW-1 Rajendra Verma, which, according to learned
counsel, resulted in the proceedings being completely vitiated,
applying the law as laid down by the Supreme Court in
Mohan Lal
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                 Page 6 of 25
(supra). The second submission was the infraction of
Section 50
of
the NDPS Act, inasmuch as the search of the appellant‟s person, as
well as the baggage in his possession, had been effected and the search
was not carried out in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted
Officer.
20.     Mr. Satish Aggarwala submits, per contra, that
Mohan Lal
(supra), has no applicability, whatsoever, to the investigations carried
out by the DRI, which are not based on information but on
intelligence.
He submits that
Mohan Lal
(supra) barred an informant
from being the I/O, and not the complainant from being the I/O. He
sought, therefore, to distinguish between "an informant" and a
"complainant".
He submits that there was no proscription, in
Mohan
Lal
(supra), to the seizing officer being the complainant, which was
what had happened in the present case.          Insofar as filing of the
complaint by PW-1 was concerned, Mr. Aggarwala reiterated the
finding, of the learned Special Judge, that PW-1 had filed a complaint
in his official capacity and that the said act could not vitiate the
proceedings.
21.     The judgment in Arif Khan (supra) was also sought to be
distinguished on the ground that recovery had taken place, not from
the appellant‟s person, but from his baggage.
22.     Vehement though the submission of Mr. Aggarwala may be, it
is a stand authoritatively discountenanced by the pronouncements of
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                 Page 7 of 25
the Supreme Court on the issue, which bind this Court, by virtue of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India.
23.     Submissions, identical to those advanced by him in the present
case, were advanced by Mr. Aggarwala himself, in another matter,
recently adjudicated by me, in
Anabelle Analista Malibago v. DRI
,
2018 SCC Online Del 12114 where
Mohan Lal
(supra) came in for
exhaustive consideration.
24.     As in the present case, Mr. Aggarwala had, even
in that case
,
sought to distinguish between an "informant‟ and a "complainant",
and contend further, that the seizing officer was not barred from filing
the complaint, in his official capacity.
These submissions, I had
followed, could not sustain in view of the law
laid down in
Mohan
Lal
(supra). My reasoning, in
the said judgment
, applies, squarely, to
the facts of this case and may, therefore, be reproduced thus :
"2.    Ms. Inderjeet Sidhu, appearing on behalf of the
        appellant, restricts her submission to one single ground, viz.
        that the entire proceedings were vitiated as the Investigating
        Officer (hereinafter referred to as the "IO") was herself the
        complainant, who had submitted/filed the written complaint,
        wherefrom these proceedings emanated. She relies on a recent
        judgment of the Supreme Court, rendered by a Bench of three
        Hon'ble Judges, in
Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab
, 2018 SCC
        OnLine SC 974.
3.     Arguing per contra, on behalf of the Directorate of
        Revenue Intelligence (hereinafter referred to as "DRI"), Mr.
        Satish Aggarwala, learned counsel, would seek to distinguish
        the judgment in
Mohan Lal
(supra) on the ground that
the
        said judgment
held the proceedings to be vitiated where
        the informant was the IO, and not where the complainant was
        the IO. He submits that there is a distinction between an
        "informant" and a "complainant", and that the cases
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                    Page 8 of 25
investigated by the DRI are based, not on information, but on
        intelligence sourced by the DRI and the documents recovered
        pursuant thereto.
He submits that, where the seizing officer
        was the complainant, as in the present case, the proceedings
        were not vitiated and
Mohan Lal
(supra) would not apply. He
        draws my attention to the contents of the complaint, and to the
        contentions advanced by him in his written submissions before
        the learned ASJ.
4.     Ms. Sidhu, in rejoinder, submits that the distinction,
        sought to be drawn by Mr. Aggarwala, between an informant
        and a complainant, is a distinction without a difference, in
        cases relating to prosecution under the
NDPS Act
, as the
        source of intelligence was not known in such cases. Besides,
        she submits that a holistic reading of
Mohan Lal
(supra)
        reveals that it covers cases where the informant was the IO, as
        well as cases where the complainant was the IO. She,
        therefore, reiterates her reliance on
Mohan Lal
(supra).
*********
10.
Insofar as the applicability of
Mohan Lal
(supra) is
        concerned, Mr. Aggarwala, as already noted hereinabove,
        seeks to distinguish the said case by drawing my attention to
        the distinction between an "informant" and a "complainant",
        and that in cases investigated by the DRI, there was no
        "informant", as the cases proceeded on prior intelligence, and
        that the seizing officer was the complainant. He submits that
        there is no prohibition to the seizing officer being the
        complainant and that if, therefore, the seizing officer, who also
        investigated the case, happened to file the complaint, against
        the appellant-accused in court, no illegality, warranting a
        decision in favour of the accused, could be said to have been
        committed.
11.     Mr. Satish Aggarwala has also filed written
        submissions, in which, besides advancing the legal arguments
        already noted hereinabove, it has been sought to be contended
        that Ms. Anju Singh was neither the informant nor the
        investigating officer, as "almost the entire investigation" had
        been conducted by PW-4 Ramesh Kumar, Senior Intelligence
        Officer (SIO). My attention has been invited, in this context,
        to the testimonies of Anju Singh and Ramesh Kumar, testified
        as PW-1 and PW-4 respectively. The filing of complaint by
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 9 of 25
Anju Singh, it is sought to be contended in the written
        submissions, was only by way of discharge of her official
        duties.
12.    Before examining the rival contentions, it would be
        appropriate to peruse the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Mohan Lal
(supra), which constitutes the sheet-anchor, and
        the summum bonum, of the appellant's case.
13.      Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab, 2018 SCC OnLine SC
974
14.    The proceedings, in
Mohan Lal
(supra) commenced
        from an FIR, lodged on 3rd February, 1997 by PW-1 Chand
        Singh, Sub-Inspector, who alleged that, while on patrol duty in
        the company of other officers of the police station, they
        saw Mohan Lal and, on entertaining doubts, called Mr.
        Rajinder N. Dhoke, a gazetted IPS officer and, in his presence,
        searched Mohan Lal, leading to recovery of 4 kg of opium in
        a bag carried by him. The matter proceeded, inexorably, to his
        incarceration, trial and eventual conviction.
15.    Based on the contentions advanced before it, the
        Supreme Court delineated the "primary question" arising for
        its consideration, in para 5 of the judgment, "whether in a
        criminal prosecution, it will be in consonance with the
        principles of natural justice, fair play and a fair investigation,
        if the informant and the investigating officer were to be the
        same person". Additionally, the Supreme Court examined
        whether, in such a case, it was "necessary for the accused to
        demonstrate prejudice, especially under laws such as
NDPS Act
, carrying a reverse burden of proof".
16.   On the "reverse burden of proof" cast by the
NDPS Act
, the Supreme Court ruled, in para 13 of its
        judgment thus:
"13. Unlike the general principle of criminal
                 jurisprudence that an accused is presumed innocent
                 unless proved guilty, the
NDPS Act
carries a reverse
                 burden of proof under
Sections 35
and
54
. But that
                 cannot be understood to mean that the moment an
                 allegation is made and the F.I.R recites compliance
                 with statutory procedures leading to recovery, the
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 10 of 25
burden of proof from the very inception of the
                 prosecution shifts to the accused, without the
                 prosecution having to establish or prove anything more.
                 The presumption is rebuttable.
Section 35(2)
provides
                 that a fact can be said to have been proved if it is
                 established beyond reasonable doubt and not on
                 preponderance of probability.
The stringent provisions of the
NDPS Act
, such as
Section 37
, the minimum sentence of ten years, absence
                 of any provision for remission, do not dispense with the
                 requirement of the prosecution to establish a prima
                 facie case beyond reasonable doubt after investigation,
                 only after which the burden of proof shall shift to the
                 accused. The case of the prosecution cannot be allowed
                 to rest on a preponderance of probabilities."
17.    Thereafter, the prime necessity of the investigation, in
        cases under the
NDPS Act
being scrupulously fair and free
        from any objectionable features or infirmities, was highlighted
        in paras 14 to 16 of the judgment, thus:
"14. A fair trial to an accused, a constitutional
                 guarantee under
Article 21
of the Constitution, would
                 be a hollow promise if the investigation in a NDPS case
                 were not to be fair or raises serious questions about its
                 fairness apparent on the face of the investigation. In the
                 nature of the reverse burden of proof, the onus will lie
                 on the prosecution to demonstrate on the face of it that
                 the investigation was fair, judicious with no
                 circumstances that may raise doubts about its veracity.
                 The obligation of proof beyond reasonable doubt will
                 take within its ambit a fair investigation, in absence of
                 which there can be no fair trial. If the investigation
                 itself is unfair, to require the accused to demonstrate
                 prejudice will be fraught with danger vesting arbitrary
                 powers in the police which may well lead to false
                 implication also. Investigation in such a case would
                 then become an empty formality and a farce. Such an
                 interpretation therefore naturally has to be avoided.
15.    That investigation in a criminal offence must be
                 free from objectionable features or infirmities which
                 may legitimately lead to a grievance on part of the
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                        Page 11 of 25
accused was noticed in
Babubhai v. State              of
                 Gujarat
, (2010) 12 SCC 254 as follows:
"32. The investigation into a criminal offence
                      must be free from objectionable features or
                      infirmities which may legitimately lead to a
                      grievance on the part of the accused that
                      investigation was unfair and carried out with an
                      ulterior motive. It is also the duty of the
                      investigating officer to conduct the investigation
                      avoiding any kind of mischief and harassment to
                      any of the accused. The investigating officer
                      should be fair and conscious so as to rule out any
                      possibility of fabrication of evidence and his
                      impartial conduct must dispel any suspicion as
                      to its genuineness. The investigating officer "is
                      not merely to bolster up a prosecution case with
                      such evidence as may enable the court to record
                      a conviction but to bring out the real
                      unvarnished truth".
33.
In
State of Bihar v. P.P Sharma
, 1992
                      Supp (1) SCC 222 : AIR 1991 SC 1260 this
                      Court has held as under:
"57. ... Investigation is a delicate
                             painstaking and dextrous process. Ethical
                             conduct is absolutely essential for
                             investigative     professionalism.         ...
Therefore, before countenancing such
                             allegations of mala fides or bias it is
                             salutary and an onerous duty and
                             responsibility of the court, not only to
                             insist upon making specific and definite
                             allegations of personal animosity against
                             the investigating officer at the start of the
                             investigation but also must insist to
                             establish and prove them from the facts
                             and circumstances to the satisfaction of
                             the court.
***
59.   Malice in law could be inferred
                             from doing of wrongful act intentionally
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 12 of 25
without any just cause or excuse or
                              without there being reasonable relation to
                              the purpose of the exercise of statutory
                              power.
...
61.    An investigating officer who is not
                              sensitive to the constitutional mandates,
                              may be prone to trample upon the
                              personal liberty of a person when he is
                              actuated by mala fides."
16.   The duty of the prosecution under the
NDPS Act
, considering the reverse burden of proof,
                 was noticed in
Noor Aga v. State of Punjab
, (2008) 16
                 SCC 417 observing:
"58......An initial burden exists upon the
                       prosecution and only when it stands satisfied,
                       would the legal burden shift. Even then, the
                       standard of proof required for the accused to
                       prove his innocence is not as high as that of the
                       prosecution. Whereas the standard of proof
                       required to prove the guilt of the accused on the
                       prosecution is "beyond all reasonable doubt" but
                       it is "preponderance of probability" on the
                       accused. If the prosecution fails to prove the
                       foundational facts so as to attract the rigours of
Section 35
of the Act, the actus reus which is
                       possession of contraband by the accused cannot
                       be said to have been established.
59.     With a view to bring within its purview
                     the requirements of
Section 54
of the Act,
                     element of possession of the contraband was
                     essential so as to shift the burden on the accused.
                     The provisions being exceptions to the general
                     rule, the generality thereof would continue to be
                     operative, namely, the element of possession
                     will have to be proved beyond reasonable
                     doubt."
18.    The Supreme Court, thereafter, went on to examine the
        implication of the IO, carrying out investigation under the
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                      Page 13 of 25
NDPS Act
, being the informant, as well as being the
        complainant, in paras 18 to 31 of the decision, thus:
"18. In a criminal prosecution, there is an obligation
                 cast on the investigator not only to be fair, judicious
                 and just during investigation, but also that the
                 investigation on the very face of it must appear to be
                 so, eschewing any conduct or impression which may
                 give rise to a real and genuine apprehension in the mind
                 of an accused and not mere fanciful, that the
                 investigation was not fair. In the circumstances, if an
                 informant police official in a criminal prosecution,
                 especially when carrying a reverse burden of
                 proof, who makes the allegations himself, is asked to
                 investigate, serious doubts will naturally arise with
                 regard to his fairness and impartiality. It is not
                 necessary that bias must actually be proved. It would be
                 illogical to presume and contrary to normal human
                 conduct, that he would himself at the end of the
                 investigation submit a closure report to conclude false
                 implication with all its attendant consequences for the
                 complainant himself. The result of the investigation
                 would therefore be a foregone conclusion.
19.     The discussion in the present case may not be
                 understood as confined to the requirements of a fair
                 investigation under the
NDPS Act
only carrying a
                 reverse burden of proof. Baldev Singh (supra) related
                 to a prosecution under
Section 165A
of the IPC.
                 Nonetheless, it observed that if the informant were to
                 be made the investigating officer, it was bound to
                 reflect on the credibility of the prosecution
                 case. Megha Singh (supra) concerned a prosecution
                 under the
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
                 (Prevention) Act, 1985
. It was held that the Head
                 Constable being the complainant himself could not
                 have proceeded with the investigation and it was a
                 practice, to say the least, which should not be resorted
                 to so that there may not be any occasion to suspect fair
                 and impartial investigation. Rajangam (supra) was a
                 prosecution under the
NDPS Act
. An objection was
                 taken that PW6 who apprehended the accused could
                 not have investigated the case. Upholding the
                 objection, relying on Megha Singh (supra) the accused
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                      Page 14 of 25
was acquitted.
The view taken by the Madras High
                 Court in
Balasundaran v. State
, 1999 (113) ELT 785
                 (Mad.), was also noticed as follows:
"16. Learned Counsel for the appellants also
                        stated that P.W 5 being the Inspector of Police
                        who was present at the time of search and he
                        was the investigating officer and as such it is
                        fatal to the case of the prosecution. P.W 5,
                        according to the prosecution, was present with
                        PWs 3 and 4 at the time of search. In fact, P.W 5
                        alone took up investigation in the case and he
                        had examined the witnesses. No doubt the
                        successor to P.W 5 alone had filed the charge
                        sheet. But there is no material to show that he
                        had examined any other witness. It therefore
                        follows that P.W 5 16 was the person who really
                        investigated the case. P.W 5 was the person who
                        had searched the appellants in question and he
                        being the investigation officer, certainly it is not
                        proper and correct. The investigation ought to
                        have been done by any other investigating
                        agency. On this score also, the investigation is
                        bound to suffer and as such the entire
                        proceedings will be vitiated."
20.     Bhaskar Ramappa Madar (supra) concerned a
                 prosecution under
Section 304B
, I.P.C which also
                 carries a reverse burden of proof. The Trial Court held
                 that the investigating officer who was also the
                 complainant could not have investigated, and on that
                 ground, held the prosecution to be tainted. The acquittal
                 was reversed by the High Court. In appeal, this Court
                 declined to interfere with the conviction. After referring
                 to Bhagwan Singh (supra) and Megha Singh (supra),
                 it was observed that the principles laid down therein
                 had to be confined to the facts of the said cases and that
                 the matter would have to be decided on the facts of
                 each case without any universal generalisation.
21.
Hardip Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2008) 8 SCC
                 557 concerned a prosecution under the
NDPS Act
. The
                 contention was that the Inspector, PW5 being the
                 complainant himself would be an interested person and
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                         Page 15 of 25
should not have been made the investigating officer.
The argument was repelled relying on State rep. by
                 Inspector of Police, Vigilance and AntiCorruption,
                 Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu v. V. Jayapaul, (2004) 5
                 SCC 223 observing as follows:
"6.... We find no principle or binding authority
                       to hold that the moment the competent police
                       officer, on the basis of information received,
                       makes out an FIR incorporating his name as the
                       informant, he forfeits his right to investigate. If
                       at all, such investigation could only be assailed
                       on the ground of bias or real likelihood of bias
                       on the part of the investigating officer. The
                       question of bias would depend on the facts and
                       circumstances of each case and it is not proper to
                       lay down a broad and unqualified proposition, in
                       the manner in which it has been done by the
                       High Court, that whenever a police officer
                       proceeds to investigate after registering the FIR
                       on his own, the investigation would necessarily
                       be unfair or biased."
22.     Significantly, V. Jayapaul, (supra) related to a
                 prosecution under the
Prevention of Corruption Act
which sought to distinguish
Megha Singh
, (supra) on
                 its facts.
23.    Baldev Singh, (supra) relied upon by the State
                 is distinguishable on its own facts concerning an
                 irregularity in an investigation by an officer not
                 especially empowered under the NDPS Act to do so.
24.    In Surender (supra), the prosecution was under
the
NDPS Act
. There was no independent witness. The
                 objection that PW6, Subinspector Satbir Singh being
                 the complainant could not have investigated relying
                 on Rajangam, (supra) and
Megha Singh
, (supra) was
                 rejected on the ground that he was not the sole person
                 investigating the case, and that the ground had not been
                 raised before the High Court in appeal.
25.    In the nature of the controversy, it would be
                 useful to also notice the view taken by different High
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 16 of 25
Courts on the issue.
In
State of Himachal
                 Pradesh v. Atul Sharma
, 2015 (2) shimLC 693 (Crl.
                 Appeal No. 246 of 2008, decided on 28.02.2015), under
                 the
NDPS Act
, it was observed as follows:
"10.8     In present case it is proved on record
                       that complainant is SI Bahadur Singh as per FIR
                       Ext.PW12.A and it is proved on record that
                       entire investigation has been conducted by
                       complainant himself and there is no evidence on
                       record in order to prove that investigation was
                       handed over to some other independent
                       Investigating Officer. It is not the case of
                       prosecution that no other independent
                       Investigating Officer was available to conduct
                       impartial investigation. We are of the opinion
                       that conducting entire investigation i.e
                       preparation of seizure memo, site plan, recording
                       statements of witnesses by complainant himself
                       has caused miscarriage of justice to accused qua
                       fair investigation."
26. A similar view has been taken in Shri Fayas
                 Ali v. State of Mizoram Crl. Appeal No. 26 of 2013 (J)
                 dated 19.09.2013, relating to prosecution under the
NDPS Act
, by the Gauhati High Court as follows:
"From the evidence of PWs 1 and 4, it is clearly
                       found that the major part of the investigation
                       including the arrest of the accused, preparation
                       of seizure, taking of sample, examination of the
                       seizure witnesses and examination of the
                       accused person, was completed by the PW1,
                       who was the informant/complainant in the
                       present case. Therefore, it is clearly found that
                       the investigation, in its true sense, was done by
                       the complainant himself.
In the case of State by
                       Inspector of Police, Narcotic Intelligence
                       Bureau, Madurai (supra), the Supreme Court,
                       relying on the decision held in the case
                       of
Megha Singh
(supra), observed that the
                       investigation is to be done by a person other than
                       the complainant and that the investigation done
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                      Page 17 of 25
by the complainant is bound to suffer and vitiate
                       the entire proceeding."
27.    The Punjab & Haryana High Court
                 in Gannu v. State of Punjab, 2017 (3) RCR (criminal)
566 (Crl. Appeal No. 1688SB of 2004 dated
26.05.2017) relating to the
NDPS Act
, after referring
                 to
Noor Aga
, (supra) and the views of the Calcutta
                 High Court also, apart from
Atul Sharma
(supra),
                 concluded as follows:
"14. Another aspect of the matter is that in
                       sheer violation of the principles of fair and
                       impartial investigation, the complainant and the
                       investigating officer is the same person, which
                       makes the prosecution case doubtful.
In
Laltu
                       Prasad v. State of West Bengal
, 2017 (2) R.C.R
                       21 (Criminal) 237 (Calcutta) (DB), it was held
                       that the complainant himself acting as the
                       investigating officer violating the principles of
                       fair and impartial investigation is a practice, to
                       say the least, should not be resorted to and it is a
                       disturbing feature.
To the same effect, is a
                       Division Bench judgment of Hon'ble Himachal
                       Pradesh High Court reported as
State of
                       Himachal Pradesh v. Atul Sharma
, 2015 (6)
                       R.C.R (Criminal) 949, wherein, it has been held
                       that where the complainant himself conducts
                       investigation, it causes miscarriage of justice to
                       accused qua fair investigation."
28. A Single Judge of the Kerala High Court
                 in
Naushad v. State of Kerala
, 2000 (1) KLT 785,
                 relating to the
NDPS Act
held as follows:
"... In a case of this nature, when the
                       complainant himself is a Police Official, the
                       investigation should have been conducted by his
                       top ranking officer and the final report also
                       ought to have been filed by the higher official. A
                       complainant being a police officer cannot be
                       an Investigating Officer. For, in such case, the
                       accused and the prosecution will be deprived of
                       their valuable rights of contradicting and
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                        Page 18 of 25
corroborating, the previous information recorded
                       under Ss. 154 or 155
Cr.P.C
and previous
                       statement of the witness, being a police officer,
                       complaint recorded, under
S. 161
Cr.P.C
                       enjoined in
S. 145
and
157
of the Indian
                       Evidence Act and proviso of
S. 162
Cr.P.C In
                       the instant case, before me, PW1 is an Assistant
                       Sub Inspector of Police, 22 and I understand
                       from the Public Prosecutor as well as from the
                       Counsel for the petitioner that the particular
                       Police Station has got a Sub Inspector of Police.
                       Therefore, in this case, the investigation ought to
                       have been conducted by the Sub Inspector of
                       Police or any other Police Officer above the rank
                       of PW1. In the instant case, thus an incurable
                       infirmity and flaw have been committed by the
                       prosecution, quite against the proposition of law.
                       Therefore, on that score itself, the petitioner is
                       entitled to get an order of acquittal. In view of
                       my above conclusion on the footing of position
                       of law, this is a fit case, which has to be allowed
                       by acquitting the petitioner."
29.   Disapproving of the same, a Division Bench
                 in
Kader v. State of Kerala
, 2001 Cri LJ 4044, held:
"6.    Unlike usual cases under the
Criminal
                       Procedure Code
, in cases under the
NDPS Act
,
                       by the time of arrest, main part of investigation
                       will be completed and duty of the investigating
                       officer is mainly in sending the samples for
                       chemical analysis and other routine work and
                       there is no likelihood of any prejudice in usual
                       circumstances. Therefore, we are of the opinion
                       that merely because a detecting officer himself is
                       investigating officer or the officer of the same
                       ranks as that of the detecting officer is
                       investigating the case and files report before the
                       Court will not vitiate the proceedings under
                       N.D.P.S act in the absence of proof of specific
                       prejudice to the accused. Therefore, legal
                       position     stated    in
Naushad v. State      of
                       Kerala
, 2000 (1) KLT 785 to the contrary is
                       overruled."
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 19 of 25
30. The view taken by the Kerala High Court
                 in
Kader
(supra) does not meet our approval. It
                 tantamounts to holding that the F.I.R was a gospel
                 truth, making investigation an empty formality if not a
                 farce. The right of the accused to a fair investigation
                 and fair trial guaranteed under
Article 21
of the
                 Constitution will stand negated in that event, with
                 arbitrary and uncanalised powers vested with the police
                 in matters relating to the
NDPS Act
and similar laws
                 carrying a reverse burden of proof. An investigation is
                 a systemic collection of facts for the purpose of
                 describing what occurred and explaining why it
                 occurred. The word systemic suggests that it is more
                 than a whimsical process. An investigator will collect
                 the facts relating to the incident under investigation.
                 The fact is a mere information and is not synonymous
                 with the truth.
Kader
(supra) is, therefore, overruled.
We approve the view taken in
Naushad
(supra).
31.    In view of the conflicting opinions expressed by
                 different two Judge Benches of this Court, the
                 importance of a fair investigation from the point of
                 view of an accused as a guaranteed constitutional right
                 under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India, it is
                 considered necessary that the law in this regard be laid
                 down with certainty. To leave the matter for being
                 determined on the individual facts of a case, may not
                 only lead to a possible abuse of powers, but more
                 importantly will leave the police, the accused, the
                 lawyer and the courts in a state of uncertainty and
                 confusion which has to be avoided. It is therefore held
                 that a fair investigation, which is but the very
                 foundation of fair trial, necessarily postulates that the
                 informant and the investigator must not be the same
                 person. Justice must not only be done but must appear
                 to be done also. Any possibility of bias or a
                 predetermined conclusion has to be excluded. This
                 requirement is all the more imperative in laws carrying
                 a reverse burden of proof."
(Emphasis and underscoring supplied)
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                       Page 20 of 25
19.     The opening words of para 31 of the judgment make it
        apparent that, prior thereto, there was considerable divergence
        of judicial opinion, amongst decisions of various benches, in
        each case of two Hon'ble judges of the Supreme Court,
        regarding the issue of whether the fact that the
        informant/complainant/searching officer, was the IO, was fatal
        to the prosecution, especially in cases where the statute casts a
        reverse burden of proof. Needless to say, this Court is loath to
        revisit the issue and, thereby, undo the efforts of the Supreme
        Court, as manifested by the judgment in
Mohan Lal
(supra),
        which sets the legal position at rest.
For the nonce, at least,
        this Court is sanguine about the position, in law, that all
        prosecutions, under the
NDPS Act
- or, for that matter, under
        any "criminal" statute which casts a reverse burden of proof -
        must abide by the enunciation of the law in
Mohan
        Lal
(supra).
20.     Another feature which becomes apparent, from the
        underscored words in the above extracted passages
        from
Mohan Lal
(supra), is that they apply, not only to a
        situation in which the IO is the informant, but also to a
        situation in which the IO is the complainant or even, for that
        matter, the searching officer.
21.   With those prefatory remarks, the following principles
        may justifiably be said to emerge, from the judgment
        in
Mohan Lal
(supra), insofar as the effect, on prosecutions
        under the
NDPS Act
, of the IO being the informant,
        complainant or searching officer, is concerned:
(i)    In every criminal prosecution, it was essential
                 that the investigation, on the face of it, had to be free,
                 judicious and just, and that it had also to appear to be
                 so, eschewing any conduct or impression which may
                 give rise to a real and genuine, and not a mere fanciful,
                 apprehension, in the mind of the accused, that the
                 investigation was not fair.
(ii)   If, therefore, the informant police official in a
                 criminal prosecution, especially one which carries a
                 reverse burden of proof, who had made the allegations,
                 was himself asked to investigate, serious doubts would
                 naturally arise with regard to his fairness and
                 impartiality.
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                        Page 21 of 25
(iii) Actual proof of bias was not required in such a
                 case. It would be illogical to presume and contrary to
                 normal human conduct, that the IO would, in such a
                 case, conclude the investigation with a closure report,
                 which would mean that he had falsely implicated the
                 petitioner and would result in attendant consequences
                 on the complainant himself.
(iv) In
Megha Singh v. State of Haryana
, (1996) 11
                 SCC 709, it had been held that the Head
                 Constable, being the complainant himself, could not
                 have proceeded with the investigation, and such a
                 practice was one which should not be resorted to, so
                 that there can be no occasion to suspect the fairness and
                 impartiality of the investigation.
(v)    Following the law
laid down in
Megha
                 Singh
(supra),      the   Supreme      Court     had,
in
State v. Rajangam
, (2010) 15 SCC 369, acquitted
                 the accused, in a case under the
NDPS Act
, on the
                 ground that the officer who apprehended the
                 accused could not have investigated the case.
The
                 Supreme Court also affirmed the view taken by the
                 Madras High Court in
Balasundaran v. State
, 1999
                 (113) ELT 785 (Mad.), which held that the person who
                 had searched the appellantscould not be the
                 investigating officer.
(vi) In
Naushad v. State of Kerala
, 2000 (1) KLT
                 785, it was categorically held by a learned Single Judge
                 of the Kerala High Court, in a case relating to the
NDPS Act
that "the complainant being a police officer
                 cannot be an investigating officer" as, "in such case, the
                 accused and the prosecution will be deprived of their
                 valuable rights of contradicting and corroborating, the
                 previous information recorded under Sections 154 or
                 155 of
CrPC
and previous statement of the witness,
                 being a police officer, complaint recorded, under
Section 161
CrPC enjoined in
Section 145
and
157
of
                 the Indian Evidence Act and proviso of
Section 162
CrPC". The fact that the complainant was the
                 investigating officer was held, by the learned Single
                 Judge of the High Court of Kerala, to constitute an
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                        Page 22 of 25
"incurable infirmity", entitling the petitioner to an order
                 of acquittal.
The said judgment of the learned Single
                 Judge in
Naushad
(supra) stands specifically approved
                 in
Mohan Lal
(supra), which overrules the contrary
                 view, expressed by a Division Bench of the High Court
                 of Kerala, in
Kader
(supra).
The view of the learned
                 Single Judge of the High Court of Kerala
                 in
Naushad
(supra) stands, thereby, elevated to the
                 status of the opinion of a bench of three Hon'ble judges
                 of the Supreme Court.
22.     A holistic reading of
Mohan Lal
(supra), in my view,
        leaves no manner of doubt that the Supreme Court has
        disapproved, in cases relating to prosecution under the
NDPS
        Act
, not only the informant being the IO, but also the
        complainant, the officer who apprehends the accused, or the
        officer who conducts the search, being the IO. The reasons, for
        taking such a view are also clearly delineated in
the said
        decision
. The Supreme Court has clearly expressed a view
        that, if the person making the allegations is himself asked to
        investigate, serious doubts would arise with regard to his
        fairness and impartiality. It has also noted that it would be
        illogical to presume, and contrary to human conduct, to expect
        the IO, who had himself provided the initial information, or
        filed the complaint against the accused before the competent
        court, or even conducted the apprehension or search of the
        accused, to, at the conclusion of the investigation, submits a
        closure report, which could invite an inference that he had
        obviously implicated the accused, with all its attendant
        consequences, "for the complainant himself".
While limiting
        the earlier judgment in
Megha Singh
(supra) to its own facts,
        the Supreme Court also held that the complainant could not be
        the IO, and that such a practice was inherently pernicious in
        nature.
Rajangam
(supra) which arose under the
NDPS Act
,
        also stated that the officer who apprehended the accused could
        not have investigated the case.
The judgment of the learned
        Single Judge of the Kerala High Court in
Naushad
(supra),
        which stands affirmed by the Supreme Court in
Mohan
        Lal
(supra), too, affirms the same view.
23.    In view of the above, the submission, of Ms. Sidhu, to
        the effect that, if the complainant, who has filed the complaint
        in a case relating to prosecution under the
NDPS Act
, was
        herself/himself the IO, the entire investigation and subsequent
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                         Page 23 of 25
prosecution and trial stand vitiated, and that the accused is
        entitled, ipso facto, to acquittal, merits acceptance."
25.
In view of the law
laid down in
Mohan Lal
(supra), therefore
the fact that PW-1 Rajendra Verma was the I/O, as well as the
complainant, completely vitiated the proceedings in the present case.
26.     Apropos Arif Khan (supra), the contention of Mr. Aggarwala,
is that the said judgment had no applicability, as the recovery had
taken place, not from the person of the appellant, but from his
baggage.
This submission, too, has no force, in view of the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in
Dilip v. State of Madhya Pradesh
,
(
2007) 1 SCC 450 and State of Rajasthan v. Parmanand
, AIR 2014
SC 1384 which hold that, where the search of the baggage of the
accused (from which the contraband was recovered) takes place
alongwith the search of his person,
Section 50
applies with full force.
I may mention, here that I have, in my judgment in
Dharambir v.
State
, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 12305 also dealt with this aspect of the
matter.
27.     Once
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, is treated as applicable, Arif
Khan (supra) clearly applies, resulting in the present proceedings
being vitiated additionally for the reason that the search and recovery
did not take place in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted
Officer. The requirement of consent, from the appellant, for being
searched by the members of the raiding team, would be irrelevant, in
view of the law laid down in Arif Khan (supra).
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                   Page 24 of 25
Conclusion
28.     Resultantly, the proceedings against the appellant stand
completely vitiated in law, for the above two reasons.            It is not
necessary, therefore, to enter into any other aspect of the controversy.
29.     As a result, the appellant is entitled to be acquitted of the charge
against him, of contravening
Section 23
of the NDPS Act.
30.     Accordingly, the appellant is acquitted of the said charge. The
impugned judgment dated 14th August, 2014 and consequential order
on sentence dated 19th August, 2014 of the learned Special Judge,
stand quashed and set aside.
31.     The appellant is entitled to be set at liberty unless his detention
is required in any other case.
32.     The appeal stands allowed accordingly. Trial court record be
returned forthwith.
C. HARI SHANKAR, J
NOVEMBER 27, 2018/kr
Crl.A. 39/2015                                                   Page 25 of 25
