Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/10865971/

[Cites
17
, Cited by
2
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Dr. Joginder Singh Dhiman vs State Of Himachal Pradesh & Others on 30 September, 2019
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH,
              SHIMLA




                                                                             .
Cr. MMO No. 546/2019
Reserved on : 27.9.2019
                                    Date of decision : 30th September, 2019





   Dr. Joginder Singh Dhiman
                                                                  ... Petitioner
                                    Versus





   State of Himachal Pradesh & others
                                                                  ...Respondents

   Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 No.

   For the Petitioners        :     Mr. Anand Sharma, Advocate.
For the Respondent :             M/s Ashwani K. Sharma, Nand Lal Thakur and
                                    Rameeta Rahi, Additional Advocate Generals.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge




                     The present petition is under Section 482 Cr. P.C. for





   quashing of F.I.R. No. 0124/2019, dated 31.05.2019, registered at





   Police Station, Shimla West (H.P.) under
Sections 279
and
337
IPC,1860 and for quashing of all consequent Criminal proceedings.
2.                The present F.I.R. stands registered on the basis of

   information given by Kusum.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...2...
FACTS:
.
3.                The gist of the entire case is as follows:
(a)         The present FIR was registered on the basis
            of information given by one Kusum.
(b)         Now the parties have entered into a written
            compromise dated 04.05.2019 which has been placed
            on record.
(c)         (respondent     No.3/injured)      had      put      in
            appearance and made a statement on oath that he
            has compromised the entire matter with the accused

            Dr. Joginder Singh, the present petitioner. The

            statement is taken on file.
REASONING:
4.                The following aspects would be relevant to arrive at a final




conclusion in this petition:-
The injured person has amicably settled the matter with
a)

            petitioner/accused and stated that the accident took place
            due to error in judgment of the road situation and that it was





            unintentional. Petitioner/accused was neither rash nor
            negligent.
b)   The entire facts and evidence, point out that accident just
            happened due to factors beyond the control of humans and
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...3...
not because of the fault of the driver, certainly not because
           of the petitioner/accused.
.
c)   Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District
           Magistrate as a normal procedure. However, there is





           inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of
           the Code of Criminal Procedure to intervene in such kind of
           matters. It is not the requirement of law that the cancellation





           has to be approved only through the District Magistrate.
           Inherent Jurisdiction of High Court under
section 482
CrPC
           can always be exercised, depending upon the facts and

           circumstances of each and every case.
d)   Even if, this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to
           maintain the stand which they have taken in this
           compromise, which is likely to result in the acquittal of the



           accused.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
5.
In
Ashok    Chaturvedi     and   others       v. Shitul        H.





Chanchani and another
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court





holds that the determination of the question as regards the propriety of

the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process

need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The

Court observed thus :-
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...4...
".... .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to us
          inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to




                                                               .
plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no
          sufficient material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred





          from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic earlier)
          point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the
          offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that





          the very issuance of the order of taking cognizance is invalid
          on the ground that no offence can be said to have been
          made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition.
It has been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the interest
          of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue


          even where the allegations in the complaint petition do not
          make out any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of
          the process of court, and therefore, there cannot be any




          dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the





          Code can be exercised."
6.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd
.
and another, (2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as

under:-
"8. .... .... ....There is no hard and fast rule that the objection as
     to cognizability of offence and maintainability of the complaint
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...5...
should be allowed to be raised only at the time of framing the
     charge."
.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
7.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three





Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
"6. ....    ...     ...It is well established that the inherent





         jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash
         proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of
         the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of

         justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an

         accused person must be tried under the provisions of the
         Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to interfere with
         the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not



         possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible
         rule which would govern the exercise of this inherent




         jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some categories of
         cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be





         exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be
         cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take





         the view that the institution or continuance of criminal
         proceedings against an accused person may amount to the
         abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the
         impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If
         the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an
         offence alleged to have been committed by an accused
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...6...
person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar
     against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding,




                                                          .
the High Court would be justified in quashing the
     proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite
     sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this





     category. Cases may also arise where the allegations in the
     First Information Report or the complaint, even if they are
     taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do





     not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question
     of appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of
     looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to

     decide whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In

     such case, it would be legitimate for the High Court to hold
     that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of the


     criminal Court to be issued against the accused person. A
     third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of
     the High Court can be successfully invoked may also arise.
In cases falling under this category the allegations made





     against the accused person do constitute an offence alleged
     but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support of





     the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to
     prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is
     important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
     where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence
     which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the
     accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...7...
which on its appreciation may or may not support the
         accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S.




                                                                .
561-A, the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as
         to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is
         the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not





         be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent
         jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of
         the evidence the accusation made against the accused





         would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and
         scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S.
         561-A in the matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and

         that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide :
In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat
         Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr.


         Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (AIR 1954
         Punj 193), Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu
         Majumdar, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v.
Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad
39)."
8.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao





Chandrojirao Angre
, 1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges bench of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court holds:-
"7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution
         at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be
         applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...8...
allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is
         also for the court to take into consideration any special




                                                               .
features which appear in a particular case to consider
         whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit
         a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the





         court cannot be utilised for any oblique purpose and where
         in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction
         is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be





         served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the
         court may while taking into consideration the special facts of
         a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at

         a preliminary stage."
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
9.         A three Judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian

Singh v. State of Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on




quashing on account of compromise/compounding, in the following





terms:
"53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language suggests,
         saves the inherent power of the High Court which it has by
         virtue of it being a superior court to prevent abuse of the
         process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
         justice. It begins with the words, 'nothing in this Code' which
         means that the provision is an overriding provision. These
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...9...
words leave no manner of doubt that none of the provisions
     of the Code limits or restricts the inherent power. The




                                                           .
guideline for exercise of such power is provided in
Section
     482
itself i.e., to prevent abuse of the process of any court or
     otherwise to secure the ends of justice. As has been





     repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers no new powers
     on High Court; it merely safeguards existing inherent powers
     possessed by High Court necessary to prevent abuse of the





     process of any Court or to secure the ends of justice. It is
     equally well settled that the power is not to be resorted to if
     there is specific provision in the Code for the redress of the

     grievance of an aggrieved party. It should be exercised very

     sparingly and it should not be exercised as against the
     express bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the


     Code.
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the




     ground of settlement between an offender and victim is not
     the same thing as compounding of offence. They are





     different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the
     power of compounding of offences given to a court under
Section 320
is materially different from the quashing of
     criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
     inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a
     criminal court is circumscribed by the provisions contained in
Section 320
and the court is guided solely and squarely
     thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...10...
the High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal
     proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the material on




                                                           .
record as to whether the ends of justice would justify such
     exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may
     be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having
     regard to the fact that dispute between the offender and





     victim   has   been   settled   although     offences       are    not
     compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, continuation of
     criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice

     in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is

     put to an end and peace is restored; securing the ends of
     justice being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes
     are acts which have harmful effect on the public and consist



     in wrong doing that seriously endangers and threatens well-
     being of society and it is not safe to leave the crime- doer




     only because he and the victim have settled the dispute
     amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet





     certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
     or without permission of the Court. In respect of serious





     offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of
     mental depravity under
Indian Penal Code
or offences of
     moral turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of
     Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants
     while working in that capacity, the settlement between
     offender and victim can have no legal sanction at all.
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...11...
However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and
         predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil,




                                                               .
mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or such like
         transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony,
         particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute,





         where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender and
         victim have settled all disputes between them amicably,
         irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been





         made compoundable, the High Court may within the
         framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal
         proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that

         on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood

         of offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
         proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice


         shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and not
         exhaustive. Each case will depend on its own facts and no
         hard and fast category can be prescribed."
10.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai





Karmur and Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
& anr., Criminal Appeal No.





1723 of 2017, decided on 4.10.2017, a Three Judges Bench of

Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for quashing of

FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...12...
"15. The broad principles which emerge from the
     precedents on the subject, may be summarised in the




                                                         .
following propositions :
(i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the
       High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of





       any court or to secure the ends of justice. The
       provision does not confer new powers. It only
       recognises and preserves powers which inhere in





       the High Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High
       Court to quash a First Information Report or a

       criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement

       has been arrived at between the offender and the
       victim is not the same as the invocation of


       jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an
       offence. While compounding an offence, the power
       of the court is governed by the provisions of
section




       320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The





       power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even
       if the offence is non-compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal
       proceeding or complaint should be quashed in
       exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the
       High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
       justice would justify the exercise of the inherent
       power;
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...13...
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has
     a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised;
.
(i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an
     abuse of the process of any court;
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First





     Information Report should be quashed on the
     ground that the offender and victim have settled the
     dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and





     circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
     elaboration of principles can be formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482

     and while dealing with a plea that the dispute has

     been settled, the High Court must have due regard
     to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous


     and serious offences involving mental depravity or
     offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
     appropriately be quashed though the victim or the




     family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such





     offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature
     but have a serious impact upon society. The





     decision to continue with the trial in such cases is
     founded on the overriding element of public interest
     in punishing persons for serious offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there
     may    be    criminal    cases     which       have       an
     overwhelming or predominant element of a civil
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...14...
dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as
     the exercise of the inherent power to quash is




                                                        .
concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise
     from commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership





     or similar transactions with an essentially civil
     flavour may in appropriate situations fall for
     quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the
     criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise
     between the disputants, the possibility of a

     conviction is remote and the continuation of a

     criminal proceeding would cause oppression and
     prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out
     in propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic




     offences involving the financial and economic well-
     being of the state have implications which lie





     beyond the domain of a mere dispute between
     private disputants. The High Court would be





     justified in declining to quash where the offender is
     involved in an activity akin to a financial or
     economic      fraud    or    misdemeanour.             The
     consequences of the act complained of upon the
     financial or economic system will weigh in the
     balance."
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...15...
11.         In the present case, the offences are not compoundable




                                                               .
under
section 320
CrPC. However, in view of the entire facts and





circumstances of the case, the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC can be invoked to quash the FIR and subsequent proceedings.
12.         A Full Bench of Madhya Bharat High Court, in State v.
Gulam Meer (Madhya Bharat), AIR 1956 (Madhya Bharat) 141,

holds:
"16. An offence under
Section 279
, I.P.C. is

         distinct from an offence under Section 337 or
Section 338
, I.P.C. and, therefore, a person
         convicted of an offence under Section 337 or
Section 338
, I.P.C. can also be convicted for an
         offence under
Section 279
, I.P.C. If, however, the




         two   offences   are   committed     in   the     same
         transaction,
Section 71
, I.P.C. will govern the





         assessment of punishment."
13.         In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as

judicial precedents, a few of which have been mentioned hereinabove,

I am of the considered opinion that continuation of these proceedings

will not only cause unnecessary burden on the trial Courts but also in
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...16...
all likelihood is going to cause distressing hardship on both the victim




                                                               .
as well as the accused, without resulting into any fruitful purpose





whatsoever. Moreover, our trial Courts are already burdened with so

many cases and it will be a total wastage of the valuable time of the





Courts. If these types of proceedings are permitted to be continued

and the accused are prosecuted, it will serve no purpose whatsoever.
Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that this is a fit case where

the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the above mentioned

FIR and consequent proceedings.
14.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State of



Himachal Pradesh (SC
) 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme

Court holds as under:-
"47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is





          concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the
          order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter





          was already pending as the appellants had filed the Special
          Leave Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting
          their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having
          regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been
          entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
...17...
quashed, order of cognizance would automatically stands
         vitiated."
.
CONSEQUENCES:
15.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979)

3 SCR 639, at p. 642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
"The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when





                 parties, despite falling apart, bury the hatchet and
                 weave a sense of fellowship or reunion."
16.         Consequently, this petition is allowed and the F.I.R. No.

0124/2019 dated 31.5.2019 registered at Police Station Shimla West

(H.P.) for the commission of offences punishable under
Sections 279
&
337
of the Indian Penal Code, is quashed. Since FIR has been

quashed, all the consequential proceedings, if any, are also quashed




and set aside.
17.         The bail bonds are accordingly discharged.
Petition is allowed. All pending application(s), if any, also

stand disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                   Judge.
30th September, 2019(rohit)
::: Downloaded on - 30/09/2019 20:25:38 :::HCHP
