Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 19
AIR 1987
Citation: SCC 11, more particularly the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/110879669/

[Cites
29
, Cited by
19
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Baljinder Singh Sra vs State Of H.P. And Others on 18 April, 2015
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Tarlok Singh Chauhan
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA.
.
CWP No. 4953 of 2014





                                   Judgment reserved on: 30.3.2015
                                   Date of Decision : April 18, 2015.
Baljinder Singh Sra                                               ...Petitioner
                                          Versus





    State of H.P. and others                                          . ...Respondents.

    Coram               r
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mansoor Ahmad Mir, Chief Justice.
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting ? Yes


    For the Petitioner             :      Mr. Surinder Kumar Saklani, Advocate.
For the respondents            :      Mr. Shrawan Dogra, Advocate General,
                                          with Mr. Romesh Verma and Mr. Anup




                                          Rattan, Addl. A.Gs., and Mr. J.K. Verma,
                                          Dy. A.G., for respondents No. 1 and 2.
Ms. Jyotsna Rewal Dua, Advocate, for
                                          respondent No.3.
Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Judge

                    By medium of this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed

    for the following substantive reliefs:
"(i). Issue of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the notice of
                         result (Annexure P-6) for the appointment to the post of
                         Additional & District Sessions Judge by direct recruitment for
                         the year 2013 whereby the candidature of the petitioner was
                         rejected; and further quashing the action of respondent No.3
                         rejecting the representation dated 19.02.2014 vide letter dated
                         13.03.2014 for consideration of the claim of the petitioner for
                         the appointment to the post of Addl. District & Sessions Judge
                         by direct recruitment for the year 2013 on account of the fact
    ______________________
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the Judgment ? Yes
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
2
that the petitioner had obtained aggregate 55% marks (written
                        examination and viva voce), being in contravention of the




                                                                      .
Himachal Pradesh Judicial Services Rules, 2004 supplemented





                        by Regulations applicable thereto;
(ii)   issue a writ, order or direction quashing the condition of





                        securing minimum 50% marks in interview for being qualified for
                        final selection and direct the respondent No.3 to recommend
                        the name of the petitioner for appointment to H.P.Higher
                        Judicial Service to respondent No.1 alongwith all consequential





                        benefits;
(iii) Issue a writ, order or direction quashing the action of the
                        respondent making the separate assessment of the candidates
                        including the petitioner dehors the rules and further without

                        adopting any criteria, basis or method to do so and further

                        without disclosing any material on the basis of which the said
                        assessment has been made;
(iv)   Issuance of the writ of mandamus directing the respondents to


                        appoint the petitioner to the post of Addl. District & Sessions
                        Judge by direct recruitment alongwith all consequential and
                        incidental benefits applicable thereto;
(v)    Further directing the respondents to stay the notice dated
                        31.03.2014 (Annexure P-12) re-advertising the post of Addl.
District & Sessions Judges by direct recruitment and prohibiting
                        them from filling the vacancies to the aforesaid post as it tends





                        to seriously prejudice the claim of the petitioner;
(vi)   Further directing the respondents to reserve one seat of general
                        quota for the petitioner in order to protect the rights and interest
                        of the petitioner during the pendency of the writ petition as the
                        fresh process of selection had already commence in pursuance
                        to notice dated 31.03.2014."
2.             The case of the petitioner in nutshell is that he being fully

    eligible applied for the post of Additional District & Sessions Judge on

    8.8.2013 in pursuance to the notification issued by respondent No.3

    advertising two vacancies for the post of Additional District & Sessions

    Judge. After scrutiny on 31.10.2013, he was allotted Roll No. 209.
Since there were only two posts, only six candidates, who had

    successfully qualified as per merit, were called for interview in the ratio
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
3
of 1:3 in accordance with the Rules and Regulations. On 5.1.2014 the




                                                              .
petitioner reached the venue but was informed that the interview had





    been postponed for 6.1.2014. On 6.1.2014, the petitioner appeared

    before the interview committee, but was not successful. The petitioner





    has challenged his non-selection on the ground that there was no

    stipulation in the regulation that the candidates would be required to





    obtain minimum 50% marks in the viva voce and the only condition

    stipulated in the regulation was that no candidate would be considered

    to be qualified unless he obtained 55% marks in aggregate (written

    examination and viva voce) and, therefore, the action of the

    respondents in not selecting the petitioner only on account of having



    not secured minimum 50% marks in viva voce was illegal.
3.            The respondents No. 1 and 2 in their reply have stated




    that it is on the recommendations made by respondent No.3 that it





    offers appointment to the recommended candidates and in the instant





    case since there is no recommendation for offering appointment to the

    post in question, therefore, no action on behalf of the respondents was

    called for.
4.            The High Court in its reply has averred that after

    conducting the written examination, meeting of Rule 2-A Committee

    was held on 2.1.2014 wherein it was decided to prescribe certain

    minimum standards for qualifying in the viva voce for adjudging the

    qualities/capacities of the candidates so that the standard of the

    judiciary is not diluted and to further ensure that sub-standard stuff

    does not get selected. It was further averred that a high powered body

    like the High Court is free to evolve its own procedure in the matter of
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
4
selection as it was the best judge. It is further averred that the

    Selection Committee while conducting the viva voce on 6th and 7th




                                                                   .
January, 2014 had also observed that all the six candidates were not

    found suitable and had failed to make a grade for selection and





    appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge.
5.           The petitioner in rejoinder to the reply of respondent No.3





    has averred that the selection committee had not adopted any

    objective criteria and the selection was based only on the personal

    whims, caprice and fancies and was wholly arbitrary, illegal and thus

    liable to be set-aside.
6.           We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have



    carefully and meticulously gone through the records of the case.
7.           Mr.Surinder Saklani, learned counsel for the petitioner has




    vehemently argued that once no cut off marks were prescribed for viva





    voce, then the same could not have been introduced lateron, more





    particularly, after the entire selection process was completed as the

    same would amount to changing the 'rules of the game' after the game

    was played. He in support of his submission, has placed reliance upon

    the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Hemani Malhotra vs.

    High
court of Delhi, (2008) 7 SCC 11, more particularly the

    observations contained in paragraphs 14 to 16:
"14.   It is an admitted position that at the beginning of the selection
                 process, no minimum cut off marks for vive-voce were prescribed for
                 Delhi Higher Judicial Service Examination, 2006. The question,
                 therefore, which arises for consideration of the Court is whether
                 introduction of the requirement of minimum marks for interview, after
                 the entire selection process was completed would amount to
                 changing the rules of the game after the game was played. This
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
5
Court notices that in
K.Manjusree vs. State of A.P.
(2008) 3 SCC
        512, the question posed for consideration of this Court in the instant




                                                          .
petitions was considered and answered in the following terms: (SCC





        pp. 526-27, para 33)


               "33.The resolution dated 30.11.2004 merely adopted the





               procedure prescribed earlier. The previous procedure was not
               to have any minimum marks for interview. Therefore,
               extending   the   minimum     marks     prescribed     for   written





               examination, to interviews, in the selection process is
               impermissible. We may clarify that prescription of minimum
               marks for any interview is not illegal. We have no doubt that
               the authority making rules regulating the selection, can

               prescribe by rules, the minimum marks both for written

               examination and interviews, or prescribe minimum marks for
               written examination but not for interview, or may not prescribe
               any minimum marks for either written examination or


               interview. Where the rules do not prescribe any procedure,
               the Selection Committee may also prescribe the minimum
               marks, as stated above. But if the Selection Committee want




               to prescribe minimum marks for interview, it should do so
               before the commencement of selection process. If the





               selection committee prescribed minimum marks only for the
               written examination, before the commencement of selection





               process, it cannot either during the selection process or after
               the selection process, add an additional requirement that the
               candidates should also secure minimum marks in the
               interview. What we have found to be illegal, is changing the
               criteria after completion of the selection process, when the
               entire selection proceeded on the basis that there will be no
               minimum marks for the interview."
From the proposition of law
laid down by
this Court in the above
        mentioned case it is evident that previous procedure was not to have
        any minimum marks for vive-voce. Therefore, prescribing minimum
        marks for vive-voce was not permissible at all after written test was
        conducted.
15.    There is no manner of doubt that the authority making rules
        regulating the selection can prescribe by rules the minimum marks
        both for written examination and vive-voce, but if minimum marks are
        not prescribed for vive-voce before the commencement of selection
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
6
process, the authority concerned, cannot either during the selection
                process      or   after   the   selection   process     add    an    additional




                                                                       .
requirement/qualification that the candidate should also secure





                minimum marks in the interview. Therefore, this Court is of the
                opinion that prescription of minimum marks by the respondent at





                vive-voce, test was illegal.
16.       The contention raised by the learned Counsel for the
                respondent that the decision rendered in
K.Manjusree
(Supra) did not





                notice the decisions in
Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana
(1985) 4 SCC 417 as well as
K.H.Siraj v. High
Court of Kerala and
                Others (2006) 6 SCC 395 and therefore should be regarded either as
                decision per incuriam or should be referred to Larger Bench for

                reconsideration, cannot be accepted. What is
laid down in
the

                decisions relied upon by the learned Counsel for the respondent is
                that it is always open to the authority making the rules regulating the
                selection to prescribe the minimum marks both for written


                examination and interview. The question whether introduction of the
                requirement of minimum marks for interview after the entire selection
                process was completed was valid or nor, never fell for consideration




                of this Court in the decisions referred to by the learned Counsel for
                the respondent.
While deciding the case of
K.Manjusree
(Supra) the





                Court noticed the decisions in (
1) P.K.Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of
                India
(1984) 2 SCC 141; (
2) Umesh Chandra Shukla v. Union of India
(1985) 3 SCC 721; and (
3) Durgacharan Misra v. State of Orissa
(1987) 4 SCC 646, and has thereafter laid down the proposition of
                law which is quoted above.
On the facts and in the circumstances of
                the case this Court is of the opinion that the decision rendered by this
                Court in
K.Manjusree
(Supra) can neither be regarded as Judgment
                per incuriam nor good case is made out by the respondent for
                referring the matter to the Larger Bench for reconsidering
the said
                decision
."
8.          On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondent

    No.3 has contended that the respondent was well within its right to

    have prescribed certain minimum standard for qualifying in the viva

    voce for adjudging the qualities/capacities of the candidates so that the

    standard of judiciary was not diluted and it was further required to

    ensure that sub-standard stuff does not get selected and such exercise
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
7
was in tune with the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in K.H.




                                                              .
Siraj vs. High
Court of Kerala and others (2006) 6 Supreme Court
Cases, 395, Ramesh Kumar vs. High
Court of
Delhi and Anr. (2010) 3

    SCC 104, Mahinder Kumar and others vs. High
Court of Madhya





    Pradesh, (2013) 11 SCC 87.
9.           It cannot be disputed that a very responsible and onerous





    duty is cast on the High Court under the Constitutional scheme to

    ensure independence of judiciary. It has been given a prime and

    paramount position in this matter, with the necessity of choosing the

    best available talent for manning the subordinate judiciary. (See:
State

    of Bihar vs. Bal Mukund Shah
(2000) 4 SCC 640).
10.
In
State of Haryana vs. Subash Chander Marwaha &

    Others
1974 (3) SCC 220, the Haryana Public Service Commission




    had drawn up a list of 40 candidates who had secured 45% or more





    marks in the examination in connection with the process for recruitment





    of candidates for 15 vacancies in the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial

    Branch). The State Government however, made seven appointments

    serially in order of merit limiting to the candidates securing 55% marks.
The other vacancies were left unfilled. In response to challenge to this

    action, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Apex Court held that mere entry

    of the name of a candidate in a select list does not give him/her the

    right to be appointed and the existence of vacancies does not give a

    legal right to him/her to be selected for appointment, and that it was

    open to the Government to decide how many appointments are to be

    made. The impugned action was left un-interfered.
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
8
11.
In
K.H. Siraj vs. High
Court of Kerala (2006 ) 6 SCC




                                                                .
395, the process involved related to the appointment to the post of





    Munsiff Magistrate in the Kerala Judicial Service. The relevant Rules

    provided for minimum marks in the written examination as well as in





    the oral examination and the candidates were to be appointed on the

    basis of the sum total of the marks in these segments. Their Lordships





    observed that the High Court has to exercise its powers in the light of

    the constitutional scheme so that the best available talent, suitable for

    manning the judiciary may be selected and to evolve a procedure to

    ensure the same. While approving the prescription of minimum pass

    marks in the written examination and the oral examination, it was held



    further that when a high powered constitutional authority is left with

    such power and it evolves the procedure which is germane and best




    suited to achieve the object, it is not proper to scuttle the same.
12.
In
Ramesh Kumar vs. High
Court of Delhi and another





    (2010) 3 SCC 104, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the

    Commission/Board while making selection of Judicial Officers, has to

    satisfy itself that a candidate had obtained such aggregate marks in the

    written test as to qualify for interview and obtained "sufficient marks in

    viva voce" which would show his suitability for service. Such a course

    is permissible for adjudging the qualities/capacities of the candidates.
Justification for such a course obviously was with a view to ensure that

    only persons with a prescribed minimum of said qualities/capacities

    should be selected or else the standard of judiciary would be diluted

    and substandard stuff may get selected. It was further observed that

    while the written test would testify the candidate's academic
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
9
knowledge, the oral test can bring out or disclose overall intellectual




                                                                .
and personal qualities like alertness, resourcefulness, dependability,





    capacity for discussion, ability to take decisions, qualities of leadership

    etc. which are also essential for a Judicial Officer.
13.
In
Barot Vijay Kumar Balakrishna and others vs. Modh
.
Vinay Kumar Dasrathlal & others(2011) 7 SCC 308, the rules framed





    under
Article 309
of the Constitution, governing the selection process,

    for the posts of Assistant Public Prosecutor in the State of Gujarat

    mandated that there would be minimum qualifying marks each for the

    written test and the oral interview. In this case, cut off marks for viva

    voce were not specified in the advertisement. It was observed by the



    Hon'ble Apex Court that in view of this omission, there were only two

    courses open. One, to carry on with the selection process, and to




    complete it without fixing any cut off marks for the viva voce, and to





    prepare the select list on the basis of the aggregate of marks obtained





    by the candidates in the written test and the viva voce. That would

    have been clearly wrong, and in violation of the statutory rules

    governing the selection. The other course was to fix the cut off marks

    for the viva voce, and to notify the candidates called for interview. This

    course was adopted by the Commission just two or three days before

    the interview/viva voce. Having observed that it did not cause any

    prejudice to the candidates, the Court did not interfere in the selection

    process.
14.          In Mahinder Kumar and Others vs. High Court of

    Madhya Pradesh through Registrar General and others (2013) 11

    SCC 87, a three Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
10
clearly held that the High Court is fully empowered to evolve its own




                                                                    .
procedure of selection for direct recruitment and promotion in respect





    of entry level District Judge and can also specify such procedure

    depending on exigencies from time to time.
15.
In
Yogesh Yadav vs. Union of India and others
(2013)

    14 SCC 623, the matter pertained to appointment to the post of Deputy





    Director (Law), under the OBC category, in the office of Competition

    Commission of India. The appellants therein applied in pursuance of

    the notification and clause 7 of the said notification reads as follows:
"7. Mode of Selection- All the applications received by the due date
                 will be screened with reference to the minimum qualification criteria.
                 From amongst the eligible candidates, suitable candidates will be



                 short listed through a transparent mechanism and the short listed
                 candidates will be called for interview before final selection. Mere
                 fulfilling of minimum qualifications by itself would not entitle any




                 applicant for being called for interview. Thereafter alongwith the





                 admit cards issued to the appellants for appearing in the written test,
                 detailed instructions, including the scheme of the examination, were
                 enclosed and the relevant instructions reads as follows:
4. The selection to all the positions advertised will be based on a

                 written test followed by an interview. The written test will carry 80% of

                 the marks and interview will have 20% of the marks. The written test

                 will be in two parts. The first part will be based on multiple choice

                 questions for 50 marks. There is no negative marking in this multiple

                 choice questions. The second part carrying 30 marks will be

                 distributed to the descriptive questions on the subject of your

                 specialization within the broad outline of the subject of specialization

                 as indicated in the advertisement.
Xxxx           xxxxxxxx               xxxxxxxxxxxx
9. Candidates who do not secure 50% of the marks in the test will not

                 be called for the interview. However, for candidates belonging to the

                 reserved categories, the cut off marks will be 40% of the total marks".
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
11
The appellants therein after qualifying the written test




                                                               .
faced the interview but their names did not appear in the list of

    candidates finally selected. The appellants challenged the said action





    by stating that their non-selection was the result of altering the

    prescribed mode of selection mid-way, i.e. after the initiation of the





    recruitment process, which was impermissible. The precise contention

    was that the bench mark which was fixed by way of issuing instructions

    was not mentioned earlier. i.e., before the start of selection process,


    either in the advertisement or otherwise. The Hon'ble Apex Court after

    considering the judgments in
Hemani Malhotra and Manjushree
case

    (supra) while upholding the view of the High Court that the aforesaid



    judgments were not applicable in the said case as the fact scenario




    was altogether different, by following the judgments in
State of





    Haryana vs. Subhash Chander Marwaha and others
(
supra) and

    M.P.Public Service Commission vs. Navneet Kumar                     Potdar and





    another
(1994) 6 SCC 293, held that short listing which is done by

    fixing the benchmark, to recruit best candidates on rational and

    reasonable basis, is legal and valid.
16.         Notably, the judgment in
Hemani Malhotra
's case (supra)

    (which in turn is based upon
Manjushree
's case) upon which much

    reliance has been placed by the petitioner has not found favour with

    the larger Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and has been referred

    to the Constitutional Bench in
Tej Prakash Pathak and others vs.

    Rajasthan High
Court and others (2013) 4 SCC 540 and it has been

    held as under:
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
12
"7. The question whether the 'rules of the game' could be changed
        was considered by this Court on a number of occasions in different




                                                             .
circumstances. Such question arose in the context of employment





        under State which under the scheme of our Constitution is required to
        be regulated by "law" made under
Article 309
or employment under





        the instrumentalities of the State which could be regulated either by
        statute or subordinate legislation. In either case the 'law' dealing with
        the recruitment is subject to the discipline of
Article 14.
8. Legal relationship between employer and employee is essentially
        contractual. Though in the context of employment under State the
        contract of employment is generally regulated by statutory provisions
        or subordinate legislation which restricts the freedom of the employer

        i.e. the 'State' in certain respects.
9. In the context of the employment covered by the regime of
Article
        309
, the 'law' - the recruitment rules in theory could be either


        prospective or retrospective subject of course to the rule of non-
        arbitrariness. However, in the context of employment under the
        instrumentalities of the State which is normally regulated by




        subordinate legislation, such rules cannot be made retrospectively
        unless specifically authorised by some constitutionally valid statute.
10. Under the Scheme of our Constitution an absolute and non-
        negotiable prohibition against retrospective law making is made only





        with reference to the creation of crimes. Any other legal right or
        obligation could be created, altered, extinguished retrospectively by
        the sovereign law making bodies. However such drastic power is
        required to be exercised in a manner that it does not conflict with any
        other constitutionally guaranteed rights, such as,
Articles 14
and
16
etc. Changing the 'rules of game' either midstream or after the game
        is played is an aspect of retrospective law making power.
11.. Those various cases[3] deal with situations where the State
        sought to alter 1) the eligibility criteria of the candidates seeking
        employment or 2) the method and manner of making the selection of
        the suitable candidates. The latter could be termed as the procedure
        adopted for the selection, such as, prescribing minimum cut off marks
        to be secured by the candidates either in the written examination or
        viva-voce as was done in the case of
Manjusree
(supra) or the
        present case or calling upon the candidates to undergo some test
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
13
relevant to the nature of the employment [such as driving test as was
        the case in
Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation
(supra)].
.
12. If the principle of
Manjusree
's case (supra) is applied strictly to
        the present case, the respondent High Court is bound to recruit 13 of
        the "best" candidates out of the 21 who applied irrespective of their





        performance in the examination held. In such cases, theoretically it is
        possible that candidates securing very low marks but higher than
        some other competing candidates may have to be appointed.
In our





        opinion, application of the principle as
laid down in
Manjusree
case
        (supra) without any further scrutiny would not be in the larger public
        interest or the goal of establishing an efficient administrative
        machinery.
13. This Court in the case of the
State of Haryana v. Subash
        Chander Marwaha and Others
[(1974) 3 SCC 220] while dealing with
        the recruitment of subordinate judges of the Punjab Civil Services
        (Judicial Branch) had to deal with the situation where the relevant



        Rule prescribed a minimum qualifying marks. The recruitment was for
        filling up of 15 vacancies. 40 candidates secured the minimum




        qualifying marks (45%). Only 7 candidates who secured 55% and
        above marks were appointed and the remaining vacancies were kept





        unfilled. The decision of the State Government not to fill up the
        remaining vacancies in spite of the availability of candidates who
        secured the minimum qualifying marks was challenged. The State





        Government defended its decision not to fill up posts on the ground
        that the decision was taken to maintain the high standards of
        competence in judicial service. The High Court upheld the challenge
        and issued a mandamus. In appeal, this Court reversed and opined
        that the candidates securing minimum qualifying marks at an
        examination held for the purpose of recruitment into the service of the
        State have no legal right to be appointed. In the context, it was held:
(
Subhash Chander Marwaha
case) SCC p. 227, para 12)
12. ......In a case where appointments are made by selection
               from a number of eligible candidates it is open to the
               Government with a view to maintain high-standards of
               competence to fix a score which is much higher than the one
               required for more (sic mere) eligibility/".
14. Unfortunately, the decision in
Subash Chander Marwaha
(supra)
        does not appear to have been brought to the notice of their Lordships
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
14
in the case of
Manjusree
(supra).
This Court in the case of
Manjusree
(supra) relied upon
P.K. Ramachandra Iyer and Others v. Union
of




                                                                     .
India and Others [(1984) 2 SCC 141], Umesh Chandra Shukla v.
Union of India and Others [(1985) 3 SCC 721] and Durgacharan
                Misra v. State of Orissa and Others [(1987) 4 SCC 646].
In none of





                the cases, the decision in
Subash Chander Marwaha
(supra) was
                considered.
15. No doubt it is a salutary principle not to permit the State or its





                instrumentalities to tinker with the 'rules of the game' insofar as the
                prescription of eligibility criteria is concerned as was done in the case
                of
C. Channabasavaiah v. State of Mysore
[AIR 1965 SC 1293] etc.
                in order to avoid manipulation of the recruitment process and its

                results. Whether such a principle should be applied in the context of

                the 'rules of the game' stipulating the procedure for selection more
                particularly when the change sought is to impose a more rigorous
                scrutiny for selection requires an authoritative pronouncement of a


                larger Bench of this Court. We, therefore, order that the matter be
                placed before the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India for appropriate
                orders in this regard."
A      perusal    of   the    aforesaid       judgment,        particularly





    paragraphs 11 and 12 would clearly go to show that the Hon'ble





    Supreme Court itself was not in agreement with the principles
laid

    down in
Manjushree
's case and, therefore, it referred the matter to the

    Larger Bench.
17.         The importance of viva voce has been highlighted by the

    Hon'ble Supreme Court in
K.H.Siraj
's case (supra) in the following

    manner:
"54.     In our opinion, the interview is the best mode of assessing the
                suitability of a candidate for a particular position. While the written
                examination will testify the candidates' academic knowledge, the oral
                test alone can bring out or disclose his overall intellectual and
                personal qualities like alertness, resourcefulness, dependability,
                capacity for discussion, ability to take decisions, qualities of
                leadership etc. which are also essential for a judicial officer.
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
15
55.       We may usefully refer to a decision of this Court in
Lila Dhar
        vs. State of Rajasthan
(1981) 4 SCC 159 in which this Court




                                                                    .
observed as under:
"The object of any process of selection for entry into a public
                  service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for





                  the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism. Selection based
                  on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential
                  foundation of any useful and efficient public service. So, open
                  competitive examination has come to be accepted almost
                  universally as the gateway to public services.
'The ideal in recruitment is to do away with unfairness.'(SCC
                  pp. 162-63, para 4)


                  ****                         ****                       ****


                  'A system of recruitment almost totally dependent on
                  assessment of a person's academic knowledge and skills, as
                  distinct from ability to deal with pressing problems of


                  economic and social development, with people, and with
                  novel situations cannot serve the needs of today, much less
                  of tomorrow       .We venture to suggest that out recruitment




                  procedures should be such that we can select candidates
                  who cannot only assimilate knowledge and sift material to





                  understand the ramifications of a situation or a problem but
                  have the potential to develop an original or innovative





                  approach to the solution of problems.'

        It is now well recognised that while a written examination assesses a
        candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, an interview test is
        valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal
        qualities. While a written examination has certain distinct advantage
        over the interview-test there are yet no written tests which can
        evaluate         a   candidate's       initiative,   alertness,    resourcefulness,
        dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear and logical
        presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting
        and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make
        decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity. (SCC p. 163,
        para 5)


                  ****             ****                         ****


                  '"While we do feel that the marks allotted for interview are on
                  the high side and it may be appropriate for the Government to
                  re-examine the question, we are unable to uphold the
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
16
contention that it was not within the power of the Government
               to provide such high marks for interview or that there was any
               arbitrary exercise of power.' (SCC p. 166, para 9).
.
56.
In
Mohan Kumar Singhania & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.
,
        (1992) suppl. 1 SCC 594 , S.Ratnavel Pandian, J. speaking for the
        Bench, observed as under: (SCC P. 608, paras 18-21)
"18. Hermer Finer in his textbook under the caption The
               Theory and Practice of Modern government states:
"The problem of selection for character is still the pons
                      asinorum of recruitment to the public services
                      everywhere. The British Civil Service experiments with
                      the interview."
r   19. The purpose of viva voce test for the ICS Examination in

               1935 could be best understood from the following extract of
               the Civil Service Commission's pamphlet:
"Viva Voce - the examination will be in matters of


                      general interest : it is intended to test the candidate's
                      alertness, intelligence and intellectual outlook. The
                      candidate will be accorded an opportunity of furnishing
                      the record of his life and education."
20. It is apposite, in this connection, to have reference to an





               excerpt from the United Nations Handbook on Civil Service
               Laws and Practice, which reads thus:
".....the written papers permit an assessment of
                      culture and intellectual competence. This interview
                      permits an assessment of qualities of character which
                      written papers ignore; it attempts to assess the man
                      himself and not his intellectual abilities."
21. This Court in
Lila Dhar vs. State of Rajasthan
, (1981) 4
               SCC 159 while expressing the view about the importance and
               significance of the two tests, namely, the written and interview
               has observed thus: (SCC p. 164, para 6)

                      "...the written examination assess the man's intellect
                      and the interview test the man himself and the 'the
                      twain shall meet' for a proper selection."
57.    The qualities which a Judicial Officer would possess are
        delineated by this Court in
Delhi Bar Association vs. Union of India &
        Ors.
, (2002) 10 SCC 159. A Judicial Officer must, apart from
        academic knowledge, have the capacity to communicate his
        thoughts, he must be tactful, he must be diplomatic, he must have a
        sense of humour, he must have the ability to defuse situations, to
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
17
control the examination of witnesses and also lengthy irrelevant
        arguments and the like. Existence of such capacities can be brought




                                                              .
out only in an oral interview. It is imperative that only persons with a





        minimum of such capacities should be selected for the judiciary as
        otherwise the standards would get diluted and substandard stuff may





        be getting into the judiciary. Acceptance of the contention of the
        appellants/petitioners can even lead to a postulate that a candidate
        who scores high in the written examination but is totally inadequate
        for the job as evident from the oral interview and gets 0 marks may





        still find it a place in the judiciary. It will spell disaster to the standards
        to be maintained by the subordinate judiciary. It is, therefore, the
        High Court has set a bench mark for the oral interview, a bench mark
        which is actually low as it requires 30% for a pass. The total marks

        for the interview are only 50 out of a total of 450. The prescription is,

        therefore, kept to the bare minimum and if a candidate fails to secure
        even this bare minimum, it cannot be postulated that he is suitable for
        the job of Munsif Magistrate, as assessed by five experienced


        Judges of the High Court.
58.
In this connection, reference may be made to the decision in
Manjeet Singh,, UDC & Ors. Vs. Employees State Insurance
        Corporation & Anr.
, (1990) 2 SCC 367 (SCC at p. 371) wherein the





        Rules did not prescribe any minimum marks for the interview. The
        advertisement for the job set a minimum of 40% to the written test





        and without a minimum for the interview. However, candidates with
        less than 40% at the interview were not selected.
The selection was
        upheld by this Court relying on a judgment of Punchhi,J in Rajesh
        Sood vs. Director-General, Employees State Insurance Corporation,
        1985 (2) Service Law 699.
In
Union of India & Anr. Vs. Amrik Singh &
        Ors.
, (1994) 1 SCC 269, though there was no specification in the
        statutory Rules regarding the minimum length of service for
        promotion, such prescription was laid by administrative instructions.
        In para 7, this Court said that the instructions so issued were not
        inconsistent with the Rules.
Reference may also be made to a
        decision of this Court in
Jasbir Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab &
        Anr.
, (2002) 1 SCC 124, in which the relevant Rules did not specify
        as to the relevant date for considering the age qualification. The
        advertisement, however, fixed a cut off date, which was contended to
        be illegal. This Court held that the said prescription was for the
        purpose of implementation of the Rules regarding age.
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
18
62.     Thus it is seen that apart from the amplitude of the power
                under Rule 7 it is clearly open for the High Court to prescribe bench




                                                                     .
marks for the written test and oral test in order to achieve the





                purpose of getting the best available talent. There is nothing in the
                Rules barring such a procedure from being adopted. It may also be





                mentioned that executive instructions can always supplement the
                Rules which may not deal with every aspect of a matter. Even
                assuming that Rule 7 did not prescribe any particular minimum, it
                was open to the High Court to supplement the Rule with a view to





                implement     them    by   prescribing       relevant   standards    in   the
                advertisement for selection. Reference may be made to the decision
                of this Court in
State of Gujarat vs. Akhilesh C. Bhargav & Ors.
,
                (1987) 4 SCC 482."
18.
In
Ramesh Kumar
's case (supra) the importance of

    interview was restated in the following terms:
"11.
In
State of U.P. v. Rafiquddin & Ors.
, AIR 1988 SC 162;
Dr.Krushna Chandra Sahu & Ors. v. State of Orissa & Ors.
AIR 1996
                SC 352;
Majeet Singh, UDC & Ors. v. Employees' State Insurance




                Corporation & Anr.
AIR 1990 SC 1104; and
K.H. Siraj v. High
Court
                of Kerala & Ors. AIR 2006 SC 2339, this Court held that





                Commission/Board has to satisfy itself that a candidate had obtained
                such aggregate marks in the written test as to qualify for interview





                and obtained "sufficient marks in viva voce" which would show his
                suitability for service. Such a course is permissible for adjudging the
                qualities/capacities of the candidates. It may be necessary in view of
                the fact that it is imperative that only persons with a prescribed
                minimum of said qualities/capacities             should be selected as
                otherwise the standard of judiciary would get diluted and sub-
                standard stuff may get selected. Interview may also be the best mode
                of assessing the suitability of a candidate for a particular position as it
                brings out overall intellectual qualities of the candidates. While the
                written test will testify the candidate's academic knowledge, the oral
                test can bring out or disclose overall intellectual and personal
                qualities like alertness, resourcefulness, dependability, capacity for
                discussion, ability to take decisions, qualities of leadership etc. which
                are also essential for a Judicial Officer.
12.    Re-iterating similar views, this Court has given much emphasis
                on interview in
Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan & Ors.
, AIR 1981 SC
                1777; and
Ashok Kumar Yadav & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Ors
.
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
19
AIR 1987 SC 454 stating that interview can evaluate a candidate's
                 initiative,   alertness,   resourcefulness,           dependableness,         co-
.
operativeness,     capacity    for     clear    and     logical   presentation,





                 effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with
                 others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead,





                 intellectual and moral integrity with some degree of error."
19.          The object of prescribing minimum marks in viva voce is to

    have the best hands in the field of law especially when it is well




    recognised that the viva voce plays a predominant role in the selection

    process. According to us, fixation of such marks is legitimate and gives

    a demarcating choice to the employer i.e. High Court. It has to be

    borne in mind that the requirement of the job in a competition demands

    a well structured process. Such a selection would advance the cause



    of efficiency. The law is consistent in this regard that higher marks than




    the eligibility conditions can always be introduced by the competent

    authority for the purpose of maintenance of higher standards in service





    and in furtherance to its decision taken in the interest of administrative





    excellence. Thus scrutinized, we do not perceive any error in fixation of

    minimum marks in viva voce which have otherwise been uniformly

    applied. The said action cannot be treated to be illegal, irrational or

    illegitimate. Therefore, fixation of qualifying marks for the viva voce, by

    no means, can be imputed to be an act resulting in altering the "rules of

    the game" after the initiation of the selection process. After all, the

    High Court should be able to get the candidates of the desired level of

    excellence in service in the institutional exigencies.
20.          Though we have gone into the question regarding validity

    of the decision taken by the Rule 2-A Committee, but the same was

    hardly required to be gone into because the matter largely, if not,
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
20
entirely is only academic. Reason being that the candidature of the




                                                                   .
petitioner was not rejected on the sole ground of his having failed to





    obtain minimum qualifying marks in viva voce, but has been rejected

    even on the ground of suitability which has not been seriously





    questioned by the petitioner except by raising a vague plea.
21.         The further question, therefore, arises as to whether this





    Court while exercising its writ jurisdiction can venture to go behind the

    assessment, more particularly, with regard to suitability made by an

    expert Committee consisting of high level members of the Judiciary.
The complete answer to this question is found in
K.H. Siraj
's case

    (supra) wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that it was the High



    Court which is the best judge in the matter of selection and is required

    to exercise its powers in light of the constitutional scheme so that the




    best available talent suitable for manning the judiciary may get





    selected and this action cannot be questioned. The Hon'ble Supreme





    Court observed as under:
"49.   So far as the first submission is concerned, we have already
                extracted Rule 7 in paragraph supra. Rule 7 has to be read in this
                background and High Court's power conferred under Rule 7 has to
                be adjudged in this basis. The said Rule requires the High Court
                firstly to hold examinations written and oral. Secondly the mandate is
                to prepare a select list of candidates suitable for appointment as
                Munsif Magistrates. The very use of the word 'suitable' gives the
                nature and extent of the power conferred upon the High Court and
                the duty that it has to perform in the matter of selection of candidates.
                The High Court alone knows what are the requirements of the
                subordinate judiciary, what qualities the Judicial Officer should
                possess both on the judicial side and on the administrative side since
                the performance of duties as a Munsif or in the higher categories of
                subordinate Judge. Chief Judicial Magistrate or District Judge to
                which the candidates may get promoted require administrative
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
21
abilities as well. Since the High Court is the best Judge of what
               should be the proper mode of selection, Rule 7 has left it to the High




                                                                  .
Court to follow such procedure as it deems fit. The High Court has to





               exercise its powers in the light of the constitutional scheme so that
               the best available talent, suitable for manning the judiciary may get





               selected.
50.    What the High Court has done by the Notification dated
               26.3.2001 is to evolve a procedure to choose the best available





               talent. It cannot for a moment be stated that prescription of minimum
               pass marks for the written examination or for the oral examination is
               in any manner irrelevant or not having any nexus to the object sought
               to be achieved. The merit of a candidate and his suitability are

               always assessed with reference to his performance at the

               examination and it is a well accepted norm to adjudge the merit and
               suitability of any candidate for any service, whether it be the Public
               Service Commission (I.A.S., I.A.F. etc.) or any other. Therefore, the


               powers conferred by Rule 7 fully justified the prescription of the
               minimum eligibility condition in Rule 10 of the Notification dated
               26.3.2001. The very concept of examination envisaged by Rule 7 is a




               concept justifying prescription of a minimum as bench mark for
               passing the same. In addition, further requirements are necessary for





               assessment of suitability of the candidate and that is why power is
               vested in a high powered body like High Court to evolve its own





               procedure as it is the best Judge in the matter. It will not be proper in
               any other authority to confine the High Court within any limits and it
               is, therefore, that the evolution of the procedure has been left to the
               High Court itself. When a high powered constitutional authority is left
               with such power and it has evolved the procedure which is germane
               and best suited to achieve the object, it is not proper to scuttle the
               same as beyond its powers. Reference in this connection may be
               made to the decision of this Court in 2006(1) SCC 779 wherein an
               action of the Chief Justice of India was sought to be questioned
               before the High Court and it was held to be improper."
22.        At this stage, we may also make a reference to a decision

    rendered by the Hon'ble three Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

    Mahinder Kumar and others vs. High Court of Madhya Pradesh,

    through its Registrar General and others (2013) 11 SCC 87 wherein
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
22
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that no Court including the Hon'ble




                                                                   .
Supreme Court can venture to go behind the assessment made by an





    expert committee consisting of high-level members of the judiciary of

    the State in making selections to the post of higher judiciary and it was





    held :
"63.........It is by now well settled that no Court, including this Court





                can venture to go behind the said assessment made by an expert
                committee consisting of high-level members of the judiciary of the
                State and state that the said decision should be varied by holding
                that the other candidates whose performance was also apprised by

                the said expert committee should be held to be suitable on a par with

                the selected candidate and that they should also be selected and
                appointed. This Court should never make even an attempt to go
                behind the ultimate decision of the Selection Committee in order to


                set at naught the final decision arrived at by it, which was approved
                by the Full Court or vary its decision by adding some more
                candidates in the list by laying down a different criterion by altering or




                by fixing any benchmark for being appointed to the higher judiciary of
                the State...."
Therefore, once the candidature of the petitioner has been rejected on





    the ground of suitability, all other questions are only rendered

    academic.
23.         Before parting, it may be relevant to note here that during

    the pendency of this writ petition, appointments in the higher judiciary

    to the posts of Additional District and Sessions Judge have already

    been made which have not been questioned by the petitioner. It was

    incumbent upon the petitioner to have questioned those appointments

    and in absence thereof, the present petition can conveniently be held

    to be not maintainable.
24.         Lastly, as already observed, apart from judicial review not

    being available in such a matter, even if it was to be assumed that the
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
23
petitioner's name was there in the selection list, the same would




                                                                     .
otherwise afford him no right and if there was no right, there could be





    no occasion to maintain a writ petition for enforcement of a non-
existing right as observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Union of





    India and others vs. Kali Dass Batish and another
AIR 2006 SC

    789 wherein it was held as under:
"15. In this matter, the approach adopted by the Jharkhand High
                 Court commends itself to us. The Jharkhand High Court approached
                 the matter on the principle that judicial review is not available in such

                 a matter. The Jharkhand High Court also rightly pointed out that

                 mere inclusion of a candidate's name in the selection list gave him no
                 right and if there was no right, there could be no occasion to maintain
                 a writ petition for enforcement of a non-existing right."
25.          In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find no merit in this

    petition and accordingly the same is dismissed, so also the pending




    application(s), if any, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
( Mansoor Ahmad Mir)
                                                               Chief Justice





    April 18, 2015                                         (Tarlok Singh Chauhan),
         (GR)                                                     Judge.
::: Downloaded on - 15/04/2017 18:00:53 :::HCHP
