Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 39 of  
               



        2005
Citation: AIR  1976  SC  109]
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/113472194/

[Cites
28
, Cited by
6
]
Bombay High Court
Shalini Sumant Raut & Ors vs Milind Sumant Raut & Ors on 14 December, 2012
Author:
Roshan Dalvi
Bench:
Roshan Dalvi
1                                              CHS 492/12

                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
                         ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION




                                                                                                
Amk
                            CHAMBER SUMMONS NO. 492 OF 2012
                                           IN




                                                                      
                                 SUIT NO. 143 OF 2010 

      Shalini Sumant Raut & Ors.                                               ..  Plaintiffs
                 Vs.




                                                                     
      Milind Sumant Raut & Ors.                                                ..  Defendants

                                         WITH
                            CHAMBER SUMMONS NO. 2123 OF 2011




                                                      
                                           IN
                                  SUIT NO. 143 OF 2010

      Shalini Sumant Raut & Ors.
                                    ig                                         ..  Plaintiffs
                 Vs.
                                  
      Milind Sumant Raut & Ors.                                                ..  Defendants
                 And
      Dr. Gautam Manohar Raut & Anr.                                           ..  Applicants
             


      Mr. Y. V. Divekar i/b Divekar & Co. for Plaintiff Nos. 4 to 8.
      Ms Rajani Iyer, Sr. Advocate a/w. Mr. V. M. Bhate for Defendant Nos.1 to 5.
          



      Mr. S. Amin i/b Pravin Mehta & Mithi & Co. for the Applicant in Chamber 
      Summons No. 1910/11.
      Mr.   R.   S.   Apte,   Sr.   Advocate   a/w.   Ms.   Ashwini   A.   Takalkar   for 
      Applicant/Intervener in Chamber Summons No. 2123/2011.





                                            CORAM            :  MRS. ROSHAN DALVI, J.





      Date of reserving the Order                   :  31 st
                                                             OCTOBER, 2012.
                                                                           
      Date of pronouncing the Order                 :  14 th
                                                             DECEMBER, 2012.
                                                                             

      ORDER
1.             This   suit   is   filed   for   declaration   that   the   plaintiffs   and   the 
      defendants are co-owners of the suit properties, for ascertaining of the share 
      claimed by them, for partitioning the suit properties as per such shares and for 
      possession   of   such   partitioned   share.     Exhibit   'A'   to   the   plaint   shows   9
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
2                                              CHS 492/12
immovable and several movable properties belonging to the joint family of the 
parties which are sought to be partitioned.  Exhibit 'B' to the plaint shows the 




                                                                                                         
family tree.
2.              The   parties   claim   through   one   Rajaram   Balkrishna   Raut 
(Rajaram) who died intestate on 23.11.1991 leaving behind 8 children and 




                                                                                
several   grand   children   ancestral   properties.     The   children   and   the   grand 
children who are the children of the pre-deceased or the deceased children of 
Rajaram are the parties to the suit.  The great grand-children of the Rajaram 




                                                                
are not sought to be made parties, though the suit properties are claimed to 
be ancestral properties of Rajaram.
3.              The   son   and  the   grandson   of   plaintiff   No.4  have   sought   to  be 
                                           
made party-defendants to the suit.   They claim that they are coparceners in 
the coparcenary property of the joint family which are the properties shown in 
the schedule Exhibit A to the plaint.  They claim to be entitled to their share 
                  


therein   separately   and   individually   from   plaintiff   No.4   who,   they   claim,   is 
               



unable to manage his affairs and claim his share.  They claim that the parties 
to the suit have taken advantage of the old age of their father/grand-father 





who resides alone which may adversely affect his share and consequently their 
shares.     They   have   claimed   their   right   by   virtue   of   their   birth   in   the   suit 
properties which are claimed to be coparcenary properties.  [See.
Surjit Lal 
Chhabda  Vs.   Commissioner   of  Income  Tax,   Bombay
AIR  1976  SC  109] 





They claim to protect their interest in the joint family properties which are the 
suit properties.
4.              It   is   contended   by   the   plaintiffs   as   well   as   the   defendants 
including plaintiff No.4 that during the lifetime of plaintiff No.4, his son and 
grandson would not have any share in the suit properties and, therefore, have 
no locus to be joined as party-defendants.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
3                                              CHS 492/12
5.              The parties to the suit have disposed of two of the properties in 




                                                                                                 
    the suit.  Hence defendant Nos.1 to 5 in the suit have applied for deletion of 




                                                                       
    two immovable properties at Item Nos.6 & 7 shown in Exhibit 'A' to the plaint. 
    They   claim   that   the   suit   has   become   infructuous   with   regard   to   those 
    properties   and   there   is   no   lis   between   the   parties   with   regard   to   those 




                                                                      
    properties.
6.              It would first have to be determined whether the applicants in 




                                                       
    Chamber   Summons   No.   2123   of   2011   who   are   the   son   and   grandson   of 
                                    
    plaintiff No.4 must be made parties to the suit as having an independent right 
    and interest in the suit properties being coparceners of the joint Hindu family.
If that is so decided, the properties which are sold pending the suit would 
    have to be accounted for to them.   If not, the properties sold by the parties 
    with which the parties to the  suit, at present, have  no dispute, may stand 
           

    deleted.
7.              The   seminal   aspect   for   adjudication   is   whether   a   son   or   a 
    grandson   of   a   coparcener   claiming   an   interest   in   the   joint   family 





    properties/coparcenary properties would be entitled to claim such interest by 
    virtue of his birth and hence prosecute or defend any litigation in respect of 
    the joint family properties instituted by other coparceners who are his family 
    members but who are of a generation or two generations prior to him.   The 





    test  of  the  claim   is in   the  right of  the  coparcener  to apply  for   and  obtain 
    partition of the coparcenary property by virtue of his very birth.  If that be so, 
    the applicants as coparceners would be entitled to separately maintain a suit 
    for   partition   to   claim   their   share   therein.     If   they   can   maintain   a   suit   for 
    partition they may also be joined as defendants in this suit and claim partition 
    and other consequential reliefs in the suit, of course, subject to payment of 
    court fees upon valuation of all the suit properties by them as per new and
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
4                                              CHS 492/12
different shares of all coparceners.
8.              It may be mentioned at the inception that counsel on behalf of 




                                                                               
the applicants accepted that the applicants would pay court fees upon they 
being   joined   even   as   defendants   in   this   suit   pending   the   suit   for 
determination,   partition   and   recovery   of   their   own   share   which   they   have 




                                                                              
claimed upon claiming interest in the suit properties.
9.              It   would   be   imperative   to   consider   the   Hindu   Law   relating   to 




                                                              
coparcenary property first.
10.
                                          
                In  Mulla's   Hindu   Law,   Twentieth   Edition,   Volume-I,   Chapter 
XII  relating   to  joint   Hindu   family-coparceners   and   coparcenary   property-
Mitakshara Law the principles of the ancient settled uncodified Hindu Law are 
succinctly enunciated.  The principles may be enumerated thus:
(i) The property inherited by a  Hindu from  his father, father's father  or 
                  


        father's father's father is ancestral property (unobstructed heritage as 
               



        regards his own male issue).  -page 357
(ii) His male issues acquire an interest in it from the moment of their birth.
-page 357
(iii)They become coparceners with their paternal ancestor upon their birth.
-page 357
(iv)The joint and undivided family is a normal condition of Hindu society.
Undivided Hindu family is ordinarily joint in estate, food and worship. 
        Page 358
(v)A   Hindu   coparcenary   is   a   narrower   body   than   the   joint   family.     It 
        includes only those persons who acquire by birth an interest in the joint 
        or   coparcenary   property.   (Hence   joint   property   and   coparcenary 
        property   or   joint   Hindu   family   property   or   coparcenary   property   are 
        synonymous).  -page 359
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
5                                              CHS 492/12
(vi)The persons who acquire an interest by birth in a joint family property 
       or coparcenary property are sons, grand sons and great grand sons of 




                                                                                          
       the holder of the joint property.  Sons, grandsons or great grandsons are 




                                                                
       joint   owners/coparceners.     They   become   entitled   to   joint 
       property/coparcenary property upon their birth.  -page 359
(vii)Ancestral property and separate property are distinct.   The property 




                                                               
       inherited   by   a   Hindu   from   his   father,   father's   father,   father's   father's 
       father is ancestral property.  The property inherited by him from other 
       relations is his separate property.
(viii)Ancestral property is a species of coparcenary property.   If a Hindu 
                              
       acquires coparcenary property from his father, it becomes ancestral in 
       his hands as regards his sons.   The sons become coparceners with the 
                             
       father as regards such property.  The coparcenary would then consist of 
       the father and the son.  -page 361
(ix) The   coparcenary   may   consist   also   of   the   grandson   and   the   great-
grandson, who acquire an interest by birth in coparcenary property.
Illustration:   If A inherits property from his father, his two sons B & C, 
    would become coparceners with him as regards such ancestral property.  If 





    B has a son D and C has a son E, the coparcenary will consists of the  
    father, sons and grandsons.  -page 361
(x)A   joint   Hindu   family   has   a   common   male   ancestor   with   his   lineal 





       descendants in  the  male line  within  four degrees counting from and 
       inclusive  from  such ancestor  (propositus).    {After  the  amendment of 
       2005   to
Section   6
of   the   Hindu   Succession   Act   (HSA)   (2005 
       Amendments) which shall be presently considered, the line within four 
       degrees may be male or female}.  -pages 361, 362
(xi)No   coparcenary   can   commence   without   a   common   male   ancestor. 
       {After   2005   Amendment   a   coparcenary   may   well   commence   with   a
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
6                                              CHS 492/12
common female ancestor}.  -page 362
(xii)After the death of common ancestor it may consist of collaterals, such 




                                                                                                 
    as  brothers,  uncles,  nephews   and  cousins.     (These   illustrations   show 




                                                                         
    two generations of coparceners).  -page 362
(xiii) A coparcenary is a creature of law; it cannot be created by parties.
-page 362
(xiv) No female can be a coparcener, although she may be a member of 
    joint   Hindu   family.     (This   position   has   changed   upon   the   2005 
    Amendment.)  -page 362
(xv) When a Hindu inherits the self acquired property of his father the sons 
                                    
    take a vested interest in the property by reason of their birth and the 
    property inherited by their father would become ancestral property in 
                                   
    the hands of the son.  The sons are coparceners as regards the property. 
    When a son is born to either of them that son would also become a 
    coparcener by the mere fact of his birth.  -page 363  
             

(xvi) The property inherited by a person from his father is ancestral in his 
    hands.   He is not the owner of the property,   he is entitled merely to 
          



    hold and manage the  property as the head of the family for and on 
    behalf of the family.  The ownership of the property is in the joint family 





    consisting   of   himself   and   his   sons.     They   are   all   co-owners   or 
    coparceners.     (Hence   the   expression   co-owners   and   coparceners   are 
    synonymous).  -page 364
(xvii) The essence of a coparcenary is unity of ownership.  -page 366.
(xviii)The   ownership   of   a   coparcenary   is   in   the   whole   body   of   the 
    coparceners.  -page 366
(xix) No coparcener or member of a joint Hindu family has a definite share 
    in the property.  His interest is a fluctuating interest.  It is enlarged by 
    the deaths in the family; it is diminished by the births in the family. 
    Hence his interest is called "undivided coparcenary interest".  -page 366
(xx) He becomes entitled to a definite share only on partition.  -page 366.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
7                                              CHS 492/12
(xxi) The members of a joint family who are within 3 degrees from the last 
          holder of the property have a right to demand partition.
(xxii)Until   partition   he   would   have   a   common   possession   and   common 




                                                                  
          enjoyment of coparcenary property.
The well known  expression  of  HUF  is that  there is a  "community of 
    interest and unity of possession between all the members of the family which 




                                                                 
    has been enunciated  since the  Privy Council  case  of  Katama  Natchiar Vs. 
    Rajab of Shivagunga (1863) 9 MIA 539 @ 543 & 611.  -page 366
       (xxiii)    Hence the interest of a coparcener in coparcenary property/joint 




                                                  
          Hindu family property is undivided and indefinite.  If fluctuates on the 
                                
          birth or death of a member.   So long as the family remains joint no 
          individual member can have a definite share.  When it is partitioned the 
                               
          share of the member in the joint family becomes definite. 
       (xxiv)On the death of one coparcener, the others take by survivorship the 
          share which he had in common earlier.  -page 366
         

       (xxv) Coparcenary property is, therefore, held in collective ownership by all 
          the coparceners in a quasi-corporate capacity.  -page 366
      



       (xxvi) The incidents of a coparcenary are that the lineal male descendants 
          upto the third generation, acquire by birth, the ownership in ancestral 





          properties of their ancestor.  -page 366
       (xxvii) Their descendants can ask for partition.  -page 366
       (xxviii) Till partition, each member or coparcener would have ownership 
          extended over the entire property conjointly with the rest.  -page 366





       (xxix)As a result of the co-ownership the possession and enjoyment of the 
          property   is   common.     Hence   the   coparceners   cannot   alienate   the 
          property except for necessity without concurrence of all coparceners.- 
          page 366
       (xxx) The   interest   of   the   deceased   members   passes   on   his   death   to   the 
          surviving coparceners.  - page 366
       (xxxi) The surviving coparceners are not only his brothers and sisters but
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
8                                              CHS 492/12
also their children - each being entitled to his own specific equal share. 
    [See.
State Bank of India Vs. Ghamandi Ram
AIR 1969 SC 1330]




                                                                                                 
(xxxii) The interest of a coparcener in an undivided Mitakshra property is 




                                                                         
    not individual property.  -page 367
(xxxiii) Coparcenary   property   is   of   two   types;   apratibandha   daya   or 
    unobstructed heritage, and sapratibandha daya or obstructed heritage.
-page 368
(xxxiv) When a person acquires an interest in the property by birth, it is 
    unobstructed heritage, because the accrual of the right to the property 




                                                        
    is not obstructed by the existence of the owner.  The property inherited 
                                     
    by a Hindu from his father or father's father or father's father's father is 
    unobstructed   heritage   as   regards   his   own   male   issue   i.e.   his   son, 
                                    
    grandson or great-grandson.   His sons would acquire an interest in it 
    from the moment of their birth.   They become coparceners with their 
    paternal   ancestor   in   such   property   immediately   upon   their   birth.
{After the 2005 Amendment a daughter also would acquire an interest 
    in the unobstructed heritage from the moment of her birth.} -page 369
          



(xxxv) A   property   acquired   from   others   e.g.   maternal   grand-father   is 
    obstructed heritage.   No right accrues by birth in such property.   The 





    right would accrue on the death of the last owner without leaving a 
    male issue.  Hence the accrual of the right is obstructed by the existence 
    of the owner.  The property devolving upon parents, brothers, nephews, 
    uncles  etc.   upon   the  death  of  the  last  owner,  is   obstructed   heritage.
These relations do not get a vested interest in the property by birth. 
    Until the death of the owner they only have a spes successionis or  a bare 
    chance   of   succession   which   is   contingent   upon   surviving   the   owner.
-page 369
(xxxvi) Unobstructed   heritage   devolves   by   survivorship;   obstructed 
    heritage devolves by succession.  -page 369
(xxxvii) Property jointly acquired by the members of the joint family, with
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
9                                              CHS 492/12
the   aid   of   ancestral   property,   is   also   joint   family   property.   Property 
       acquired by them without the aid of ancestral property may or may not 




                                                                                         
       be joint family property.  -page 370




                                                               
    (xxxviii) The term joint family property is synonymous with coparcenary 
       property.  -page 370 (Separate property would be synonymous with self 
       acquired property.)  -page 370




                                                              
    (xxxix) A coparcener has joint interest or joint possession in joint family 
       property or coparcenary property.  -page 370
    (xl) Property inherited by a male Hindu from his father, father's father or 




                                               
       father's   father's   father,   is   ancestral   property.     His   son,   grandson   and 
                             
       great-grandson would acquire an interest in it by virtue of their birth, if 
       they have a male issue.  (Hence ancestral property is inherited and not 
                            
       self acquired property.)  -page 372
    (xli) If a person who acquired a property by birth has no male issue, he 
       would hold that property as absolute owner thereof and he would be 
      

       able to deal with it as he pleased. However if he had a male issue in 
       existence at the time he inherited the property or if he had a male issue 
   



       subsequently, they would become entitled to the interest in the property 
       by virtue of their birth.  -page 372





    (xlii) A father cannot change the character of the joint family property into 
       absolute property of his son by bequeathing it to him as if it was the self 
       acquired property of the father.  It would be ancestral property only in 
       the hands of the son.  His son would acquire it by survivorship since he 





       would acquire an interest in it by his birth.  -page 372
         (Hence since the father cannot bequeath the property after his death, 
         he cannot also transfer such property during his lifetime inter vivos.)  
    (xliii) A   person   inheriting   property   from   his   three   immediate   paternal 
       ancestors (father, father's father and father's father's father) must hold it 
       in   coparcenary   with   his   son,   son's   son   and   son's   son's   sons.     Such 
       property is ancestral as regards his male issue.  -page 373
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
10                                              CHS 492/12
(xliv) A   son   takes   an   interest   equal   to   that   of   the   father   in   ancestral 
    property upon his birth.  -page 377




                                                                                                    
(xlv) This  right  is wholly  independent of  his father.   He  does  not claim 




                                                                           
    through his father.  -page 377  
    ........  "under the Mitakshara law each son upon his birth takes an  
    interest equal to that of his father in ancestral property, whether it  
    be movable or immovable.  It is very important to note that the right  




                                                                          
    which the son takes at his birth in the ancestral property is wholly  
    independent of his father.
He does not claim through the father."  
    (see   mulla's   Hindu   Law,   Thirteenth   Edition,   p.   251,   para   224). 
    (See.
Valliammai Achi Vs. Nagappa Chettiar & Anr.
AIR 1967 




                                                           
    SC 1153) 
    Hence the transfer of such property would affect the interest of the 
    son in the ancestral property.
(xlvi) There is no distinction between the rights of a father and his sons as 
                                      
    regards ancestral property.  -page 377
(xlvii) A  father   can,  however,  dispose   of   the   ancestral  property   only   for 
    payment of his debts (legal necessity).  -page 377-378
              


(xlviii) A father has no greater interest in the joint property than any of his 
           



    sons.  Each son acquires an interest equal to that of the father upon his 
    birth.     His   grandson   and   great-grandsons   similarly   acquire   an   equal 
    interest upon their birth.  -page 378





(xlix) On the death of a coparcener, his interest in the coparcenary property 
    does not pass by succession to his heirs.  It passes by survivorship to the 
    other coparceners.  {This position of old uncodified Hindu law has been 





    materially altered by
Section 6
of the HSA as enacted in 1956 and later 
    as amended in 2005.}
(l) There is a presumption that every Hindu family is joint in food, worship 
    and estate.  -page 393
(li) There is a presumption that a joint family continues joint.  -page 393
(lii)The presumption of union is the greatest in the case of father and sons.
-page 393 
(liii)After   the   coparceners  separate,   there   is   no   presumption   as   to   joint
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
11                                              CHS 492/12
family property.  -page 393
    (liv)There is no presumption that the joint family possessed joint family 




                                                                                         
       property;   the   party   who   claims   partition   must   prove   that   it   is   joint 




                                                                
       family   property.     (If   it   is   admitted   to   be   joint   family   property   or 
       ancestral property, that fact would not have to be proved.)  -page 394
    (lv) There   may   be   a   joint   Hindu   family   which   does   not   have   any   joint 




                                                               
       property or any estate.  [See.
Ram Narain Chand Vs. Purnea Banking 
       Corporation Ltd.
AIR 1953 Pat 110 
    (lvi) The   plaintiff   must   prove   (or   it   may   be   admitted)   that   the   family 




                                               
       possessed some property with the income of which some other property 
                              
       was acquired.  Such property would become joint family property since 
       it would be purchased with joint family funds.  -page 395
                             
    (lvii) Where   it   is   admitted   that   the   family   possessed   some   joint   family 
       property, it would form the nucleus from which another property could 
       have been acquired.  -page 395
      

    (lviii)Such   acquisition   would   carry   a   presumption   that   that   was   joint 
       property.   The presumption that properties in the hands of individual 
   



       coparceners   is   coparcenary   property   (or   joint   property   or   ancestral 
       property) would arise if the family nucleus is proved.  -page 395





    (lix)If no nucleus is shown the members alone would be co-sharers but the 
       property   would   not   be   taken   to   be   joint   family   property   and   hence 
       would not devolve by survivorship.  -page 395
    (lx)Coparceners have community of interest and unity of possession. No 





       coparcener   is   entitled   to   any   any   special   interest   in   coparcenary 
       property.  No coparcener is entitled to exclusive possession of any part 
       of   the   property.     (No   coparcener   can,   therefore,   sell   or   alienate   any 
       ancestral property or joint family property except with the consent of 
       the other coparceners.)  -page 409
    (lxi)No coparcener can predicate at any given moment what his share in 
       joint family property is.   No member would be entitled to a definite
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
12                                              CHS 492/12
share in joint family property or in its income.   The income would be 
       brought   into   a   common   chest   or   purse.     His   share   would   become 




                                                                                                          
       defined only when the partition takes place.  -page 409




                                                                                 
   (lxii) Each   coparcener   is   entitled   to   joint   possession   and   enjoyment   of 
       family property.  -page 410
   (lxiii) If a coparcener is excluded from joint possession or enjoyment, he is 




                                                                                
       entitled   to   enforce   his   right   by   a   suit.     He   is   not   bound   to   sue   for  
       partition.  (He may sue for joint possession or enjoyment or for separate 
       possession upon partition.  However he would have to value his share 




                                                                 
       in the coparcenary property on the date of filing of the suit and pay 
       court fees thereon).  -page 410
                                            
   (lxiv) The right to enforce a partition and the right survivorship go hand in 
                                           
       hand.
"It is the right to partition which determines the right to take by 
       survivorship" as held by the Privy Council in
Anant Vs. Gopal
(1895) 
       19 Bom 269.
11.            These   rules   and   incidents   of   coparcenary   or   joint   family 
               



properties are enumerated in the case of
State Bank of India Vs. Ghamandi 
Ram
AIR 1969 SC 1330 thus:
"the   incidents   of   co-parcenership   under   the   Mitakshara   law   are   :
first,   the   lineal   male   descendants   of   a   person   up   to   the   third  
       generation, acquire on birth ownership in the ancestral properties of  
       such person; secondly that such descendants can at any time work  
       out their rights by asking for  partition; thirdly, that till  partition  
       each member has got ownership extending over the entire property  





       conjointly   with   the   rest;   fourthly,   that   as   a   result   of   such   co-
       ownership the possession and enjoyment of the properties is common;  
       fifthly that no alienation of the property is possible unless it be for  
       necessity,  without   the   concurrence   of   the  coparceners,   and   sixthly,  
       that the interest of a deceased member lapses on his death to the  
       survivors."
Further   in   the   case   of
Surjit   Lal   Chhabda   Vs.   Commissioner   of 
Income   Tax,   Bombay
AIR   1976   SC   109  the   conclusion   derived   from   the 
position of uncodified Hindu Law is set out thus:
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
13                                              CHS 492/12
"the expression 'Hindu undivided family' must be construed in  
           the sense in which it is understood under the Hindu Law.
The   presumption   therefore   is   that   the   members   of   a   Hindu  
           family   are   living   in   a   state   of   union,   unless   the   contrary   is  
           established.
generally speaking, the normal state of every Hindu family is  
           joint   and   in   the   absence   of   proof   of   division,   such   is   the   legal  
           presumption.
A Hindu coparcenary is a much narrower body than the joint  




                                                                     
           family.     It   includes   only   those   persons   who   acquire   by   birth   an  
           interest in the joint or coparcenary property and these are the sons,  
           grandsons and great-grandsons of the holder of the joint property for  
           the time being, that is to say, the three generations next to the holder  




                                                      
           in   unbroken   male  descent.     Since   under   the   Mitakshara   Law,  the  
           right to joint family property by birth is vested in the male issue only,  
                                   
           females   who   come   in   only   as   heirs   to   obstructed   heritage  
           (sapratibandha daya), cannot be coparceners.
Outside the limits of coparcenary, there is a fringe of persons,  
                                  
           males   and   females,   who   constitute   an   undivided   or   joint   family.  
           There is no limit to the number of persons who can compose it nor to  
           their remoteness from the common ancestor and to their relationship  
           with one another.   A joint Hindu family consists of persons lineally  
           descended   from   a   common   ancestor   and   includes   their   wives   and  
            


           unmarried  daughters.    The  daughter,  on  marriage,  ceases  to  be  a  
         



           member   of   her   father's   family   and   becomes   a   member   of   her  
           husband's   family.     The   joint   Hindu   family   is   thus   a   larger   body  
           consisting   of   a   group   of   persons   who   are   united   by   the   tie   of  
           sapindaship arising by birth, marriage or adoption.
That   it   does   not   take   more   than   one   male   to   form   a   joint  
           Hindu family with females is well established.
In
Gowli Buddanna  
           v.   Commissioner   of  Income-tax,   Mysore,   Bangalore
,   (1966)   3  
           SCR 224 = (AIR 1966 SC 1523).
These are the principles of the uncodified Hindu law.
12.            In 1956 the Hindu Law underwent extensive reforms inter alia in 
    the   law   of   inheritance   and   succession.     The   enactment   of   the
Hindu 
    Succession Act, 1956
dealt with coparcenary property which survived upon 
    any of the coparceners having female heirs.  This brought about a departure 
    from   the   old   Hindu   Law   such   that   upon   the   death   of   any   coparcener   the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
14                                              CHS 492/12
incidents of coparcenary property and its survivorship was largely diluted.
13.          It would, therefore, be apt to see certain provisions of the
Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956
in that behalf :
(a)    The purpose and object of the Act as shown in the statement of 
      the objects and reasons was to amend and codify the law relating to the 




                                                                           
      intestate   succession   amongst   Hindus.     It   is   the   third   of   the   three 
      installments   of   the   Hindu   Code;   the   first   two   having   dealt   with   the 
      aspects  of  adoption   and  maintenance   and   guardianship   and  minority 




                                                            
      issues.  It amended and codified the law relating to intestate succession 
      amongst   Hindus.     It   brought   about   changes   with   regard   to   women's 
                                        
      property   and   provided   rules   for   devolution   of   interest   of   a   deceased 
      male   in   certain   cases.     It   laid   down   a   uniform   and   comprehensive 
                                       
      system   of   inheritance  applying   to   the  persons   governed  inter   alia  by 
      Mitakshara Law.
(b)
Section 4
of the Act gave overriding effect to the Act.
Section 4
runs thus:
4.     Overriding   effect   of   Act.-   (1)   Save   as   otherwise   expressly  
      provided in this Act,-
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or  
      usage   as   part   of   that   law   in   force   immediately   before   the  
      commencement of this Act, shall  cease to have effect  with respect to  
      any matter for which provision is made in this Act;
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement  





      of this Act shall cease to apply to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent  
      with any of the provisions contained in this Act.
Thus
Section 4
overrides any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or 
      any   custom   or   usage   and   any   other   law   in   force   prior   to   the 
      commencement of the Act.  Under
Section 4(1)(b)
any of these would 
      cease to apply to Hindus so far as it was inconsistent with any of the 
      provisions of the Act.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
15                                              CHS 492/12
(c)
Section   6
deals   with   devolution   of   interest   in   coparcenary  




                                                                                                
            property.  The relevant part of amended
Section 6
runs thus:
6.     Devolution   of   interest   in   coparcenary   property.-When   a 




                                                                       
            male Hindu dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the  
            time of his death an interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary property,  
            his interest  in the property  shall devolve by
                                                               survivorship
                                                                             upon the  
            surviving members of the coparcenary and not in accordance with  




                                                                      
            this Act:
Provided that, if the deceased had left him surviving a female  
             relative specified in class I of the Schedule or a male relative specified  




                                                       
             in that class who claims through such female relative, the interest of  
             the deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by  
                                    
             testamentary or intestate  succession
                                                      , as the case may be, under this  
             Act and not by survivorship.
The   above   rules   of   devolution   of   interest   in   coparcenary   property 
    would, therefore be, to the extent stated in
Section 6
of the HSA,  overridden 
    and   would   cease   to   apply   as   inconsistent   with   the   provisions   of   the   HSA.
Consequently in case of ancestral property consisting of a father and his sons 
       



    and grandsons only the rules of coparcenary property under the uncodified 
    law   would   still   prevail.     But   if   the   father   has   e.g.   not   only   sons   but   also 
    daughters   and   not   only   grandsons   but   also   granddaughters   his   interest   in 





    coparcenary   property   would   not   survive   to   the   other   members   of   the 
    coparcenary   but   would   succeed   to   his   heirs   so   that   not   only   his   sons   and 
    grandsons would get an increased share upon his death, but his successors 





    being his sons, daughters as also his widow and his mother would succeed to 
    his interest in the coparcenary property under the provisions of the HSA.
Hence   there   is   a   notional   partition   which   is   deemed   to   have   been 
    effected upon the death of a coparcener under
Section 6
of the HSA 1956. 
    The share so separated devolves upon the heirs of the deceased instead of 
    vesting   in   the   other   coparceners   by   survivorship.     Such   partition   does   not
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
16                                              CHS 492/12
bring   about   disruption   in   the   coparcenary.     It   is   only   the   interest   of   the 
deceased   which   is   separated.     The   coparcenary   minus   the   interest   of   the 




                                                                                                        
deceased continues with its incidents.  The surviving coparceners continue as 




                                                                               
such.
In the case of Shankarlal Ramprasad Ladha Vs. Vasant Chandidasrao 




                                                                              
Deshmukh & Ors. 2009(2) ALL MR 93 it is held that the concept of notional 
partition is a legal device for demarcating the interest of the deceased when 
the explanation (I) of
Section 6
is attracted.  Like any other legal fiction, it is 




                                                               
meant for a specific purpose.  It is not a real partition by metes and bounds.  It 
                                           
neither effects a severance of status, nor does it demarcate the interest of the 
surviving coparceners or any of the females who are entitled to a share on a 
                                          
partition.
The joint status of the family is not impaired by
Section 6
of the HSA. 
The family is not disrupted.
(d)    Further amendment to
Section 6
by the Amendment Act 39 of  
               



        2005 which came into effect from 09.09.1995 brought about further  
        changes   in   devolution   of   interest   of   a   Hindu   male   in   coparcenary  





        property.
The relevant part of
Section 6
as amended in 2005 runs thus:
6.     Devolution   of   interest   in   coparcenary   property.-   (1)   On  





        and from the commencement of the
Hindu Succession (Amendment)  
        Act, 2005
, in a joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law,  
        the daughter of a coparcener shall,-
(a) by birth become a coparcener  in her own right in the same  
        manner as the son;
(b) have the same rights in the coparcenary property as she would  
        have had if she had been a son;
(c) be   subject   to   the   same   liabilities   in   respect   of   the   said  
        coparcenary property as that of a son,
        and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed  
        to include a reference to a daughter of a coparcener:
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
17                                              CHS 492/12
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect  
           or invalidate any disposition or alienation including any partition or  




                                                                                              
           testamentary  disposition  of property  which had taken place before  
           the 20th day of December, 2004.
(2)      Any   property   to   which   a   female   Hindu   becomes   entitled   by  




                                                                     
           virtue of sub-section (1) shall be held by her with the  incidents of  
           coparcenary   ownership  and   shall   be   regarded,   notwithstanding  
           anything contained in this Act, or any other law for the time being in  
           force, as property capable of being disposed of by her by testamentary  




                                                                    
           disposition.
(3)      Where   a   Hindu   dies   after   the   commencement   of   the
Hindu  
           Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005
, his interest in the property of a  
           Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, shall devolve by 




                                                     
           testamentary or intestate  succession, as the case may be, under this  
           Act and  not by survivorship, and the coparcenary property shall be  
                                  
           deemed to have been divided as if a partition had taken place and,-
(a)  the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a  
           son;
(b)     the   share   of   the   pre-deceased   son   or   a   pre-deceased  
           daughter, as they would have got had they been alive at the time of  
           partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre-deceased  
           son or of such pre-deceased daughter; and
(c)  the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-deceased son or  
         


           of a pre-deceased daughter, as such child would have got had he or  
      



           she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the  
           child   of   such   pre-deceased   child   of   the   pre-deceased   son   or   a   pre-
deceased daughter, as the case may be.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest  





           of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in  
           the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the  
           property had taken place immediately before his death, irrespective of  
           whether he was entitled to claim partition or not.
There would be a notional partition under
Section 6
of HSA, 1956 if a 
    female relative (heir) or a person claiming through female relative (heir) was 
    left   by   the   deceased   male   Hindu   coparcener.     There   shall   be   a   deemed 
    partition under the statutory provisions contained in
Section 6(3)
of the Act as 
    amended in 2005.   That would be a partition of the interest in Mitakshara 
    property of a Hindu dying intestate.
Consequently after 2005 upon the death of a coparcener, leaving any
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
18                                              CHS 492/12
child,   his   son   and   his   daughter   would   share   equally   in   his   interest   in 
coparcenary property.   They would share as if there was a partition.   For all 




                                                                                                       
the Hindus dying after the commencement of the Amendment Act, leaving any 




                                                                              
child, the interest in the joint family property which he had would not survive 
at all.  It would only succeed - either by testamentary or intestate succession.
This has brought about a total departure from the law relating to the 




                                                                             
coparcenary property.  After 2005 for all Hindus leaving any child there could 
be no case of survivorship at all; after 1956 but before 2005 there would be 
survivorship of interest in coparcenary property but only in a family having no 




                                                              
female relatives (heirs).   Even during that period in a family having female 
                                          
relatives (heirs) there would be no survivorship  but only succession of the 
interest of a Hindu male in Mitakshara coparcenary property.
(e)     What would, therefore, be the succession amongst Hindu males is 
       required   to   be   seen.     That   is   provided   under
Section   8
of   the   HSA.
Section 8
runs thus:
8.     General   rules   of   succession   in   the   case   of   males.-The 
               



       property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to  
       the provisions of this Chapter:-
(a)  firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in  class  
       I of the Schedule;
(b)  secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, 
              being the relatives specified in class II of the Schedule;
(c)  thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then 
              upon the agnates of the deceased; and
(d)  lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the 





              deceased.
The Schedule annexed to
Section 8
showing Class I and Class II heirs 
show the son, daughter, widow and mother of a Hindu male dying intestate as 
his   first   heirs.     Along   with   them   are   included   the   sons   and   daughters   of 
predeceased sons and daughter; a grandson is not included anywhere in Class 
I or Class II of the schedule to
Section 8
of the HSA.   The grandson never 
succeeds to the property of the Hindu male dying intestate.  That includes also
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
19                                              CHS 492/12
the interest in the joint family property which that Hindu male had and which 
    would constitute his property or his estate.
(f)     The  act  also  deals  with  the  property of  a  female  Hindu  which 
          would   be   her   absolute   property   under
Section   14
and   the   rules   of 
          succession of female Hindus under
Sections 15
&
16
but with which the 




                                                                  
          dispute in this case is not concerned and hence which shall not be dealt 
          with.
(g)
Section 19
deals with the mode of succession of 2 or more heirs.
Section 19
runs thus :
19.
Mode of succession of two or more heirs.-  If two or more  
          heirs succeed together to the property of an intestate, they shall take  
                               
          the property,-
(a)  save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per capita 
          and not per stripes; and
(b)  as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants.
Hence   if   there   are   two   or   more   heirs  when   they   succeed   to   a 
      



          property, the property would devolve upon them  per capita  each one 
          taking for that branch and as tenants in common so that the heirs of any 





          deceased successor  would claim the share of such successor.
This   is   a   further   departure   from   the   uncodified   Hindu   Law   of 
          survivorship   of   a   coparcenary   property   in   which   the   shares   would 
          fluctuate on the birth and death of any male member so that the other 





          surviving male members would get a decreased or increased share upon 
          the birth and death respectively thus augmenting the shares of all the 
          survivors.  The shares of the successors under the
Hindu Succession Act
would not so augment.  Each branch would take its share; the increase 
          and  decrease   would  be  within  that   branch.     The   successors   of   those 
          successors alone would get that share.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
20                                              CHS 492/12
(h)     Under
Section 30
of the HSA, a Hindu, male or a female, would 
      be entitled to make a testamentary disposition as per the provisions of
Indian   Succession   Act,   1925
.     The   relevant   part   of
Section   30
reads 




                                                                            
      thus:
30.    Testamentary succession.  - Any Hindu may dispose of by will or  
      other testamentary disposition any property, which is capable of being  so  
      [disposed of by him or by her], in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
, or any other law for the time being in force  
      and applicable to Hindus.
The   interest   of   a   Hindu   in   a   coparcenary   part   which   would 




                                                            
      otherwise   survive   to   other   coparceners   equally   can,   therefore,   be 
                                        
      disposed of by will.  Consequently the interest of a Hindu in Mitakshara 
      coparcenary property would not  per se  survive upon coming into force 
                                       
      of the HSA.  If the Hindu does not leave behind any will it would only 
      succeed to his/her heirs under
Section 8
/
15
of the Act as applicable.
14.           This position would be governed by when the succession opened.
The succession would open upon the death of a Hindu.  Hence if a Hindu died 
after  1956, the  provisions of  the  old
Section  6
as enacted in  1956 and as 
analyzed above would prevail.   If he died after 2005, the provisions of new
Section   6
as   amended   by   the
Amendment   Act,   2005
and   analyzed   above 
would prevail.
15.           In   this   case   Rajaram   expired   on   23.11.1991   leaving   behind   8 





heirs being his 5 sons and 3 daughters.  Some of them have expired leaving 
behind their widow and sons and daughters.  These are the parties to the suit. 
Rajaram   died   intestate.     Rajaram's   succession   opened   on   23.11.1991. 
Consequently   the   law   which   applied   to   Rajaram's   succession   was   under
Section 6
of the HSA as enacted in 1956 and prior to the law as amended in 
2005.  Rajaram had left him surviving 3 daughters and 5 sons.  His interest in 
his ancestral property which was Mitakshara coparcenary property, therefore,
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
21                                              CHS 492/12
devolved upon his sons and daughters by intestate succession under
Section 8
of the Hindu Succession Act and not by survivorship.   For such  interest  the 




                                                                                            
    Hindu Coparcenary property and all the incidents of such Hindu coparcenary 




                                                                   
    as shown above would have applied had he left behind only sons.  But he left 
    behind 3 daughters also.  Hence the incidents of a Hindu coparcenary do not 
    apply   to   his  interest  in   the   coparcenary   properties.     The   succession   to  his 




                                                                  
    interest  in   the   coparcenary   property   would   be   under
Section   8
read   with
Section 19
of the HSA.   All his sons and daughters would share equally  per  
    capita as tenants in common.  Upon their death their children would take their 




                                                  
    share.
16.
                                 
                   Under   that   succession   so   long   as   the   sons   and   daughters   of 
    Rajaram are alive,   the grandsons or the great-grandsons of Rajaram would 
                                
    not succeed at all  to any interest  in the coparcenary property that Rajaram 
    had.  Such interest could have only survived to them as coparceners had there 
            

    been no female heir of Rajaram. (i.e. had Rajaram left no daughters or, of 
    course,   any   persons   claiming   through   daughters   i.e.   the   heirs   of   such 
         



    daughters.)
17.            Consequently   the   general   rules   of   jointness   of   a   Hindu   family, 
    being community of interest and unity of possession, the incidents of a joint 
    family   property,   the   coparcener   surviving   to   the   interest   of   a   deceased 
    coparcener, the share of a coparcener diminishing or augmenting upon the 





    death or birth of another coparcener, the joint ownership of a coparcener,  the 
    undivided   share   of   coparcenary   etc.   stand   diluted   upon   any   coparceners 
    having any female heir since 1956 in respect of such interest.
18.            It was this beginning of egalitarianism which is the bed rock of a 
    Hindu society.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
22                                              CHS 492/12
19.            The true effect of the uncodified Hindu law relating to the Hindu 
coparcenery, therefore, applied only so long as there were only male heirs in 




                                                                                                        
that HUF after 1956.   It would continue as before until any one coparcener 




                                                                               
died.     The   devolution  of   interest  in   the   coparcenary   got   changed   as   per
Section 6
of the HSA.  It continued as before if he had only sons.  It came to  
an end in effect if he had a single daughter or even a predeceased son having 




                                                                              
a single daughter such that he had a female relative (heir) or a male heir 
claiming through a female relative (heir).
20.            Ms.   Iyer   on   behalf   of   the   defendant   Nos.   1   to   5   as   also   Mr. 
Divekar on behalf of plaintiff No.4 drew my attention to the judgment of the 
                                           
Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of
Commissioner   of   Wealth-tax,   Kanpur   Vs. 
Chander Sen
AIR 1986 SC 1753 relating to partition of joint family business.
They   argued   that   the   property   of   a   Hindu   male   succeeds   to   his   heirs   and 
would not form the HUF of that heir.  It would be his individual property.  The 
case of
Chander Sen
(supra) concerned the wealth tax payment.  It must be 
                  


analysed only after considering the settled uncodified Hindu Law enunciated 
               



inter alia in items (viii), (xv), (xvi), (xl), (xli), (xlii) and (xliii) above.  In that 
case there was a partition of joint family business between the father and his 





only son.  The father and son continued the business in partnership.  The son 
formed the joint family with his own sons.   The father died leaving behind 
amounts standing to the credit of the father in the partnership account.  That 
amount was held to have devolved upon his son by succession.  The son was 





his only heir.  The son was, therefore, held to have inherited that property as 
an individual and not as Karta as his own joint family.  That judgment relates 
to the account of property which an heir succeeds to.   It does not deal with 
succession of a deceased Hindu male alone.  It deals with how the property is 
to be assessed.  In that case there was a partition.   Upon partition the share 
coming   to   the   coparceners   would   be   their   separate   individual   property 
acquired by them on partition.  The property would no longer be coparcenery.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
23                                              CHS 492/12
That   property   would   have   to   succeed;   it   can   never   survive   to   the   other 
    coparceners, because there are no coparceners upon the partition.  The joint 




                                                                                             
    Hindu family comes to an end upon the partition.  That property being the self 




                                                                    
    acquired   property   of   a   given   coparcener,   who   no   longer   is   a   coparcener 
    because   the   joint   Hindu   family   no   longer   continues   joint,   would   succeed 
    under
Section 8
to Class I heirs initially.
In that case there was partial partition.  The Court was concerned with 
    the partitioned property.  Another property which was house property of the 
    family had  continued to remain joint  as has been set out in para 2 of that 




                                                   
    judgment.   The Court was not concerned with how that house property had 
                                  
    devolved upon the son since it remained joint.  It was observed in para 2 of 
    the judgment that that property devolved by survivorship.  We are concerned 
                                 
    with such properties.   It would have  to be  seen  how such property would 
    survive inter alia to the applicants.
In that case the joint Hindu family consisted only of father and the son.
The   father   had   not   left   any   other   female   relative   (heir).     His   widow   and 
    mother had predeceased him.   Under
section 6
of the HSA also that house 
         



    property, therefore, would only survive to the son, Chander Sen.  Had Rajaram 
    also left no female heir, his interest in the ancestral properties would have 





    survived to his male heirs being his sons as also then to his grandsons and 
    great-grandsons, because unlike in the case of
Chander Sen
(supra), Rajaram 
    left behind 3 daughters, the entire legal position would change in respect of 
    such interest in consonance with
Section 6
of the HSA, 1956.
21.            It would, therefore, be incorrect to state that the Supreme Court 
    held in the case of
Chander Sen
(supra) that all the properties left by a Hindu 
    would   only   devolve   by   succession   to   his   heirs.     That   would   not   only   be 
    simplistic but erroneous.   In that case the property was partitioned and the 
    share that the deceased Hindu male, being the father of Chander Sen, got on 
    partition was his self acquired property which remained in partnership and his
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
24                                              CHS 492/12
son succeeded thereto only; his son did not succeed to the house property 
which had remained joint.
22.             The Supreme  Court has  considered other  judgments of  various 




                                                                                
High   Courts   being   Allahabad   High   Court,   Madras   High   Court   Full   Bench, 
Andhra Pradesh High Court, Madhya Pradesh High Court as also Gujarat High 




                                                                               
Court.  All of these are shown to me.  The Gujarat High court has taken a view 
different from the other High Courts.  The other High Courts' view has been 
accepted by the Supreme Court which is set out in the case of
Chander Sen
(supra).     All   those   judgments   also   dealt   with   the  properties   separated   by 
partition or self acquired properties.   Reliance upon those judgments for the 
                                            
rule relating to ancestral property would, therefore, be equally misplaced if 
those judgments also are minutely analyzed and dissected.
23.             The   effect   of   the   devolution   by   succession   of   the   partitioned 
property or even ancestral property has been set out in those judgments which 
                  


is material for our case.
24.             The Supreme Court in the judgment in the case of
Chander Sen
(supra) held in para 11 that the heirs in Class I do not include the grandson 





being the son of a son living.  Hence it is held in para 12 of the judgment that  
when   the   son   as   a   Class   I   heir   inherits   the   property,   he   does   so   in   his 
individual capacity.  Under
Section 4
of the HSA that provision would override 





the   old   uncodified   Hindu   Law   as   being   inconsistent   with   such   succession 
under
Section   8
of   the   HSA.     The   son   taking   individually   would   take  per  
capita  and not  per stripes  and as tenant-in-common and not as joint tenant 
under
Section 19
of the HSA.  He would be entitled to will away that property 
by a testamentary disposition under
Section 30
of the HSA.  It is held in para 
14 of the judgment that when a son gets his share in a HUF (which is by 
partition only) to which
Section 8
is applied, which includes the son but not
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
25                                              CHS 492/12
the grandson, the son takes individually in his individual capacity and not as 
    Karta of his own family.  Therefore that property would not continue joint and 




                                                                                             
    would not taken to be joint property.  The son who so inherits, inherits it as 




                                                                    
    his   own   separate   property   and   his   son   would   not   have   any   right   as   a 
    coparcener therein.
25.            The Gujarat High Court in the case of Commissioner of Income-
    tax,
Gujarat-I Vs. Dr. Babubhai Mansukhbhai
, (1977) 108 ITR 417 took a 
    view   that   whatever   the   property   which   the   son   in   a   HUF   inherited   and 




                                                   
    acquired from his father was ancestral property qua him and, therefore, that 
    property would be coparcenary property of his HUF in which his son would 
                                 
    have a share and which his son would be able to have partitioned.
That view 
    has been dissented from by the Supreme Court in the case of
Chander Sen
(supra).     That   related   to   the  self   acquired   property  of   the   father   which 
    succeeded to the son.
In this case it is Rajaram's ancestral property that the applicants claim.
Again, therefore, it is the specific provision of the statute prevailing over the 
         



    settled principles of Hindu Law which is overridden by the statute that would 
    be essential to this case.
26.            It   would   be   interesting   to   see   how   the   Supreme   Court   has 
    considered   the   judgments   with   which   it   found   favour.     The   case   of
Commissioner   of   Income-tax,   U.   P.   Vs.   Ram   Rakshpal,   Ashok   Kumar
(1968) 67 ITR 164 was in the case of a son and a father of HUF which was 
    partitioned.   The assets inherited by his son from his father from whom he 
    had separated by partition was held not capable of being the income of the 
    HUF   of   the   son.     This   was   because  partition   took   away   the   character   of 
    coparcenary property.  The father left behind his widow, married daughter, his 
    son and his son's son.   The estate left by him devolved by succession as per
Section   6
of   the   HSA   under
Section   8
thereof.     There   were,   therefore,   3
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
26                                              CHS 492/12
shares; for his widow, his married daughter and the son.  There was no share 
for his sons' son Ashok Kumar.
The other question that came up for consideration  was whether that 




                                                                               
1/3rd of the property which was inherited by the son was inherited by him as 
Karta of his own family or as an individual.   It was held in para 12 of the  
judgment that that was inherited by him in his individual capacity.
Hence it would not be coparcenary property and hence his son Ashok 
Kumar would not be able to ask for partition of that property.
27.            Madras   High   Court's   Full   Bench   judgment   in   the   case   of
Additional   Commissioner   of   Income-tax,   Madras   Vs.   P.   L.   Karuppan 
                                          
Chettiar
, 114 ITR 523 was also a case of partition effected between a father, 
his wife, their sons and daughter-in-law.  The father was separated.  The son 
                                         
constituted   HUF   with   his   wife   and   his   subsequently   born   son.     When   the 
father died leaving behind his widow and the divided son who was Karta of 
his   HUF   as   his   legal   heirs   under
Section   8
of   the   HSA,   those   2   persons 
                  


succeeded   him   to   the  partitioned   properties  of   the   father/husband.     They 
               



could  divide  the  properties  amongst  themselves.     Since   the  father   had  left 
behind a female relative (heir) being his widow, the properties succeeded to 





the widow and the son as per the provisions of
Section 6
of the HSA as per
Section 8
thereof.
28.            Hence the Supreme Court considered in para 16 of the judgment 





in the case
Chander Sen
(supra) upon considering the case of Madras High 
Court   that   when   a   Hindu   male   died,   his   sons   and   grandsons   would   have 
inherited in such property.  Under
Section 8
his sons' son would get excluded 
and the son alone would inherit the property to the exclusion of the grandson. 
No interest would accrue to the grandson in the property left by his grand-
father.  (This would be because
Section 6
would come into play.  There would 
be a notional partition.  The property would succeed to the son and would not
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
27                                              CHS 492/12
survive to him.  The succession is to the son as the Class I heir.  The grandson 
    is excluded from Class I).
The Supreme
Court further held
in para 16 that the effect of
Section 8
was   directly   derogatory   of   the   old   Hindu   Law   and   that   the   provision   of
Section 8
must prevail over uncodified law of survivorship in view of
Section 4
of the HSA, which overrides the established provisions of Hindu law.
In fact the Supreme Court went further to show that since the grandson 
    was excluded, an after born son of that son would also not get any interest in 
    the property which was inherited by the son from the father.   The Supreme 




                                                    
    Court observed that in respect of such property "it is not possible and visualize 
                                  
    or envisage a Hindu undivided family."
In
the above case
there was a partition of the HUF during the lifetime of 
                                 
    the father with his son.
It would not matter even where there is no partition if the father died 
    leaving   behind   female   relative   (heir)   as   in   this   case.     That   aspect   is   not 
            

    covered by the Supreme Court Judgment but directly falls under the aforesaid 
    clear statutory provision of HSA.   When those provisions applied also there 
         



    would be no Hindu undivided family which could be visualized or envisaged 
    for such interest of such deceased coparcener.  The very concept of the HUF 





    would then stand diluted or even terminated upon the death of coparcener. 
    It, therefore, follows as a corollary that upon the death of any coparcener, 
    there is a notional partition after 1956 and a deemed statutory partition after 
    2005 and the share which devolves upon any copercener in case of a family 





    having   female   relative   (heir)   would   be   only   upon   succession   and   would 
    devolve only as their individual property incapable of being partitioned and in 
    which   their   own   heirs   would   have   no   interest   by   their   birth   or   by   their 
    continuance.
29.            The   case   of
Shrivallabhdas   Modani   Vs.   Commissioner   of 
    Income
tax, M. P.-I, 138 ITR 673 : (1983 Tax LR 559) of Madhya Pradesh
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
28                                              CHS 492/12
High   Court   was   the   case   where  no   coparcenery   was   subsisting  between   a 
Hindu and his sons at the time of the death of the father.   It was held that 




                                                                                                       
such property, which was  not ancestral property, received by the son on his 




                                                                              
father's   death   could   not   be   blended   with   other   property
,
in   that   case
the 
property allowed to the son on partition.  Accordingly that property devolved 
by succession under
Section 8
of the HSA.  It was held by the Supreme Court 




                                                                             
in   para   16A   of   the   judgment   that,   therefore,   the   son's   son   who   is   not 
mentioned as an heir under Class I could not get any right in the property of 
his grand-father and the property devolved upon the son under the HSA and 




                                                              
did not constitute HUF property consisting of his own branch including his 
sons.
Again this was not coparcenery property which devolved upon the son.
However it would make no difference if the interest in a coparcenery property 
devolved upon the son in case where the father left behind a female relative 
(heir)   because   that   would   devolve   by   succession   as   per
Section   6
under
Section 8
of the HSA.
30.            The  Supreme  Court also accepted the  judgment  of  the   Andhra 
Pradesh High Court in the case
Wealth-tax, A.P.-II Vs. Mukundgirji
, 144 ITR 





18 : (1983 Tax LR 1370) where the property devolved under
Section 8
of the 
HSA. It was observed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court that the Parliament 
wanted to make a clean break from the old Hindu Law in certain respects 
consistent with modern egalitarian concepts.  The intention of the law was to 





depart from the pre-existing Hindu Law as is reflected also from
Section 19
of 
the HSA.
Hence it was observed by the Supreme Court in the case of
Chander 
Sen
(supra) that when any property devolved upon a Hindu under
Section 8
of the Act it could never be HUF property in the hands of successor vis-a-vis 
his own sons because if it was not so, it would amount to creating two classes 
amongst Class I heirs viz. the male heirs in whose hands it would be joint 
family property and the female heirs for whom such concept could not have
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
29                                              CHS 492/12
been applied or contemplated then (prior to 2005).
31.            Hence any property which devolves under
Section 8
of the HSA 




                                                                   
    upon   the   death   of   a   Hindu   male   would   be   his   own   individual   property 
    incapable   of   partition.     It   would  be  his  own   property  in   which   his   son  or 
    grandson would have no interest during his lifetime.   The properties which 




                                                                  
    devolve under
Section 8
of the HSA are self acquired properties or partitioned 
    HUF   properties.     They   are   not   ancestral   HUF   properties   which   are   not 
    partitioned.   The law which as
laid down by
the Supreme Court considering 




                                                  
    the aforesaid judgments of various High Courts was in respect of separate or 
                                 
    partitioned properties.  The law is the same also with regard to the interest of 
    a coparcener in ancestral properties in case where the ancestor had female 
                                
    relatives (heirs).
32.            It must be appreciated that when a joint Hindu family consists 
            

    only of a  father  and a  son  both have  an  equal  interest in  the  joint family 
    property.  On the death of the father, the father's interest would survive to the 
         



    son if he has no child.  It would succeed to the son if he has a female child 
    (heir) after 1956 and if he has either a female or a male child (heir) after 





    2005.  In such a case the entire estate of the father would devolve upon the 
    son   by   succession   or   survivorship.     Where,   however,   there   are   more 
    coparceners in a joint Hindu family, the entire estate of the father would be 
    less than  the  entire  coparcenary properties.   In  such a case interest of  the 





    father   would   succeed   to   his   heirs   under
Section   8
of   the   HSA   and   the 
    remainder of the coparcenary properties would remain in the coparcenary and 
    the   other   coparceners   would   continue   to   be   such.     Since   the   coparcenary 
    would then remain, their interest would be diminished by the birth of any 
    member in the coparcenary (either male or female after 2005) and would be 
    augmented upon the death of any coparcener (who does not leave behind any 
    heir).
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
30                                              CHS 492/12
33.           When   Rajaram   died,  his   interest  in   the   coparcenery   property 




                                                                                                      
devolved by succession upon his 8 children; 5 sons and 3 daughters and not 
upon all the surviving members of coparcenary including the sons of his sons 




                                                                             
(and including applicant No.1 in CHS 2123 of 2011.)   That however relates 
not to the entire properties  of Rajaram shown in Exhibit A to the plaintiff.
That relates only to his interest as a coparcener in all the suit properties.  The 
interest of the other coparceners who are his 5 sons and their sons would 
continue   as   joint   interest   in   the   coparcenary   property   with   community   of 




                                                             
interest   and   unity   of   possession   being   the   prime   principle   of   coparcenery 
property   since   the   suit   properties   were   admittedly   ancestral   properties   of 
                                         
Rajaram.   That coparcenary continued as before.   The  coparcenery property, 
which would be presumed upon they being ancestral properties, to the extent 
                                        
of   the   shares   of   the   other   coparceners  continued   joint.     The   share   which 
plaintiff No.4 got as a successor along with his remaining 4 brothers and 3 
sisters became his individual separate property.  In that interest his sons and 
                 


his   grandsons   (the   applicants   herein)   would   have   no   share.     But   in   the 
              



remainder   of   the   coparcenary   ancestral   joint   Hindu   family   properties  the 
applicants would continue to have their share as before Rajaram's death.  The 





entire property of  Rajaram  which was ancestral  and which continued joint 
would, therefore, not succeed to his sons as the heirs of Rajaram alone.  The 
sons would hold the properties partly as coparceners of the HUF of Rajaram, 
which is presumed under the uncodified Hindu Law in the properties which 





are specifically averred to be ancestral in para 1 of the plaint itself, and would  
also succeed to the interest of Rajaram in such properties and would hold that 
portion of the properties so succeeded as their individual properties.
34.
In   the   case   of
Gurupad   Khandappa   Magdum   Vs.   Hirabai 
Khandappa Magdum & Ors.
AIR 1978 SC 1239 it is held that the share of 
the deceased in the coparcenary property must be ascertained to ascertain the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
31                                              CHS 492/12
share of the heirs in the property of the deceased coparcener.  The share that 
    will succeed to them is only the share in the property that would have been 




                                                                                             
    allotted to the deceased coparcener if a partition of that property had taken 




                                                                    
    place immediately before his death.   It must, therefore, be assumed that the 
    partition   had   so   taken   place.     The   share   of   the   other   heirs   cannot   be 
    ascertained   without   reference   to   such   share   which   would   devolve   by 




                                                                   
    succession.  All the consequences which flow from a real partition have to be 
    logically worked out so that the share of the heirs must be ascertained on the 
    basis that they had separated from one another and had received a share in 




                                                   
    the   partition   which   had   taken   place   during   the   lifetime   of   the   deceased.
Hence the heirs of such deceased coparcener will get his or her share  in the 
    interest which the deceased had in the coparcenary property at the time of his 
                                
    death in addition to the share which he or she would receive in the notional 
    partition.  Similarly the share of the widow in the coparcenary property would 
    be ascertained by adding the share to which she is entitled upon the notional 
            

    partition during her husband's lifetime to the share which she would get in the 
    husband's interest upon his death.
35.            In the family tree Exhibit B to the plaint only the legal heirs of 





    Rajaram are shown.  They would be the heirs of  the interest which Rajaram 
    had  in the coparcenery property.   All the coparceners of the family are not 
    shown in Exhibit B.   All the sons of Rajaram, their sons and their sons' sons 
    living   at   the   time   of   the   death   of   Rajaram   would   constitute   the   HUF   of 





    Rajaram.  They are coparceners in the family.  All of them would have by birth 
    a   right   in   the   coparcenary   properties/HUF   properties/ancestral   properties 
    being the properties shown in Exhibit A to the plaint.   They would have an 
    undivided   interest   therein.     They   would   have   a   right   to   partition   those 
    properties.   Until the partition is applied for and granted they would have 
    community   of   interest   and   unity   of   possession.     Rajaram's   death   does   not 
    effect their community of interest and unity of possession.   They continued
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
32                                              CHS 492/12
joint   since   there   was   no   partition   of   the   HUF,   though   their   coparcenary 
interest did not augment on Rajaram's death leaving behind 3 female relatives 




                                                                                                        
(heirs).   Whatever be the share of all the coparceners being the sons, sons' 




                                                                               
sons   and   sons'   sons'   sons   then   living   constituting   the   HUF,   they   would 
continue to have their share as before.   Only the interest of Rajaram  in that 
coparcenery property would succeed to his Class I heirs under
Section 8
.   The 




                                                                              
applicants would have no interest in that share because their father, plaintiff 
No.4 who succeeded to the interest which Rajaram had in the coparcenery 
property would get it as his own individual property.
36.
                                           
               However, the entire of the properties would not succeed to his 
heirs.  The other coparceners would continue their coparcenary interest in the 
                                          
remaining ancestral joint family properties.  They would be entitled to ask for 
partition   of   the   coparcenary   properties   to   the   extent   of   the   interest   which 
continued joint.  In a large family such as this the interest of the father would 
                  

be equal to that of his sons, sons' sons and sons' sons' sons in the  coparcenary 
property.  Hence the entire property cannot devolve by succession.  Only that 
               



limited   interest   would   devolve   by   succession.     The   other   coparceners, 
including the applicants would be entitled to demand partition of the ancestral  





joint   family   properties   less   the   interest   of   Rajaram   and   other   such   deceased  
coparceners.
37.            Considering the sons of all the sons of Rajaram and after 2005 





also the daughters and all the daughters of the sons as well as the daughters 
of Rajaram as also their sons and daughters, the number of coparceners would 
have to be enumerated and the share of each coparcener would accordingly 
have to be ascertained.  That is yet not done by the applicants.  Though the 
applicants in CHS 2123 of 2011 would be entitled to the share, the applicants 
have not stated what their share would be in the coparcenary property being 
the ancestral property of Rajaram.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
33                                              CHS 492/12
38.            The applicants claim that they are as much entitled to be parties 




                                                                                               
    in this suit as they would be entitled to sue on partition.   The applicants in 




                                                                      
    effect claim their share in the HUF family/coparcenary property of the HUF of 
    Rajaram.  That share is not ascertained by the applicants.  Mr. Apte on behalf 
    of the applicants agreed that an application of this nature is an application for 




                                                                     
    partition   the   HUF   properties   and   for   protection   of   the   HUF 
    property/coparcenary properties until the partition is effected.  He argued that 
    in a partition suit such as this for claiming a specified share each plaintiff and 




                                                     
    defendant   is   essentially   a   plaintiff   and   entitled   to   ask   for   his   share.     He 
                                   
    conceded that such share would be given only upon such party valuing his 
    share and paying Court fee thereon.
39.            Counsel on behalf of the applicants also relied upon the case of
Narayan Ramchandra Katkar & Ors. Vs. Arjun Bhimrao
gore & Ors. AIR 
            

    1986 BOMBAY 122 to claim partition in para 4 of which it is held that a suit 
    by a son for partition and separate possession was maintainable even if his 
         



    father was joint with his brother and did not consent to the partition.   The 
    applicants, as members of the HUF would be entitled to claim partition so 





    long   as   the   ancestral   property   continued   joint   and   they   continued   to   be 
    coparceners.   The test is whether the applicants can apply for partition and 
    separation possession of their share in the HUF in which their grand-father 
    and great-father Rajaram was Karta.  For that purpose they do not require the 





    consent of their father or grand-father, plaintiff No.4.  That claim would have 
    been   maintainable   even   if   their   father   or   grand-father,   plaintiff   No.4, 
    remained joint with his brothers and sisters.
40.            It is seen that though the suit is indeed in respect of the ancestral 
    properties left by Rajaram, the shares claimed by the plaintiffs are ascertained 
    as   if   on   succession.     They   are   not   ascertained   taking   into   account   the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
34                                              CHS 492/12
survivorship of any coparcener of the HUF of Rajaram but as co-owners of the 
property belonging to Rajaram.  The addition of the applicants to the array of 




                                                                                                          
parties in the suit would necessitate revision of the shares of each coparcener 




                                                                                 
which, upon partition, he/she would be entitled to.  Consequently the share of 
the parties to the suit would also similarly vary.  The simplistic application of 
the   applicants   to   make   them   party-defendants   would,   therefore,   be   not   in 




                                                                                
order.     The   applicants   would   require   to   file   their   own   separate   suit   for 
partition of whatever be the coparcenary interest which they have in the HUF 
of Rajaram which would continue after his death, until partition is demanded 




                                                                 
by any coparcener.
41.
                                             
                Though, therefore, the applicants may be entitled to partition, it 
                                            
would be neither feasible not proper to allow them to join in this suit.  They  
may sue separately upon showing all the coparceners of the HUF of Rajaram 
which survived to his sons, sons' sons and sons' sons' sons and after 2005 also  
                   

to the daughters, daughters' daughters and daughters' daughters' daughters 
and daughters' sons' daughters of Rajaram.
42.             It may be mentioned that the plaintiffs have themselves admitted 





in para 1 that Rajaram was the holder of various  ancestral properties.   They 
have shown the legal heirs of Rajaram in paras 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5 of the plaint.    In 
para   6   of   the   plaint   the   plaintiffs   have   claimed   the   shares   as   the   heirs   of 
Rajaram as per Hindu Law without mentioning whether it was uncodified or 





the codified Hindu law and how the plaintiff ascertained such shares.  In para 
7 of the plaint, the plaintiffs have stated that the heirs of Rajaram were "joint 
owners" of the suit properties.  This is a concept unknown to Hindu Law.  In 
para 8 of the plaint, the plaintiffs have averred that between the parties and 
their predecessor-in-title some of the properties are in possession of the some 
of the defendants are  co-owners.   In para 9 of the plaint, the plaintiffs have 
averred that certain valuable movables belong to joint family.   In para 10 of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
35                                              CHS 492/12
the plaint, the plaintiffs have averred that they have applied for partition of 
    the  ancestral and joint properties  described in Exhibit A to the plaint.   The 




                                                                                              
    plaintiffs have referred to co-owners, joint owners or coparceners in the Hindu 




                                                                     
    coparcenary synonymously.   In para 11(A) of the plaint, the plaintiffs have 
    averred   that   the   parties   are  co-owners  of   all   the   properties   described   in 
    Exhibit A to the plaint and those properties are  ancestral  properties and the 




                                                                    
    parties   are  joint   owners.     Hence   upon   the   averment   that   Rajaram   had 
    ancestral   property   described   in   Exhibit   A   to   the   plaint,   the   plaintiffs   have 
    sought partition of those ancestral and joint properties described in Exhibit A 




                                                    
    to the plaint.
43.
                                  
                   It can be seen that the plaintiffs have not understood the concept 
                                 
    of   joint   ownership   and   co-ownership   of   ancestral   properties.     Ancestral 
    properties   cannot   be   jointly   owned.     Joint   properties   survive   to   the   joint 
    holders   entirely   upon   the   death   of   one   joint   holder.     Ancestral   properties 
            

    survive to all the members of the coparcenary.  Ancestral properties can be co-
    owned by community of interest and unity of possession such that each party 
         



    is an owner of an undivided share.  Upon the incidents of joint family property 
    or   coparcenary   property,   this   interest   is   augmented   by   the   death   of   any 





    coparcener (co-owner) and is diminished by the birth of any coparcener in the 
    HUF.   The fact remains that the properties in Exhibit A stated to be the co-
    owned   or   jointly   owned   are   unmistakably   and   repeatedly   stated   to   be 
    ancestral properties.   The ancestral properties would survive to the coparceners  





    in a Hindu coparcenary owning such joint family properties.  The only exceptions  
    to that would be the interest of the deceased Hindu in such coparcenary.
44.            The fact that the suit is essentially for partition lends itself to the 
    conclusion that the suit properties stated to be of Rajaram and not acquired by 
    the parties themselves, are HUF properties capable of such partition.   Yet all 
    the coparceners of the HUF of Rajaram as on the date of the suit are not made
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
36                                              CHS 492/12
parties.  Similarly the share of the each of the parties which is claimed, is not 
the share of each of the coparceners.  The share of only the heirs of Rajaram 




                                                                                                       
upon   succession   cannot   be   ascertained   and   partitioned   for   the   ancestral 




                                                                              
properties of Rajaram.  The non-joinder of all coparceners may be fatal to the 
suit.
45.            At the time when Rajaram died in 1991, his succession having 
opened, the interest in the joint family property devolved by succession upon 
his heirs, he having left daughters and widow as shown in paras 2 & 3 of the 




                                                              
plaint   respectively.     Similarly   after   the   death   of   Rajaram   when   the   family 
                                          
continued joint but with diminution of the share of Rajaram and upon the 
death   of   Sumant,   another   son   of   Rajaram   on   22.01.2008,   the   interest   of 
                                         
Sumant   in   the   coparcenary   also   devolved   by   succession,   he   having   left   a 
widow and a daughter as his female relatives (heirs) as shown in para 4 of the 
plaint.  The daughter of Rajaram, Sunanda having died in 2001, the share in 
                  

the   coparcenary   would   not   augment   or   diminish,   she   not   having   been   a 
coparcener until her death; she is only an heir of the deceased Rajaram who 
               



would have succeeded to his Rajaram' interest in his ancestral properties.
46.            The   other   sons   and   daughters   of   the   sons   and   daughters   of 
Rajaram, who were living at the time of the death of Rajaram, are not shown 
and hence not known to Court.
47.            It may be mentioned that if the plaintiffs had sued for the suit 
properties   not   as   ancestral   properties   of   Rajaram,   but   as   his   self   acquired 
properties   which   would   wholly   devolve   by   succession   the   suit   would   have 
been barred by the Law of Limitation, Rajaram's succession having opened in 
1991, the cause of action to sue would have accrued to the plaintiffs as his 
heirs in 1991.   The suit properties are admittedly HUF properties being the 
ancestral properties of Rajaram.   The Hindu uncodified law would apply to
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
37                                              CHS 492/12
the suit properties subject to the in-roads made by the HSA only in respect of 
    the interest of Rajaram in the HUF properties upon his death.  Hence partition 




                                                                                             
    could be claimed in 2010 only of HUF properties.
48.            The applicants, therefore, do have a share in the HUF properties, 
    being the ancestral properties of Rajaram left after the interest of Rajaram and 




                                                                   
    Sumant and another such deceased coparcener leaving behind female heirs or 
    male heirs claiming though their female heirs is deducted therefrom.
49.            Despite seeing some share of the applicants in CHS 2123 of 2011, 
                                 
    because that share is not ascertained and because the entire HUF consisting of 
    all   the   coparceners   is   not   shown,   at   present   the   applicants   are   not   made 
                                
    parties to the suit and are directed to sue themselves for partition as advised.
50.            The   parties   to   the   suit   have   admittedly   sold   some   of   the 
            

    properties mentioned in the schedule Exhibit A to the plaint being properties 
    at Item Nos.6 & 7 thereof.   Defendant Nos.1 to 5 have applied for deleting 
         



    these properties.  It appears that the other parties to the suit have agreed to 
    have those properties deleted.
51.            The  Court   has,  however,   seen  that  all   the   properties  shown   in 
    Exhibit A to the plaint are admittedly ancestral properties of Rajaram.  They 
    constitute HUF properties.  The interest in the HUF properties would survive 





    to   the   sons,   sons'   sons   and   sons'   sons'   sons   of   Rajaram   until   2005   and 
    thereafter to the daughters, daughters' daughters, daughters' sons' daughters, 
    daughters'   daughters'   and   daughters   sons'   daughters   after   2005.     The 
    applicants in CHS 2123 of 2011 as also the other coparceners would have an 
    interest in those properties.
52.            These properties fall within the law enunciated inter alia in items
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
38                                              CHS 492/12
(xxix), (xliii), (xlv) and (lx) above.   These properties could not have been 
alienated   without   the   consent   of   all   the   coparceners.     If   so   alienated,   the 




                                                                                                        
alienation could be challenged.  The applicants in CHS 2123 of 2011 seek to 




                                                                               
challenge that alienation.   The very application is because of such challenge 
and to prevent further alienation.  The parties to the suit who have alienated 
the coparcenary properties would have to account for the alienation or justify 




                                                                              
the alienation upon its challenge.
53.            Alienation  can  be  made  for   the   benefit   of   the   estate,   for  legal 




                                                               
necessity or for meeting any antecedent debts, for management of the joint 
                                          
property by the Karta or pious obligation of a son to discharge his father's 
debts subject to
Section 6(4)
of the has as amended in 2005 which runs thus.
(4). After   the   commencement   of   the
Hindu   Succession  
       (Amendment)   Act,   2005
,   no   Court   shall   recognise   any   right   to  
       proceed against a son, grandson or great-grandson for the recovery of  
       any debt due from his father, grandfather or great-grandfather solely  
       on the ground of the pious obligation under the Hindu law, of such  
                  


       son, grandson or great-grandson to discharge any such debt:
Provided   that   in   the  case   of  any   debt  contracted   before  the  
               



       commencement   of   the
Hindu   Succession   (Amendment)   Act,   2005
,  
       nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect-
(a) the   right   of   any   creditor   to   proceed   against   the   son,  
       grandson or great-grandson, as the case may be; or
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of,  
       any such debt, and any such right or alienation shall be enforceable  
       under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to the  
       same   extent   as   it   would   have   been   enforceable   as   if   the
Hindu  
       Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005
had not been enacted.
54.            The   alienation   can   be   challenged   by   the   coparceners   if   it   is 
unauthorized.  Hence if the alienation is not for the above purposes it can only 
be   challenged   after   it   is   made.     (Ramesh   Damodhar   Deshmukh   Vs. 
Damodhar   Domaji   Deshmukh   &   Ors.   1999(1)   Mh.L.J.   153).  (CHS 
2123/11)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:40 :::
39                                              CHS 492/12
55.            The   applicants   who   claim   to   partition   the   properties   and   to 
    protect   their   coparcenary   interest   therein   would   have   to   challenge   the 




                                                                                              
    alienation.     That   is   not   expressly   done.     That   also   could   be   done   by   the 




                                                                     
    applicants in their own suit for partition and protection of their coparcenary 
    interest, if filed.
56.            However   the   suit   is   not   fully   settled.     The   suit,   therefore, 
    continues.     Pending   the   suit   and   pending   the   enumeration   of   all   the 
    coparceners and the ascertainment of correct shares, the properties cannot be 




                                                    
    allowed to be deleted so as not to form that suit properties which would come 
    up for the Court's scrutiny.
57.            The applicants are, therefore, seen to be the coparceners of the 
    suit   properties   which   are   admittedly   ancestral   properties.     The   applicants 
    would certainly be entitled to demand partition of the properties.  Until such 
            

    time as it is demanded they would continue to have interest in the undivided 
    suit   properties.     That   would   be   the   community   of   interest   and   unity   of 
         



    possession.  The applicants would have to ascertain their precise share in the 
    suit premises to claim any partition.     The shares of the parties to the suit 





    would alter upon the applicants' claim.  The applicants would have to consider 
    and account for the notional partition as had taken place upon the death of 
    Rajaram   leaving   3   female   heirs   and   ascertained   their   share   in   the   suit 
    properties.   The applicants would also have to consider and account for the 





    notional partitions which may have taken place in their HUF upon the death 
    of   other   coparceners   leaving   behind   other   female   heirs.     The   applicants, 
    therefore,   cannot   simplicitor   be   party-defendants   to   the   suit.     They   would 
    require to join the other coparceners also who are the children of the other 
    parties to the suit.  The applicants would have to value their share in the suit 
    premises as coparceners.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:41 :::
40                                              CHS 492/12
58.           If   the   applicants   also   challenge   the   alienation   by   sale   of   two 
properties   admittedly   executed   by   the   parties   to   the   suit,   as   the   other 




                                                                                                      
coparceners, they would have to value those suit properties entirely and pay 




                                                                             
court fees accordingly.
59.           It is, therefore, too simplistic to state that the applicants may be 




                                                                            
only made party-defendants.
60.           Consequently   there   shall   be   no   order   in   both   the   aforesaid 




                                                             
Chamber Summons.
(ROSHAN DALVI, J.)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 19:29:41 :::
