Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 35 of 2010
Citation: SCC 705 and other
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/114204376/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
4
]
Delhi High Court
Saisudhir Energy Limited vs Ntpc Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited on 8 September, 2016
Author:
Manmohan Singh
Bench:
Manmohan Singh
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%                         Judgment reserved on: 11th August, 2016
                      Judgment pronounced on: 8th September, 2016

+             O.M.P. No.410/2015 & I.A. No.15360/2015

       SAISUDHIR ENERGY LIMITED                   ..... Petitioner
                     Through    Mr.C. Mohan Rao, Adv. with
                                Mr.Lokesh Kumar Sharma, Adv.

                              versus

       NTPC VIDYUT VYAPAR NIGAM LIMITED        ..... Respondent
                      Through  Mr.Maninder Singh, ASG with
                               Mr.Bharat Sangal, Mr.Prabhas
                               Bajaj & Ms.S.Spandana Reddy,
                               Advs.

+      O.M.P. No.446/2015, I.A. Nos.17294-96/2015 &
       20015/2015

       NTPC VIDYUT VYPAR NIGAM LTD                ..... Petitioner
                      Through   Mr.Maninder Singh, ASG with
                                Mr.Bharat Sangal, Mr.Prabhas
                                Bajaj & Ms.S.Spandana Reddy,
                                Advs.

                              versus

       SAISUDHIR ENERGY LTD                           ..... Respondent
                     Through           Mr.C. Mohan Rao, Adv. with
                                       Mr.Lokesh Kumar Sharma, Adv.

       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE MANMOHAN SINGH

MANMOHAN SINGH, J.
1.     By way of this common order, I propose to decide the cross-
objections filed by both the parties under Section 34 of the Arbitration
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 1 of 72
and
Conciliation Act, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act"),
arising out of the Arbitral Award dated 21st July, 2015 passed by the
Arbitral Tribunal.       Two out of three Arbitrators have passed the
Majority Award and the third Arbitrator has passed the dissenting
Minority Award.
2.     OMP No.410/2015 has been filed by M/s. Saisudhir Energy Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as "Saisudhir"), challenging the Arbitral Award
dated 21st July, 2015 whereby the Arbitral Tribunal by majority held
that NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Ltd. has not suffered any loss and
hence is not entitled for any damages, but despite of the said finding,
the Arbitral Tribunal granted damages of Rs.1.2 Crores. It is alleged
that the Arbitral Tribunal in violation of Fundamental Policy of Indian
law had passed the said direction. By the said petition, the minority
Award has also been challenged as a whole.
3.     NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as
"NVVN") has filed OMP No.446/2015 for setting aside the Majority
Award in its entirety and the Minority Award to the extent of the
direction therein to NVVN to refund a sum of Rs.4 crores to Saisudhir.
4.     NVVN is claiming for damages of Rs.54,12,32,000/- by alleging
that that as per the Liquidated Damages (LD) clause in the contract, it
is entitled for the said amount.
5.     Brief facts of the case as per the pleadings are that:-
(i)   NVVN is a Government concern which has been identified by
           the Government of India as Nodal Agency for facilitating
           purchase and sale of solar PV power under the Jawaharlal
           Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) of the Government of
           India.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                      Page 2 of 72
Saisudhir      is   a   Company    incorporated      under      the
Companies Act, 1956
who is engaged in the business of
           power generation.
(ii) The target of the Mission is to deploy 20,000 MW of grid-
connected solar power by the year 2022. The objective of
           the Mission is to promote ecologically sustainable growth
           while addressing India's energy security challenge. It will
           also constitute a major contribution by India to the global
           effort to meet the challenges of climate change, since solar
           energy is environment-friendly as it has zero emissions
           while generating electricity or heat. The Mission was
           launched with a view to achieve the long-term objective of
           facilitating       sustainable    power       generation       through
           alternative/renewable         sources   of   energy,   and    reducing
           dependence on non-renewable sources of energy which are
           a major cause for environmental degradation and global
           warming.
(iii) In order to meet the objectives of the Mission, in view of the
           high cost of purchasing solar power, it was decided to
           bundle solar power along with cheaper unallocated quota of
           power generated at NTPC owned coal-based stations, and
           selling this bundled power to distribution utilities at CERC
           regulated prices. It was also decided that NVVN would enter
           into PPAs with Solar Power Developers with a commitment
           to purchase power at fixed rate for a period of 25 years.
In the guidelines for selection of the Solar Power
           Projects under the Mission, it has been provided that the
           objective of the guidelines is to, inter alia, facilitate a quick
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                           Page 3 of 72
start    up    of   the   Mission   and   to   facilitate   speedier
           implementation of the new projects to be selected to meet
           the Phase-I target.
(iv) It has also been provided in the guidelines that final
           selection of the project shall be done on the basis of
           discount to be offered by the Solar Power Developers on the
           CERC approved tariff, being Rs.15.39 per unit. Further, the
           Bid Bond to be submitted by the Solar Power Developer
           would be proportional to the amount of discount voluntarily
           offered by the Solar Power Developer. As per Clause 4.6 of
           the PPA, the amount of liquidated damages for delay in
           commissioning of the project is directly proportional to the
           amount of Bid Bond.
(v) The foundation of allowing the Solar Power Developer to
           voluntarily decide the amount of Bid Bond and not to go for
           adventurous bidding was for the apparent reason that the
           bidder would exercise its choice for the Bid Amount having
           regard to the clear understanding that in the event it
           commits any delay in the execution of the project, it would
           become liable and would be in a position to pay damages to
           the extent of the Bid Bond.
6.     Phase-1 Batch-II Guidelines were issued in August, 2011 by
MNRE (GOI) for selection of grid connected Solar Power Projects.
Accordingly, the NVVN issued Request for Selection (RfS) on 24th
August, 2011 for inviting applications from interested Solar Power
Project developers for setting up Solar Photo Voltaic Projects in
accordance with the terms and conditions set out in the RfS.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                        Page 4 of 72
Saisudhir under the above invitation submitted its RfS for
setting up of 20 MW Solar PV Project at Plot No.27, Vidyuthnagar,
Ananthapur - 515001, Andhra Pradesh who was selected in terms of
RfS and the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was signed by the
Saisudhir with the NVVN on 24th January, 2012. Thereafter, Request
for Proposal (RfP) document was issued to the Saisudhir vide Letter
dated 17th November, 2011. The NVVN then issued a Letter of Intent
(LOI) to the Saisudhir for selection under JNNSM Phase-1 Batch-2 on
28th December, 2011.
7.     Saisudhir at its own assessment of all relevant factors, had
voluntarily submitted a bid of supplying power at Rs.8.22 per unit,
offering a discount of Rs.7.17 per unit. As such, Saisudhir was
required to submit a Bid Bond of Rs.50.154 crores, which was
calculated on the basis of the amount of discount voluntarily offered
by them. This Bid Bond was required as a security against the
commitment of the Solar Power Developer to commence supply of
solar power from the scheduled commissioning date, in consideration
for which NVVN had agreed to purchase the solar power at a fixed
rate for a period of 25 years.       It had thus understood and had
accepted that in the event of any delay, it shall be liable to pay a sum
equivalent to the Bid Bond as liquidated damages.
8.     NVVN had agreed to purchase solar power from Saisudhir at a
fixed price of Rs.8.22 per unit [i.e. the price quoted by Saisudhir in its
Bid] for a period of 25 years. In other words, in consideration for the
commitment of Saisudhir to commence supply of solar power from
26th February, 2013, NTPC had guaranteed the purchase of such solar
power at a fixed rate for a period of 25 years, notwithstanding the
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 5 of 72
reduction in cost of production/purchase of solar power in the next 25
years.
8.1    Time was the essence for the entire process of selection as well
as under the PPA for completing the conditions prescribed therein. In
terms of Article 4.1.1 (c) of the PPA, Saisudhir was obliged, at its own
cost and risk, to commence supply of power up to the contracted
capacity to NVVN no later than the Schedule Commissioning date and
continuance of the supply of power throughout the term of the
Agreement. Schedule Commissioning date as defined under the PPA
was 26th February, 2013. Therefore, it was imperative for the
Saisudhir under the provisions of PPA, to commence supply of Power
by 26th February, 2013.
8.2    It   was    agreed     between   the   parties   that   any     delay        in
commencement of supply of power entails LD as prescribed under the
Article 4.6
of the PPA, and the extracts of the same have been
reproduced herein below:
"If the SPD is unable to commence supply of power to
       NVVN by the Scheduled Commissioning Date other than for
       the reason specified in Article 4.5.1 , the SPD shall pay to
       NVVN, Liquidated Damages for the delay in such
       commencement of supply of power and making the
       Contracted Capacity available for dispatch by the
       scheduled Commissioning date as per following:
a) Delay upto one (1) month - NVVN will encash 20%
              of total Performance Bank Guarantee.
b) Delay of more than one(1) month and upto two
              months- NVVN will encash 40% of the total
              Performance Bank Guarantee
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                          Page 6 of 72
c) Delay of more than two month and upto three
                 months-   NVVN    will  encash  the  remaining
                 Performance Bank Guarantee."
For delay beyond three months, Saisudhir would attract LD at
the rate of Rs.1,00,000/- per MW per day for a period up to 18
months of signing of the PPA.
9.     It   is    an   admitted   position   that   Saisudhir    has     failed       to
commission its project by the Scheduled Commissioning Date i.e. 26 th
February, 2013.
10.    The dispute in the present case has arisen from the delay
caused by Saisudhir in providing solar power in terms of the Power
Purchase Agreement executed between Saisudhir and NVVN. As per
the terms of the PPA dated 24th January, 2012, Saisudhir was obliged
to supply 20 MW of solar power from 26th February, 2013 for a period
of 25 years. Saisudhir commissioned the supply of 10MW from 26th
April, 2013, i.e. after a delay of two months from the Scheduled
Commissioning          Date.   The   remaining      capacity    of   10MW         was
commissioned by Saisudhir from 24th July, 2013, i.e. after a delay of
approximately 5 months from the Scheduled Commissioning Date.
11.    It was pleaded by the NVVN before the Arbitral Tribunal that
electricity is utility service being provided by it. It is neither practical
nor possible to compute damages for all tangible/intangible losses
with reference to any utility where hundreds and thousands of the
users/consumers are dependent upon such utility service. It is a
settled position in law that the named amount of damages in the
agreement is the genuine pre-estimate and there is no obligation to
prove the loss.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                            Page 7 of 72
12.     The contention of NVVN is that the contract being in respect of
Public Utility Service, it is not possible to assess the loss and hence,
the LD's as provided in the contract are liable to be allowed as
genuine pre estimate of actual losses suffered.
In support of the
contention NVVN relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
ONGC Ltd. v. Saw Pipes Ltd.
, (2003) 5 SCC 705 and other
decisions of the Supreme Court and High Courts following the dicta of
said judgment.
13.     In order to justify the delay, it was stated by Saisudhir that due
to various reasons which are completely beyond the control of the
NVVN, (but not covered by the force majeure clause under the
contract),    the    project   was   delayed.   The   Saisudhir   could      not
commence production of energy by 26th February, 2013, the
Commercial Operation Date. Saisudhir started pumping 10MW energy
from 26th April, 2013 and the remaining 10MW Energy from 24th July,
2013. There was thus, a delay of 2 months in pumping 10MW and 5
months delay in pumping the remaining 10MW energy to the NVVN.
Saisudhir addressed a letter dated 30th January, 2013 to the
NVVN seeking extension of time by two months, explaining the
reasons for the delay in completing the project. The NVVN vide letter
dated 31st March, 2013, rejected the request of the Saisudhir for
extension of time stating that a notice of 'force majeure' under clause
11.5.1 of PPA is a necessary condition for entitlement of the benefit
under force majeure clause and as the NVVN has not received any
force majeure notice, the Saisudhir is not entitled for extension of
time.
14.     In view of rejection of extension of time, Saisudhir apprehended
that the NVVN may encash the Bank Guarantees provided by
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                       Page 8 of 72
Saisudhir who filed OMP No.173/2013 before this Court seeking to
restrain from encashing the Bank Guarantees. This Court vide order
dated 27th February, 2013 granted interim order in favour of the
Saisudhir, restraining the NVVN from encashing the bank guarantees,
with a direction to the Saisudhir to keep the bank guarantees alive.
Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal of three members was constituted for
adjudicating the disputes between the parties. This Court vide order
dated 23rd May, 2013, permitted the parties to place the pleadings,
which were available before this Court, before the Arbitral Tribunal for
passing appropriate orders under
Section 17
of the Act. The parties
however, did not press for orders under
Section 17
of the Act and
addressed arguments on the main claims. The Bank Guarantees to
the extent of Rs.54,12,32,000/- were extended from time to time and
were valid till 25th August, 2015.
15.    Saisudhir filed a claim statement, inter-alia, contending that
NVNN has not invested a single rupee in the project and has not
suffered any loss or damage and in view of the settled position of law,
is not entitled for any damages or compensation and cannot invoke
the Bank Guarantees. Under Claim No.2, Saisudhir claimed refund of
the charges incurred by it in keeping the Bank Guarantees alive. By
the time of filing the statement of claim, Saisudhir had incurred a sum
of Rs.70,44,187/- in maintaining the Bank Guarantees and sought an
award for the said amount plus the amount to be incurred in
maintaining the Bank Guarantees during the pendency of arbitration
proceedings. By the time of filing of the written submissions, the
Saisudhir had incurred a sum of Rs.1,71,83,047/- (The total amount
incurred in maintaining the bank guarantee from July, 2013 to 25th
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 9 of 72
August, 2015 is Rs.2,24,66,278/-) on count of maintaining Bank
Guarantees and sought an award for the same under claim No.2.
16.    Saisudhir also claimed that it is entitled for costs of arbitration.
NVVN submitted a claim for the sum of Rs.77,51,199/- and as the
litigation costs incurred in the matter by the time of filing of written
submissions including the amounts paid to the Arbitrators subsequent
to    reserving    the    award,   the   NVVN   had   incurred   a   sum     of
Rs.91,68,887/- on account of fee of Arbitrators, counsels' fee and
travelling expenses, expenses toward Arbitration venue etc.
17.    The main contention before the Arbitral Tribunal on behalf of
Saisudhir was that NVVN has not invested a single rupee in the
project and has not suffered any loss whatsoever thus, NVVN is not
entitled for any damages. Referring to the provisions of
Sections 73
and
74
of the Indian Contract Act and judgment of the                Supreme
Court in
Fateh Chand v. Balkishan Dass
,
AIR 1963 SC 1405,
Maula Bux v. Union of India
, (
1969) 2 SCC 554, Union of India v.
Rampur Distillery and Chemicals Co. Ltd.
, (1973) 1 SCC 649,
ONGC v. Saw Pipes Ltd., (
2003) 5 SCC 705, State of Kerala v.
United Shipper and Dredgers Ltd.
,
AIR 1982 Ker 281, Praveen
Oberoi v. Raj Kumari
, (
2014) 207 DLT 116 and Vishal Engineers
& Builders v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
, (2012) 1 Arb.LR 253
(Delhi) (DB), Saisudhir contended that NVVN is not entitled for any
damages, as it was a simple case of breach of contract.
18.    It was alleged that NVVN at the best is entitled to compensation
only to the extent of loss suffered. As NVVN has not suffered any loss
in the present case, the question of compensation or damages does
not arise and the entire project cost of Rs.193 Crores was incurred by
Saisudhir. The NVVN was under an obligation to act in terms of as
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                      Page 10 of 72
well as in furtherance of the objectives of the Mission i.e. propagation
of Solar Energy; it cannot act in a manner detrimental to the
objectives of the Mission, if this Court would permit the NVVN to
encash Bank Guarantees for a short delay of few months, it would put
a death knell on the project, which was to last for 25 years. It was
also submitted before the Arbitral Tribunal by Saisudhir that as
production of solar energy is not commercially viable and was
conceived keeping in view the long term benefits, profit or immediate
generation of energy is not the object of the Mission and the project
cannot be jeopardized for the short delay. The project was to supply
solar   energy      for   25   years    and   a   delay   of   2-5   months          is
inconsequential. It is stated by Saisudhir before the Arbitral Tribunal
that NVVN is under a triple obligation: (i) as a State under
Article 12
of the Constitution of India, (ii) under
Section 74
of the Contract Act,
and (iii) in terms of the objectives of the Mission;                 to act in a
reasonable and fair manner.            The NVVN should not act in an unfair
manner to penalize Saisudhir for the short delay, for no fault of
Saisudhir by seeking damages, when it suffered no loss at all.
19.     The NVVN filed a statement of defence contending that under
the Power Purchase Agreement, Saisudhir was under an obligation to
set up the project at its own cost and risk and to commence supply of
power to the contracted capacity. Due to delay in commencement of
supply of power, the project as well as discoms, (who were to
purchase power from the petitioner) suffered.                  According to the
NVVN, its investment is in the form of the obligation to purchase
power for 25 years and the damages stipulated under the contract are
genuine estimate of the loss suffered; Saisudhir knowing well the
liability to pay damages submitted the Bank Guarantees, and
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                          Page 11 of 72
Saisudhir was also not entitled for extension of time merely on
asking. Referring to force majeure clause in the agreement, the NVVN
contended that the same is not applicable. The NVVN also denied the
plea    of      the   Saisudhir   that   the   damages   are   exorbitant     or
unreasonable.
20.    The Arbitral Tribunal vide majority Award dated 21st July, 2015
has allowed the claims of the Saisudhir by holding that the NVVN
cannot levy any Liquidated Damages, as the NVVN has not suffered
any loss and hence, the burden of proof of proving the same is on the
NVVN for the breach committed by the Saisudhir. It is further held
that the NVVN has not suffered any loss, as the NVVN has not
invested any money in the project and hence, is not entitled to the
liquidated damages as claimed. It was opined by the Tribunal that the
liquidated damages as levied by the NVVN is totally unreasonable and
unjustified and Saisudhir is entitled for the return of BGs amount to
Rs.53,92,32,000/- which was submitted by Saisudhir as a part of
earnest money deposit (EMD).
21.    The main reasons for passing the Majority Award by the Arbitral
Tribunal after discussing the pleadings of the parties and the
documents in favour of Saisudhir are mentioned in para 113 of the
Majority Award which reads as under:-
"113. From the above discussion, AT is of the view:
i.      The respondent has not invested any money in the
                 project.
ii.     The respondent has not suffered any loss, as no
                 effort has been made to prove the same.
         iii.    The respondent had not suffered on account of its
                 consequential breach to supply energy to discoms,
                 as no claim of discoms against the respondent on
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                       Page 12 of 72
account of consequential breach on part of the
              respondent, have been placed before the AT.
         iv. The respondent has also not suffered any loss of
              capital or loss of interest on capital, having not
              invested any amount in the project.
v. The respondent has not established that the project
              has suffered on count of delay.
vi. The project is not of such a nature as to cause loss
              on count of mere delay unlike construction of a road
              for public purpose, school, hospital, sewage pumping
              station etc.,
         vii. The object of the mission being long term promotion
              of solar energy (25 years in this case), a delay of
              about 2-5 months in the present case is not of much
              consequence."
22.    It is also pertinent to mention here that despite of the said
reasoning, in the Majority Award in para 114, it was held as under:-
"114. In view of the above, it is difficult to hold that the
         respondent has suffered loss, which needs to be
         compensated by the claimant. The AT therefore holds
         that the respondent has not suffered any loss in
         completing the project in time.        However, since the
         claimant has failed to complete the work in time and has
         delayed the same for 2-5 months, which has delayed the
         supply of power to the respondent, the AT is of the view
         that the claimant is liable to pay Rs.1.2 Crores to the
         respondent as 20% of the amount specified in the
         original performance guarantee at the rate of Rs.30 Lacs
         per MW for the delayed performance. The AT awards
         accordingly."
23.    The second claim of the Saisudhir regarding charges and costs
incurred in maintaining the bank guarantees was decided in para 115
of the Award.          The relevant extracts of the same have been
reproduced here as under:-
"115. .......The claimant made a claim of Rs.1,71,83,047
         on account of maintaining bank guarantees for the period
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 13 of 72
of delay not attributable to the claimant. The respondent
         contended that the claimant had to maintain the bank
         guarantee as a consequence of the interim injunction
         obtained by the claimant.         The interim orders are
         conditional in nature and for the benefit of the claimant.
         The claimant thus cannot seek to fasten the liability of
         maintaining the Bank Guarantees on the respondent.
         Thus the claim of the claimant for reimbursement of bank
         charges for maintaining the bank guarantees is rejected
         and AT awards nil amount against the same."
24.    The minority award published on 21st July, 2015 by one of the
Members of the Arbitral Tribunal who has taken a dissenting view and
has arrived at different findings in paras 117 to 124, is contrary to the
majority award. The said paras 117 to 124 read as under:
"117. Further Clause 2.9 in its last para of Guidelines and
        Clause 3.19 of RfS (Para 3 at Page 116 of SOC) clearly
        stipulates that in case NVVN selects the Claimant and
        offers to execute the PPA and the Claimant refuses or is
        not in a position to implement /execute the PPA within
        the stipulated time frame, the BGs towards the EMD and
        Bid Bond shall be encashed by NVVN. It is thus amply
        clear that even prior to executing the PPA, the Claimant
        was certainly liable to have the BGs towards EMD and Bid
        Bond encashed on Claimant's failure to forge ahead with
        contract execution. This condition not being part of
        contract, it would be in the nature of guarantee and
        certainly not hit by
Section 73
or
Section 74
of The Indian
        Contract Act 1872, which deals only with contractual
        terms. It may perhaps be pertinent to reproduce
Section
        74
of The Indian Contract Act 1872 which stipulates as
        under:
Quote
              "
Section 74
: Compensation for breach of
              contract where penalty stipulated for:- When a
              contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the
              contract as the amount to be paid in case of such
              breach, or if the contract contains any other
              stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 14 of 72
of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual
              damage or loss is proved to have been caused
              thereby, to receive from the party who has broken
              the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding
              the amount so named or, as the case may be, the
              penalty stipulated for. "
The breach, on the part of the Claimant in fulfilling
        its obligations, not only resulted in injury to the
        implementation of the Mission but also resulted in injury
        to the Discoms for failure to fulfill the renewable purchase
        obligation with the Discoms. The liquidated damages
        provided under the Clause 4.6 are a genuine pre-estimate
        of loss suffered by the Respondent, which cannot be
        directly evaluated or measured due to the nature of
        transaction and being formed partly from the Bid offer of
        the Claimant, made on its own volition. The factum of
        occurrence of loss in such a case is inherent in the delay
        on the part of the Claimant in the commissioning of the
        Project.
I am inclined to toe the line of argument of the
        Respondent as it obviously could not have pleaded the
        loss or produced any evidentiary evidence. The
        Respondent is, as such, entitled to receive from Claimant
        who has delayed the commissioning of the Power Plant a
        reasonable compensation.
118. It is an admitted fact that out of 20. MW, with COD
        being 26.02.2013 the Claimant commissioned 10MW on
        26.04.2013 with a delay of 02 months the remaining
        10MW on 24.07.2013 (Refer Page 1 RH-2) with a delay of
        about 05 months. It has to be noted that it may not be
        possible to work out the exact loss because the Solar
        Power to be generated cannot be replaced by Solar Power
        generated elsewhere as all such Solar Projects are tied up
        with their respective Agreements to supply discoms after
        bundling of Power. Therefore as LD and which is directly
        related to the bid submitted by the Claimant has to be
        treated as a genuine pro-estimate of loss and the
        Claimant is bound to pay LD to the Respondent in terms
        of
Article 4.6
of the PPA (Refer Page 82 of SOC).
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 15 of 72
119.       We must not lose sight of the fact that the
        Claimant was selected at the stage of RfP because of the
        discount offered by it. And accordingly the amount of Bid
        Bond submitted was directly proportional to the discount
        offered by the Claimant and in case it had offered lesser
        discount the amount of Bid Bond would have been less.
        The Claimant chose a discount of Rs.7.17/ unit and as
        such must mitigate its responsibility fully in term of an
        agreed PPA.
120.       Here it may perhaps be prudent to cite also
Sections 126
and
127
of The Indian Contract Act, 1872
        which speaks of "Contract of Guarantee". A "Contract of
        Guarantee" is a contract to perform the promise or
        discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his
        default. Any benefit given to the principal debtor is a
        consideration to the surety for giving the guarantees. And
        in the present case the Bank is the surety for issuing the
        guarantee to NVVN on behalf of the Claimant Encashment
        of such guarantees is obviously distinct from damages for
        breach of contract. I am certainly convinced about it.
121.       Further a reference to "Law of Guarantee" by
        Geraldine Andrews, 6th Edition, Sweet and Maxwell
        Chapter 16 at Page 616 (Refer Page 60 of RH-1) states
        and makes it distinctly clear that performance
        bond/performance guarantee are to be treated as
        substitutes for cash and are security for due performance
        which the beneficiary would be entitled to in case of
        alleged breach of contract (Refer Page 63 of RH-1). It was
        further held that such performance bonds or similar
        instruments performed the Role of an effective safeguard
        against nonperformance, inadequate performance or
        delayed performance.
122.        In fact CONSTRUCTION LAW Volume-II by
        Julian Bailey (Refer Pages 66-70 of RH-1) clearly indicates
        that such performance bonds/ guarantees are distinct
        from the underlying contract and need to be given effect
        to.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 16 of 72
123.       A reference to Hudson's Building and
        Engineering Contracts 12th Edition (Pages 77- 81 of RH-1)
        and 1978 (1) ALL ER 976 Edward Owen Engineering Ltd.
        Vs. Barclays Bank International Ltd. (Pages 82-93 of RH-
1) holds that performance guarantees are virtually
        promissory notes payable on demand, to be honoured
        according to the agreed terms and conditions.
124.       And even in 1986 II Lloyd's Report 146 Siporex
        Trade SA Vs. Banque Indo Suez (Refer Pages 94- 112 of
        RH-1), it was held at Page 106 of RH-1 that the whole
        commercial purposes of a performance bond is to provide
        security which is to be readily, promptly and assuredly
        realizable when the default occurs. And I accordingly hold
        that Respondents are entitled to encash the BGs."
25.    However, in para 133.1, in the Minority Award, NVVN was asked
to encash these BGs but partially accepted to the tune of Rs.4 Crores,
i.e. the amount towards EMD lying in the form of Performance Bank
Guarantee which NVVN should refund back to the Saisudhir within 90
days from the date of announcement of that Award, which is also
challenged by the NVVN in its objections being OMP No.446/2015.
26.    Notices in both the petitions were issued by the earlier Bench.
Both the parties have made their submissions. They have also filed
their written submissions.     Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG and
Senior Advocate instructed by Mr.Bharat Sangal, Advocate appeared
on behalf of NVVN and addressed the arguments.           On behalf of
Saisudhir, Mr.C.Mohan Rao, Advocate with Mr.Lokesh Kumar Sharma
has made the submissions.
27.    Mr.C.Mohan Rao, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
Saisudhir has referred the relevant part of the pleadings, various
paras of majority award as well as minority award. He also referred
large number of judgments in support of his submissions.        He says
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 17 of 72
that the facts and circumstances in the present case are materially
different than the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra).
The facts in present
case are similar to the judgment of
Kailash Nath Associates v.
DDA
, (2015) 4 SCC 136. He argued that NVVN in the present case
has neither invested any amount nor suffered any loss and proved
any damages. Thus, the plea of NVVN is not substainable.
28.    Mr.Rao submits that the Supreme Court in
Kailash Nath
Associates
(supra) explained as to when a LD clause in a contract
may be taken as pre estimate of losses suffered and held as under:-
"43.1       Where a sum is named in a contract as a
       liquidated amount payable by way of damages, the party
       complaining of a breach can receive as reasonable
       compensation such liquidated amount only if it is a
       genuine pre-estimate of damages fixed by both
       parties and found to be such by the court. In other
       cases, where a sum is named in a contract as a
       liquidated amount payable by way of damages, only
       reasonable compensation can be awarded not
       exceeding the amount so stated."
Mr.Rao argues that the Supreme Court in BSNL v. Reliance
Communications Ltd., (2011) 1 SCC 394, explained that when the
amount stipulated is in terrorem or forces a party to perform the
contract, it would amount to penalty. It was held as under:-
"47.  According to Chitty on Contracts "whether a
       provision is to be treated as a penalty is a matter of
       construction to be resolved by asking whether at the time
       the contract was entered into the predominant contractual
       function of the provision was to deter a party from
       breaking the contract or to compensate the innocent party
       for breach. The question to be always asked is whether the
       alleged penalty clause can pass muster as a genuine pre-
       estimate of loss". (See para 26-126 of Chitty on Contracts,
       30th edition) The fact that damage is difficult to assess
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 18 of 72
with precision strengthens the presumption that a sum
       agreed between the parties represents a genuine attempt
       to estimate it and to overcome the difficulties of proof at
       the trial."
He also relied upon the relevant extract of the Law of Contract
by G.H. Treitel (10th edition), as per which a clause is penal if it
provides for -
".....a payment stipulated as in terrorem of the offending
       party to force him to perform the contract. If, on the other
       hand, the clause is an attempt to estimate in advance the
       loss which will result from the breach, it is a liquidated
       damages clause. The question whether a clause is penal or
       pre-estimate of damages depends on its construction and
       on the surrounding circumstances at the time of entering
       into the contract."
"Lastly, the fact that a sum of money is payable on breach
       of contract is described by the contract as "penalty" or
       "liquidated damages" is relevant but not decisive as to
       categorization."
29.    He says that if the pleadings in the above matter are examined,
it is clear that the objective of the mission was promotion of solar
power and not immediate supply of power. NVVN had admitted that
LDs are levied not due to delay in delivery of power or delay in sale of
power due to delay in commissioning of the project.        NVVN never
contended that the LDs were agreed as pre-estimate of losses as it
pleaded that the objective of the LDs was to prevent Saisudhir from
abandoning the project. In case the objectives of the Mission is
considered in a meaningful manner, it would appear that in fact, the
nature of contract was not in respect of Public Utility and the LDs are
not stipulated as pre-estimate of losses. Thus, none of the arguments
advanced on behalf of NVVN before this Court is contrary to the
pleadings and against the settled legal position. The main purpose of
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 19 of 72
inclusion of Clause 6.4 in the Contract was that his client should not
break the contract.           The said clause was stipulated in the nature of
terrorem so that his client must perform the contract in time and the
said clause amount to penalty and not damages.
He    submits     that      the   Supreme     Court    in
Kailash     Nath
Associates
(supra) also        held   that   "Since
Section   74
awards
reasonable compensation for damage or loss caused by a breach of
contract, damage or loss caused is a sine qua non for the
applicability of the section." As NVVN had not suffered any loss,
therefore, it is not entitled for any damages.
30.    Mr.Rao has referred the pleadings which indicate that the object
of the Mission was promotion of solar energy and not immediate
supply of solar power to any consumer. The Mission was conceived as
a long term measure. The Mission has set the ambitious target of
generation of 20000 Mega Watts (MW) of Solar Power by 2022
through "long term policy, large scale deployment goals, aggressive
R & D."
Mr.Rao has also referred the preamble of the Mission among
others which provided that "The successful implementation of the
JNNSM requires the identification of resources to overcome
the financial, investment, technology, institutional and other
related barriers, which confront solar power development in
India. The penetration of solar power, therefore, requires
substantial support." The scope and objectives of the Mission are:
i)     To facilitate of quick start of JNNSM.

       ii)    To ensure serious participation for projects to be
selected under JNNSM. (LD's are provided to ensure this
              objective)
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                            Page 20 of 72
iii)     To facilitate speedier implementation of the new projects
                to be selected to meet the Phase-I target of JNNSM.
iv)      To enhance the               confidence       in   the   project
                developers; and

       v)       To provide manufacturing in solar sector in India.
31.    He submits that the Mission was to be implemented in three
phases.       NVVN     was      appointed    as   a   Nodal    Agency    for    the
implementation of Phase-I of the Mission. The first phase was divided
into two batches. The capacity allocated under Batch-I was 150 MW
Photovoltaic (PV) power generation. Under Batch-I, Saisudhir gave a
bid for and successfully implemented a 5 MW project.                     Batch-II
targeted 350 MW of PV power. Bids were invited for setting up of the
project by the bidders at their own cost and bids are awarded to a
bidder giving maximum discount on the bench mark tariff fixed by the
Central       Electricity     Regulatory    Commission    (CERC).    The       CERC
approved tariff under Batch-II was Rs.15.39 per unit. On this
Saisudhir gave a discount of Rs.7.17 per unit offering to supply Solar
Power at Rs.8.22 per unit.
Mr.Rao states that despite of investing more than the estimated
project cost of Rs.193 Crores, Saisudhir could not complete the
project in time due to various reasons completely beyond its control
including the reason of non-availability of sand in view of complete
ban imposed on sand mining in Andhra Pradesh by the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh.             Saisudhir, therefore, addressed a letter to NVVN
seeking extension of time by 2 months vide letter dated 13th January,
2013. NVVN rejected the request for extension of time by its letter
dated 31st January, 2013.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                          Page 21 of 72
In the very first paragraph of the claim statement filed before
the Arbitral Tribunal Saisudhir contended that:
"1.   .......The contention of the claimant in essence is that
       the respondent is not entitled for any damages as the
       respondent has not invested a single rupee towards the
       project and has not suffered any loss or damage. The
       respondent is merely a nodal agency for the
       implementation of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar
       Mission (JNNSM) and is required to act in conformity with
       the policies and objections of the mission and cannot take
       any action contrary to the objectives of the mission. The
       action of the respondent in seeking damages from the
       claimant has the effect of stifling and killing the
       development and production of solar energy. It is the
       further contention of the claimant that the respondent is
       also not entitled for any damages in view of provisions of
Section 73
&
74
of the Indian Contract Act."
32.    Mr.Rao says that though the NVVN has not suffered any loss,
however, in paragraph 1 of reply to the statement of claim, it is
contended that "....The delay in commissioning of project,
therefore, delays purchase and sale of solar power causing
loss of committed energy to discoms".              Further, NVVN in
paragraph 14 of reply to the statement of claim contended that
"Failure of the claimant in performing his obligations under the PPA
would not only            result in injury for failure to perform in
implementation of JNNSM but would also result in injury to
discoms for failure to fulfilment of Renewable Purchase Obligation
(RPO) with them. The respondent thus suffered tangible               and
intangible losses as a Nodal Agency for non performance of
claimant."
33.    Mr.Rao also submits that NVVN admitted in its pleadings that
the objectives of the Mission who is not designated as nodal agency
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                Page 22 of 72
for any purpose other than procuring solar power and therefore, it
cannot be canvassed that it was also designated for furthering any of
the purposes or objectives of the Mission except for the purchase of
solar power.
34.    Mr.Rao submits that the contention of the parties regarding the
objectives of the mission was considered in the majority award in
paras 69 to 73 who rejected the contention of NVVN. The majority
award held as under:
"71. The Mission was conceived with the avowed object
       of promoting Solar Power. It was not profitable or
       commercially viable to set up a Solar Power plant. Serious
       impetus is required to promote Solar Power, keeping in
       view the future power requirements. The objectives and
       the measures required to be taken to promote Solar Power
       are clearly spelt out in the preamble of the Mission.
       Everyone, who is associated with the Mission are
       bound by the objectives of the Mission. No one,
       particularly the agency that was entrusted with the
       task of implementing the Mission can contend that it
       is not bound by the objectives of the Mission. The
       best laid out plans go wary because long term goals
       envisaged by Mission are usually ignored for short
       term immediate benefits jeopardising the Mission. It
       is therefore, difficult to accept the contention of the
       respondent that it is merely concerned with the
       purchase of Solar Power and is not concerned with
       the objectives of the Mission. Considering the JNNS
       Mission and its objectives, the contention of the
       respondent that it is merely a nodal agency for procuring
       solar power from SPD's and is not concerned with the
       objectives of the Mission cannot be accepted. It is clear
       from clause 2.7 (d) of the guidelines for selection of Solar
       PV projects that an SPD is required to provide bank
       guarantees on count of bid bond on a graded scale in order
       to discourage adventurous bids. It is open to the
       respondent to sustain the same on the grounds specified in
       the Mission documents. It is not open to the respondent to
       contend that it is not at all concerned with the objectives
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 23 of 72
of the Mission. Various provisions in the Mission documents
       are to be considered harmoniously keeping in view the
       objectives sought to be achieved by Mission and the
       portion in the preamble designating the respondent as a
       nodal agency for procuring solar power from SPD's cannot
       be read in isolation completely excluding other provisions
       and the objectives."
He submits that it has incorrectly come to the conclusion in the
minority award wherein while dealing with the guidelines of Clause
2.6 it was held that ".....justifiably there was no other purpose for
NVVN other than procuring Solar Power under PPA." This finding in
the minority award that objectives of the mission are not binding on
NVVN, which is nodal agency for the implementation of the Mission is
absolutely perverse.
35.    The other contention of Saisudhir is that NVVN is under a Triple
Obligation to act in a reasonable and fair manner. Firstly, being State
within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution of India (in
refusing to grant reasonable extension of time considering Saisudhir
was at no fault in completing the project and was prevented in view of
blanket ban on sand mining in Andhra Pradesh by the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh.) Secondly, keeping in view of the objectives of the
mission viz; promotion of Solar Power and finally, in terms of
Section
74
of the Indian Contract Act, which mandates reasonable damages in
case of loss.
It is submitted by Mr.Rao that the judgments relied on by NVVN
however does not support the contention of NVVN and have
specifically provided that the State must act in a reasonable and fair
manner.      The issue regarding the requirement of NVVN to act in a
reasonable and fair manner was considered in the majority award in
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 24 of 72
paragraphs 75 to 84. Quoting from the very same judgments relied
on by NVVN, the majority award held:
"80. The legal position is thus exactly the opposite of
       what has been propounded by the respondent. While
       according to the respondent "The principles of
       administrative law like fairness, arbitrariness etc. have no
       place when dealing with the commercial transactions in
       which the government is a party," the judgment relied on
       by the respondent itself has clearly and categorically stated
       that "the court can examine the decision making
       process and interfere if it is found vitiated by
       malafides unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The
       state,   its   corporations,      instrumentalities      and
       agencies have the public duty to be fair to all
       concerned".
81. Thus the contention of the respondent that it is
       not required to act in a fair and reasonable manner
       cannot be accepted. ....."
Thus, the majority award is not required to be interfered with.
36.    It is contended by Mr.Rao that his client Saisudhir had pleaded
and produced the evidence in support of the contention that NVVN
had not suffered any loss who contrary to the scheme and object of
the Mission has levied damages. The majority award in paragraphs
89 to 93 considered the contention of NVVN that the claim is
premature. It was held as under:
"91. .....The contention that the respondent has not raised
       any demand for liquidated damages hence the claim is
       premature is misleading, as the respondent, under the
       facts of the case, is not required to raise any demand. The
       respondent however, is under an obligation to justify its
       entitlement for liquidated damages once the same is under
       challenge. Even in the written arguments, rather than
       providing justification, the respondent resorted to a
       misleading contention that it has not pleaded any
       loss as it had not raised any demand. The loss, if
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 25 of 72
any, is a question of fact, which the Tribunal has to
       determine on the basis of pleadings and proof. Once
       the claimant has asserted that the respondent has
       not invested a single rupee and has not suffered any
       loss, it is imperative for the respondent to give a
       justifiable response. The respondent cannot shirk or
       avoid its burden of showing loss merely on the
       ground that it has not raised the demand. Loss is
       different from raising a demand on account of loss. When
       the only dispute between the parties is whether the
       respondent is entitled to damages, for the loss sustained,
       the respondent escapes the liability to show the loss on the
       ground that it has not raised the demand. The question is,
       the entitlement of the respondent for damages, which it is
       under an obligation to justify irrespective of the fact
       whether it chose to make a demand for the same or not."
37.    It is stated by Mr.Rao that the majority award considered the
contention of NVVN that due to delay in supply of power mission has
suffered loss in paragraph 101 of the award. The majority award held
as under:
"101. The claimant on the other hand submitted that the
       Mission has not suffered any loss on account of delay.
       According to the claimant if the respondent is
       permitted to levy damages it would put a death knell
       on the claimant and the Mission would suffer. Except
       for making a statement the respondent has not
       stated as to what loss the Mission has suffered. We
       would have accepted the contention of the
       respondent that the Mission had suffered loss, had
       the claimant abandoned the project. In such a case
       loss to the Mission could have been assumed. We are
       not inclined to accept the contention that the Mission has
       suffered loss on count of delay. The very object of
       providing the high bid bond was 'to prevent adventurous
       bidding'. The respondent in the Written Submissions
       (in para 2.6) contended that the bid bond is
       submitted to ensure that the bidder executes the
       contract and does not run away after selection. In
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 26 of 72
the present case the bidder certainly did not run
       away, though there was delay. It is thus difficult to
       accept the contention that the Mission has suffered
       on count delay in completing the project."
It is also contended by Mr.Rao that the majority award also
considered the contention of NVVN that the delay has resulted in
injury to the discoms due to the delay in paragraph 102 of the Award.
The majority award held as under:
"102. The further contention of the respondent is that the
       delay has caused an injury to discoms as the respondent
       has failed to supply energy to discoms. The contention is
       not that the respondent has suffered any injury. The
       contention is that the breach on part of the claimant has
       resulted in consequential breach on part of the respondent
       is supplying energy to the discoms. Thus conversely, the
       respondent can claim damages from the claimant on the
       discoms making claim for damages against the
       respondent.     Discoms however, made no claim for
       damages against the respondent. Consequential breach on
       part of the respondent has not resulted in any loss to the
       respondent and hence, the respondent cannot raise any
       claim against the claimant."
He submits that after appreciation of pleadings and law, the
Arbitral Tribunal held as under:
"98. The law on the aspect of liquidated damages is
         crystal clear. The principle has been reiterated time and
         again. Breach simplicitor would not entitle a party for
         damages.      A party who suffered loss on account of
         breach is entitled to be compensated for the loss suffered
         and to the extent of loss suffered. In case where an
         amount is stipulated, a party who suffered loss on count
         of breach would be entitled for reasonable compensation
         not exceeding the amount. This aspect is clear from the
         judgments quoted above. Without exception all the
         judgments reiterated the very same legal position."
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 27 of 72
"105. As stated, the law is consistent and all the cases
         cited before us, Court have held that a party can claim
         damages only when it suffers loss. In Fateh Chand, Maula
         Bux, Rampur Distillery, United Shippers and Dredges,
         Praveen Oberoi, Vishal Engineers the courts denied
         damages on the ground that the party claiming damages
         have not suffered any loss."
38.    It is also submitted by Mr.Rao that on one hand, the NVVN had
not pleaded or made any effort to show that it had suffered any loss
on count of delay, as the stand of the NVVN was that the discoms
have suffered the loss, the mission has sufferd the loss and it is
premature for the NVVN to quantify the loss as it had not taken any
action even to encash the bank guarantees and the said contentions
were considered and rejected by the majority Arbitral Tribunal by
giving reasons. On the other hand, the minority award held that it is
inclined to toe the line of argument of the NVVN as it obviously could
not have pleaded the loss or produced any evidentiary evidence. The
NVVN is, as such, entitled to receive from the Saisudhir who had
delayed     the   commissioning   of   the   Power   Plant   a   reasonable
compensation.
39.    It is submitted that the decision in minority award granting
compensation of Rs.49,92,32,000/- is absolutely perverse. The
minority award could not have granted any compensation after
holding that there are no pleadings or evidence in support of the
claim for damages.
40.    Mr.Rao states that the decision in the minority award that NVVN
has not pleaded any loss, there is no evidence and still NVVN is
entitled for damages is absolutely perverse. The reasoning given in
the majority award is flawless and cannot be interdicted under
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                      Page 28 of 72
Section 34
of the Act. Thus, the objections of NVVN are liable to be
dismissed.
41.    Mr.Rao submits that the majority award, however, in violation
of Fundamental Policy of Indian law granted Rs.1.2 crores as
damages. The majority award held as under:-
"114. In view of the above, it is difficult to hold that the
       respondent has suffered loss, which needs to be
       compensated by the claimant. The AT therefore holds
       that the respondent has not suffered any loss in
       completing the project in time. However, since the
       claimant has failed to complete the work in time it
       has delayed the same for 2-5 months, which has
       delayed the supply of power to the respondent, the
       AT is of the view that the claimant is liable to pay
       Rs.1.2 Crores to the respondent as 20% of the amount
       specified in the original performance guarantee at the rate
       of Rs.30 Lacs per MW for the delayed performance."
42.    Mr.Rao contends that the majority arbitrations having correctly
appreciated the position of law that loss is sine qua non for damages
and damages cannot be granted merely on count of breach                       and
having specifically held       that "In view of above it is difficult of hold
that the respondent has suffered any loss which needs to be
compensated by the claimant.             The AT therefore, holds that the
respondent has not suffered any loss in completing the project in
time" violated the Fundamental Policy of Indian law by awarding
damages of Rs.1.2 Crores.
The    award     of    Rs.1.2   Crores   as   damages   is   clearly     by
disregarding the biding judgments of the Courts which the majority
arbitrators have taken note of.          The Supreme Court in
Associate
Builders v. DDA
(2015) 3 SCC 49 in para 27 held as under:
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                         Page 29 of 72
"Coming to each of the heads contained in Saw Pipe
       judgment, we will first deal with the head 'fundamental
       policy of Indian law'. It has already been seen from
       Renusagar Judgment that violation of
Foreign Exchange
       Act
and disregarding orders of superior courts in India
       would be regarded as being contrary to the fundamental
       policy of Indian law. To this it could be added that the
       biding effect of the judgment of a superior court being
       disregarded would be equally violative of the fundamental
       policy of Indian law."
Mr.Rao argued that the majority Arbitrators having once come
to the conclusion that damages cannot be awarded in the absence of
loss, and having held that NVVN has not suffered any loss,
disregarded the binding judgments. Hence, the award of damages of
Rs.1.2 crores in favour of NVVN is in violation of Fundamental Policy
of Indian Law.
43.    With regard to reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court
in ONGC v. Saw Pipes (supra), Mr.Rao submits that as per NVVN,
damages were awarded in the said judgment, without there being a
finding of loss and the arbitrators have committed a patent illegality
in holding that ONGC had suffered loss. In support thereof, the NVVN
relied upon paragraph 106 of the Majority award in which it has been
held as under:
"106.    Damages were allowed in the case of Saw Pipes
       and Construction and Design Services cases on a specific
       finding that the breach has resulted in losses. In Saw
       Pipes there is a specific findings that ONGC suffered
       huge loss on count of failure to supply pipes. It is
       not even contended in Saw Pipes that what has been
       stipulated as liquidated damages was unreasonable.
       Thus in the said case breach, loss as well as
       reasonableness of damages stipulated are proved. For the
       said reason the court allowed damages."
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                Page 30 of 72
Mr.Rao says that the contention of NVVN that in
Saw Pipes
(supra) damages were awarded even in the absence of finding of loss
is incorrect. In fact
in that case
there was a clear finding of loss but
there was no proof regarding the extent of loss. This is evident from
para 67 of
the said judgment
which is reproduced here as under:
"67. Take for illustration construction of a road or a
         bridge. If there is delay in completing the construction of
         road or bridge within the stipulated time, then it would
         be difficult to prove how much loss is suffered by the
         society/State. Similarly, in the present case, delay took
         place in deployment of rigs and on that basis actual
         production of gas from platform B-121 had to be
         changed. It is undoubtedly true that the witness
         has stated that redeployment plan was made
         keeping in mind several constraints including
         shortage of casing pipes. The Arbitral Tribunal,
         therefore, took into consideration the aforesaid statement
         volunteered by the witness that shortage of casing
         pipes was only one of the several reasons and not
         the only reason which led to change in deployment of
         plan or redeployment of rigs Trident II platform B-121. In
         our view, in such a contract, it would be difficult to
         prove exact loss or damage which the parties suffer
         because of the breach thereof. In such a situation, if
         the parties have pre-estimated such loss after clear
         understanding, it would be totally unjustified to arrive at
         the conclusion that the party who has committed breach
         of the contract is not liable to pay compensation. It would
         be against the specific provisions of
Sections 73
and
74
of the Indian Contract Act. There was nothing on
         record that compensation contemplated by the
         parties was in any way unreasonable. It has been
         specifically mentioned that it was an agreed
         genuine pre-estimate of damages duly agreed by
         the parties. It was also mentioned that the liquidated
         damages are not by way of penalty. It was also provided
         in the contract that such damages are to be recovered by
         the purchaser from the bills for payment of the cost of
         material submitted by the contractor. No evidence is
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 31 of 72
led by the claimant to establish that the stipulated
         condition was by way of penalty or the
         compensation contemplated was, in any way,
         unreasonable. There was no reason for the Tribunal not
         to rely upon the clear and unambiguous terms of
         agreement stipulating pre-estimate damages because of
         delay in supply of goods. Further, while extending the
         time for delivery of the goods, the respondent was
         informed that it would be required to pay stipulated
         damages.
Mr.Rao says that in
Saw Pipes
case (supra), the Supreme
Court found that due to breach on part of Saw Pipes, ONGC had
suffered loss. Specifically there is proof of loss in the form of
redeployment of rigs Trident II platform B-121 but 'difficult to prove
exact loss or damage.'
Mr.Rao referred the LD clause in
Saw Pipes
(supra) case which
is entirely different from the LD clause in the present case.
The LD
clause in the
Saw Pipes
case (supra) provided as under:
"38. .....
"11.       Failure and termination clause/liquidated
         damages.--Time and date of delivery shall be essence of
         the contract. If the contractor fails to deliver the stores,
         or any instalment thereof within the period fixed for such
         delivery in the schedule or at any time repudiates the
         contract before the expiry of such period, the purchaser
         may, without prejudice to any other right or remedy
         available to him, recover damages for breach of the
         contract:
(a) Recovery from the contractor as agreed
         liquidated damages are not by way of penalty, a
         sum equivalent to 1% (one per cent) of the contract price
         of the whole unit per week for such delay or part thereof
         (this is an agreed, genuine pre-estimate of
         damages duly agreed by the parties) which the
         contractor has failed to deliver within the period fixed for
         delivery in the schedule, where delivery thereof is
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 32 of 72
accepted after expiry of the aforesaid period. It may be
         noted that such recovery of liquidated damages may be
         up to 10% of the contract price of whole unit of stores
         which the contractor has failed to deliver within the
         period fixed for delivery......"
It is stated by Mr.Rao that
Saw Pipes
(supra) is a case where
the parties have agreed that "this is an agreed, genuine pre-estimate
of damages duly agreed by the parties." In view of this clause, the
Supreme Court held as under:
"41.        Therefore, when parties have expressly
         agreed that recovery from the contractor for breach of
         the contract is pre-estimated genuine liquidated
         damages and is not by way of penalty duly agreed
         by the parties, there was no justifiable reason for the
         Arbitral Tribunal to arrive at a conclusion that still the
         purchaser should prove loss suffered by it because of
         delay in supply of goods.
42. ......Not only this, it was also agreed that:
(a) liquidated damages for delay in supplies will be
         recovered by paying the authority from the bill for
         payment of cost of material submitted by the contractor;
(b) liquidated damages were not by way of penalty
         and it was agreed to be genuine pre-estimate of
         damages duly agreed by the parties;
(c) this pre-estimate of liquidated damages is not
         assailed by the respondent as unreasonable
         assessment of damages by the parties."
44.
In a nut shell, counsel has referred the following different
features between the
Saw Pipes
case (supra) and the present case
who has tried to canvass that due to which the ratio of
Saw Pipes
(supra) cannot be applied to the present case:
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 33 of 72
i.      In
Saw Pipes
(supra) parties have specifically agreed that
              the LD's are genuine pre-estimate of actual damages and
              not penalty.
In the present case, contract merely provided LD
              and has not specified whether it is genuine pre-estimate or
              penalty. The present case is squarely covered by the
              judgment of
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra)

      ii.     In
Saw Pipes
(supra) no evidence is led by the claimant to
              establish that the stipulated condition was by way of
              penalty.
In the present case, Saisudhir specifically pleaded
              that LD's are in the nature of penalty (para 19 of claim
              statement)      NVVN   admitted/pleaded    that   the     LD's    are
              provided to prevent the bidder from abandoning the project
              and to secure performance of contract and also pleaded that
              where the LD's are intended to secure performance of the
              contract' it would be penalty. Thus, admittedly the present
              case is a case of penalty.
iii.
In
Saw Pipes
(supra) there are no pleadings or evidence
              that the compensation contemplated was, in any way,
              unreasonable.
45.        It is submitted by him that in the present case, Saisudhir
pleaded that the entire action of NVVN is unreasonable. It was also
pleaded that NVVN levy of damages is not reasonable and is in
violation of
Section 74
of the Contract Act.            Once the facts in the
present case are to be considered as different from other cases
referred by Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG, no advantage can be
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                           Page 34 of 72
derived by the NVVN. Mr.Rao submits that the Arbitral Tribunal was
correct to the extent that "In Saw Pipes there is a specific finding that
ONGC suffered huge loss on count of failure to supply pipes. It is not
even contended in Saw Pipes that what has been stipulated as
liquidated damages was unreasonable" and the objection of NVVN is
absolutely not correct.
46.    The objections of NVVN based on Public Utility and it is
impossible to assess damages hence, NVVN is entitled for agreed LD's
cannot be raised as NVVN has failed to plead the same.
47.    The first submission of Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG is that
the majority award is patently illegal and suffers from errors apparent
on the face of the record. It is rendered against the pleadings, law
and contrary to the relevant clauses of the contract, therefore, it
deserves to be set aside by this Court. It is submitted by him that
the Arbitrators, even while holding that it is difficult to hold that NVVN
has suffered loss, have thereafter held that "therefore, NVVN has not
suffered any loss."           He says that the Arbitrators have failed to
appreciate the settled position of law that in cases where it is difficult
or impossible to compute the actual loss suffered as a result of the
breach of contract, the genuine pre-estimate of damages, as provided
in the contractual terms agreed to between the parties, would be
treated as a measure for the reasonable compensation for liquidated
damages to be awarded. He referred the celebrated judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra).
48.    Mr.Maninder Singh submits that the law
laid down in
the above
referred case is being followed in all subsequent judgments delivered
by the Supreme Court and the High Courts.            The said judgment is
binding in nature. But in the majority award, the Arbitral Tribunal
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 35 of 72
without appreciating the real disputes has published the Award which
is perverse and against the public policy.
49.    It is argued by Mr.Maninder Singh that the finding in para 106
of the Majority Award about the mandate of
Saw Pipes
case (supra)
by mentioning that ONGC
in that case
had suffered huge loss on
count of failure to supply pipes is entirely incorrect.
On this aspect, I
agree with the argument of Mr.Maninder Singh that the Majority
Award is totally contrary to the observations made at page 43 of the
Saw Pipes
(supra) judgment, wherein the Arbitral Tribunal
in that
case
had recorded a specific finding that ONGC had failed to establish
any loss.
50.    Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG has refuted the submissions
made on behalf of Saisudhir that NVVN has neither proved nor
pleaded that any loss has been caused to it on account of the delay
caused by Saisudhir in commissioning of the solar power. He also
submits that the Saisudhir was neither forced, nor the amount
mentioned in clause 4.6 stipulated is in terrorem, as Saisudhir with
open eyes had signed the contract and it knew the consequences in
case of delay in the project. It was a commercial deal; Saisudhir now
cannot be permitted to give any excuse by making the submission
that the clause is in the nature of forcing a party to perform the
contract, thus, it would be merely penalty.
He submits that the said contention is false and contrary to
pleadings of the NVVN and the Contract, as it was specifically pleaded
that loss has been caused to it by the said delay on account of
Saisudhir.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 36 of 72
51.    Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG submits that from the day one
the disputes had arisen between the parties, the submission of NVVN
was that electricity is utility service being provided by it.      It is
submitted that it is neither practical nor possible to compute damages
for all tangible/intangible losses with reference to any utility where
hundreds and thousands of the users/consumers are dependent upon
such utility service. It is a settled position in law that the named
amount of damages in the agreement is the genuine pre-estimate and
there is no obligation to prove the loss.
52.    Mr.Maninder Singh also submits that it is an admitted position
that as per sale price of Rs.8.22 per unit quoted by them, Saisudhir is
receiving revenue of approximately Rs.2.5 crores per month from the
sale of solar power to NVVN and this amount per annum is to the tune
of approximately Rs.30 crores. The total revenue earned by Saisudhir
from the solar power project over a period of 25 years, for which
NVVN is obliged to purchase solar power at a fixed rate, would
amount to approximately Rs.750 crores [Rs.30 crores per annum X
25 years = Rs.750 crores]. As such, the compensation for pre-
estimated damages arising from delay in commissioning the project,
being Rs.60.154 crores as calculated in terms of Clause 4.6 and
agreed to by the parties, would amount to only about 8% of the total
revenue earnings of Saisudhir from the Solar Power Project (being
approx. Rs.750 crores).
Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG submits that from the above, it
becomes clear that in such contracts as in the present case, where
the actual loss/damage cannot be computed/assessed, the genuine
pre-estimate of damages, as agreed between the parties, serves as a
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                Page 37 of 72
measure for reasonable compensation to be awarded in case of
breach of the contract.
53.    He submits that all arguments of judicial review etc. raised on
behalf of Saisudhir before this Court are as if a Writ Petition is being
considered by this Court for non-grant of an opportunity to participate
in the bidding process under the Mission.       In the present case, a
contract has followed the Mission and the entire relationship between
NVVN and Saisudhir is to be determined within the four corners of the
agreement signed between them. NVVN had entered into this contract
purely as a commercial contract for supply of electricity to be
distributed to thousands and millions of consumers as utility service.
54.    He refuted the argument on behalf of Saisudhir that the
objective of the Solar Mission is not for immediate supply of electricity
is totally misconceived. The obligations of the contractor are governed
by the contract where the stipulation in Clause 4.6 has been accepted
and where even one day's delay invites imposition of liquidated
damages. Similarly, the guidelines which were sought to be relied
upon have no overriding effect on the contract executed between the
parties. The relationship between the parties is purely governed by
the contract. Thus, the Arbitral Award dated 21st July, 2015 deserves
to be set aside by this Court, being contrary to the terms of the
contract and also the statutory provisions of the
Contract Act
as well
as the judgments of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
55.    Let me now deal with the legal issues raised by both the parties
in view of facts and circumstances in the present matter. Firstly, I
would like to refer the provision of relevant Clause 4.6 of the pre-
estimate liquidated damages of the PPA which is reproduced herein
below:-
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 38 of 72
"....4.6 Liquidated Damages for delay in commencement of
       supply of power to NVVN

       4.6.1     If the SPD is unable to commence supply of power
                 to NVVN by the Scheduled Commissioning Date
                 other than for the reasons specified in Article
                 4.5.1, the SPD shall pay to NVVN, Liquidated
                 Damages for the delay in such commencement of
                 supply of power and making the Contracted
                 Capacity available for dispatch by the Scheduled
                 Commissioning Dates as per the following:
a.       Delay upto one (1) month - NVVN will encash 20%
                 of total Performance Bank Guarantee proportionate
                 to the Capacity not commissioned.
b.       Delay of more than one (1) month and upto two
                 months - NVVN will encash 40% of the total
                 Performance Bank Guarantee proportionate to the
                 Capacity not commissioned.
c.       Delay of more than two and upto three months -
NVVN will encash the remaining Performance Bank
                 Guarantee proportionate to the Capacity not
                 commissioned.
4.6.2     In case the commissioning of Power Project is
                 delayed beyond three (3) months, the SPD shall
                 pay to NVVN, the Liquidated Damages at rate of
                 Rs.1,00,000/- per MW per day of delay for the
                 delay in such remaining Capacity which is not
                 commissioned. The amount of liquidated damages
                 would be recovered from the SPD from the
                 payments due on account of sale of solar power to
                 NVVN.................."
56.    In terms of Sub-clauses a, b & c of Article 4.6.1 of PPA
depending on the actual delay in the commissioning of the project,
the NVVN's case before the Arbitral Tribunal as well as before this
Court is that NVVN is entitled to levy liquidated damages amounting
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 39 of 72
to 20%, 40% or remaining 40% of the total Performance Bank
Guarantee proportionate to the delay, by encashing the said Bank
Guarantees. The said
Article 4.6
is an integral part of the Power
Purchase Agreement which is not disputed by any party.
57.    As far as the delay in commencement of supply of powers is
concerned, it is not denied by the Saisudhir that there is a breach on
its part. It is also not disputed that the time was the essence of the
contract.     As per Clause 4.1.1 (c) of the Contract Agreement, the
Saisudhir was obliged at its own cost and risk to commence the
supply of power as per schedule date, i.e. 26th February, 2013 which
is not supplied as on date and the delay has happened. Counsel for
the Saisudhir does not dispute the figure of calculation of liquidated
damages imposed by NVVN.
Saisudhir also does not dispute the factual position that the
delay caused in commissioning the solar power in the present case is
not attributable to Force Majeure, nor its case is attributed towards
NVVN, rather it is admitted that the delay has occurred on the side of
Saisudhir who had tried to justify before the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the
said clause of force majeure was invoked by the Saisudhir.
58.    It is apparent from the above that Clause 4.6 of the PPA
provides for the pre-estimate of damages, as agreed between the
parties, to be paid by Saisudhir to NVVN in case of any delay in
supply of solar power as per the terms of the Contract. The provision
of Clause 4.6, agreed to between the parties, provides for the
formula/methodology for genuine pre-estimate of damages. The
quantum of delay and the quantum of electricity are relevant factors
in operating the provision of Clause 4.6 of the Agreement.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 40 of 72
59.    The principles of law governing the provision for genuine pre-
estimate of damages in contracts where it is difficult or impossible to
compute the amount of actual loss caused by breach of contract in
those type of cases where in a contract for supply of a public utility
service, one would get the answer from the provisions of
Sections 73
and
74
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as well as the various judicial
pronouncements of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, who
have, from time to time, interpreted the above said provisions after
considering the respective clauses of liquidated damages as agreed
between the parties.
60.    The said relevant provisions have been reproduced herein
below:
Section 73
of the Contract Act provides as under:-
"73. Compensation for loss or damage caused by
       breach of contract.-- When a contract has been broken,
       the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive,
       from the party who has broken the contract, compensation
       for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which
       naturally arose in the usual course of things from such
       breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the
       contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it.
Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and
       indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach.
       Compensation for failure to discharge obligation
       resembling those created by contract.--When an
       obligation resembling those created by contract has been
       incurred and has not been discharged, any person injured
       by the failure to discharge it is entitled to receive the same
       compensation from the party in default, as if such person
       had contracted to discharge it and had broken his contract.
       Explanation.--In estimating the loss or damage arising
       from a breach of contract, the means which existed of
       remedying the inconvenience caused by the non-
       performance of the contract must be taken into account...."
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 41 of 72
Section 74
of the Contract Act, which deals with liquidated
damages for breach of contract, provides as under:-
"74. Compensation for breach of contract where
         penalty stipulated for:- [When a contract has been
         broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount
         to be paid in case of such breach, or if the contract
         contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the
         party complaining of the breach is entitled, whether or
         not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused
         thereby, to receive from the party who has broken the
         contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the
         amount so named or, as the case may be, the penalty
         stipulated for.
Explanation.-- A stipulation for increased interest from
         the date of default may be a stipulation by way of
         penalty.]
         Exception -- When any person enters into any bail-bond,
         recognizance or other instrument of the same nature or,
         under the provisions of any law, or under the orders of
         the [Central Government] or of any [State Government],
         gives any bond for the performance of any public duty or
         act in which the public are interested, he shall be liable,
         upon breach of the condition of any such instrument, to
         pay the whole sum mentioned therein.
Explanation.-- A person who enters into a contract with
         Government does not necessarily thereby undertake any
         public duty, or promise to do an act in which the public
         are interested.........."
61.    There is no force in the argument of Mr.Rao that the NVVN has
pleaded anywhere in the pleading that NVVN has suffered any
damages or any amount is invested, rather as per the pleadings in
the Statement of Defence filed on behalf of NVVN before the Arbitral
Tribunal, the argument of the learned ASG is correct.       The relevant
averments made therein are reproduced herein below:-
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 42 of 72
".............The amount of liquidated damages is a genuine
       pre-estimate of the actual loss suffered by the Respondent
       due to the delay by the Claimant in supply of solar power.
       Not only had the Respondent made an investment in this
       project by agreeing to purchase the solar power from the
       Claimant at a rate offered by them in RFP for 25 years,
       irrespective of any fluctuation in the rate over the years,
       but had also been dependent on the Claimant's promise to
       fulfill his obligations under the contract on time so that the
       Respondent could in turn fulfill his responsibilities as the
       nodal government agency for supply of solar power to the
       distributors. Therefore, since the amount of pre estimated
       damages to be paid by the Claimant on default had been
       voluntarily agreed to by both the parties at the time of
       signing of the PPA, the Claimant shall now be liable to pay
       the same................"
"................It is denied that the Respondent has not invested
       any money towards the project as alleged. It is submitted
       that the investment of the Respondent is in its
       commitment to the Claimant to purchase power from the
       Claimant's Project at a agreed higher rate tariff for full
       term of 25 years irrespective of competition/lower price
       expected in Solar Power in future years. The delay in
       commissioning of project, therefore, delays the purchase
       and sale of solar power, causing loss of committed energy
       to Discoms.................."
"....................In fact the discounted tariff which has been
       offered by the Claimant is still much higher than the tariff
       fixed by CERC for (non-solar) Thermal Power Plants and
       the Claimant to take advantage of this higher tariff for a
       period of 25 years, of its own volition and will made its bid
       for the project and gave the discount..............."
"...............That failure of the Claimant in performing his
       obligations under the PPA would not only result in injury
       for failure to perform in implementation of the JNNSM but
       would also result in injury to Discoms for failure to
       fulfilment of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) in terms
       of Article 6.8.3 of the PSA signed by Respondent with
       them. The Respondents has thus suffered tangible and
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 43 of 72
intangible losses as a Nodal Agency for non-performance
       of Claimant..............."
"...........It is however denied that the Respondent is not
       entitled to any damages as alleged. It is denied that the
       Respondent has not suffered any loss as alleged........."
".............That the PPA was signed only under the condition
       that the Claimant Company should start the supply of
       power on or before the Scheduled Commissioning Date so
       that the Respondent Company could further sell the solar
       power bundled with thermal power to distribution
       Companies for distribution to the general public for
       domestic and commercial use. It is submitted that timely
       supply of solar power by the Claimant was an essential
       part of the entire cycle of sale and onward distribution of
       electricity by the Respondent company and because of the
       delay by the Claimant, the Respondent has not only
       suffered a huge loss of profit but has also fallen back on its
       own target of supplying solar power to the electricity
       distributors due to no fault of their own. Moreover, the
       Respondent Company has agreed under the PPA to buy
       solar power from the Claimant at the rate proposed by the
       Claimant for 25 years irrespective of any fluctuation in the
       actual rate over the years. Not only does this reflect the
       trust of the Respondent in the Claimant company's ability
       to honour the contract but also shows the enormous
       investment made by the Respondent by way of
       commitment and reputation in the entire Scheme.
       Consequently, the Liquidated Damages fixed under the
       clause 4.6 of the PPA are completely justified in light of the
       losses suffered by the Respondent......................."
".................In the present case, the amount stipulated as
       liquidated damages is a genuine pre estimate of the
       damages suffered by the Respondent as elaborated earlier.
       Under no circumstances can it be said that clause 4.6 is
       meant as a threat to the Claimant or that the amount is so
       extravagant or unconscionable as to completely exceed the
       actual quantum of damages. In fact, clause 4.6 of the PPA
       envisages encashment of only 20% of the total
       Performance Bank Guarantee proportionate to the capacity
       not commissioned for a delay of upto one month, 40%
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 44 of 72
encashment for delay of one month to two months and the
       remaining value of the guarantee only after a delay of
       more than two months upto three months. This clearly
       shows that the amount of liquidated damages is only to
       mitigate the damages suffered by the Respondent as a
       consequence of delay and is hence distributed over a
       period of time to be levied only when actual damages are
       caused and also to give an opportunity to the Claimant to
       commence supply as early as possible to avoid paying a
       higher amount of liquidated damages............"
"................It is submitted that as already elucidated in the
       previous paras, the Respondent has suffered huge losses
       because of the delay by the Claimant in commissioning the
       solar power project. Further, it is denied that the liquidated
       damages provided under clause 4.6 is not a genuine pre
       estimate of loss suffered by the Respondent................."
"................Not only had the Claimant known from the very
       beginning i.e. since before the signing of the PPA, of its
       financial liability in case of delay in commissioning the
       project, the amount to be paid as damages was also
       known and is completely reasonable considering the extent
       of the loss incurred by the Respondent company.................."
62.    The second argument of Mr.Rao has also no force that the
NVVN has not pleaded its case of public utility and no benefit can be
derived by the NVVN, as in para-19 of the Statement of Defence filed
before the Arbitral Tribunal, it was specifically pleaded as under:-
".....That the PPA was signed only under the condition that
       the Claimant Company should start the supply of power on
       or before the Scheduled Commissioning Date so that the
       Respondent Company could further sell the solar power
       bundled with thermal power to distribution Companies for
       distribution to the general public for domestic and
       commercial use. It is submitted that timely supply of solar
       power by the Claimant was an essential part of the entire
       cycle of sale and onward distribution of electricity by the
       Respondent company, and because of the delay by the
       Claimant, the Respondent has not only suffered a huge
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 45 of 72
loss of profit but has also fallen back on its own target of
       supplying solar power to the electricity distributors due to
       no fault of their own. Moreover, the Respondent Company
       has agreed under the PPA to buy solar power from the
       Claimant at the rate proposed by the Claimant for 25
       years, irrespective of any fluctuation in the actual rate over
       the years. Not only does this reflect the trust of the
       Respondent in the Claimant company's ability to honour
       the contract but also shows the enormous investment
       made by the Respondent by way of commitment and
       reputation in the entire Scheme.           Consequently, the
       Liquidated Damages fixed under the clause 4.6 of the PPA
       are completely justified in light of the losses suffered by
       the Respondent."
63.    Third submission of Mr.Rao is without any substance that NVVN
has not specifically pleaded that it has suffered any damages, as well
as the issue of public utility. It is evident from the pleadings and the
written submissions filed on behalf of NVVN before the Arbitral
Tribunal, inter alia, alleged as under:-
"3.21 It must also be kept in mind that though it is a
       purely commercial transaction but it relates to a service of
       prime public importance and deprivation of such public
       utility though not capable of being strictly evaluated can be
       compensated for by the Arbitrators.
3.22 Please see Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgment in 2003
       (5) SCC 705 ONGC Vs. Saw Pipes Ltd. wherein it was
       specifically laid down that the in construction of public
       utilities like roads, bridges etc. (which would include solar
       power plants) it would be difficult to prove how much loss
       is suffered by the society/state on account of delay in
       performance of the contract. It was further laid down that
       in such cases if the parties have a pre-estimated such loss,
       it would be unjustified to come at a conclusion that the
       party in breach need not pay compensation as the party
       aggrieved could not prove the actual loss.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 46 of 72
3.23 In the present case also the Claimant has admittedly
       delayed in commissioning its Solar Power Project by nearly
       two months in regard to 10MW and by about 4 months in
       regard to the remaining 10 MWs. The scheduled
       commissioning date as per the PPA was 26.02.2013.
However,    the  Claimant     commissioned    10MW     on
       26.04.2013 and the remaining 10 MW on 24.07.2013.
3.24 It is noteworthy that in case of Solar PV power
       projects, in case of failure of the claimant to commission
       the project or in case of delay in such commissioning, it is
       not possible to assess the loss because the Solar Power to
       be generated by the Claimant's project cannot be replaced
       by Solar Power generated by any other project as all such
       Solar Projects are tied down with agreements to supply
       various discoms after bundling of power. Such power also
       cannot be replaced by thermal power as that would be
       contrary to the purposes of the JNNNSM and would not be
       usable to fulfill the requirement of various discoms to use a
       proportion of renewable energy in their business.
3.25 It is therefore clear that in the present case though a
       loss occurs due to delay in commissioning of the Claimant's
       project, it cannot be evaluated as stated above and
       therefore the pre-estimate of such loss stated as liquidated
       damages and which is directly relatable to the bid
       submitted by the Claimant has to be treated as a genuine
       pre-estimate of loss and would not fall within the definition
       of penalty as contained in
Section 74
of the contract act.
       Thus, the Claimant is bound to pay liquidated damages to
       the Respondent in terms of
Article 4.6
of the PPA (Page 82
       of Volume 1).
.......................
3.30 ........the investment of the NVVN in this project is the
       promise to buy power from the Claimant at a fix rate for
       25 years.
......................
6.2 It must be kept in mind that the LD are being levied
       not due to delay in delivery of power or delay in sale of
       power but it is due to delay in commissioning of the
       project. It is noteworthy that as argued hereinabove, in
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 47 of 72
the instant case the fact that there is a loss is evident from
       the delay in commissioning of the Plant and there being
       non-availability of contracted capacity of 20MW power
       from the project for the delay period. In absence of a
       process to evaluate the exact loss in case of a solar PV
       Project being a public utility, a graded figure agreed to
       between the parties as a genuine pre-estimate of damages
       would    be    a   legally   binding     provision    on    the
       Claimant................"
64.    Admittedly, the electricity is utility service; the facility is to be
enjoyed by the public immediately once it is supplied. It is practically
impossible to assess loss as the said utility is enjoyed by thousands of
users/consumers who all the times kept on waiting for utility service.
65.    From the nature of the clause, the liquidated damages provided
under Clause 4.6 are a genuine pre-estimate of the damages, agreed
to by the parties, and have nothing to do with the actual proof of loss.
The definition of the penalty clause as given by Black's Law
Dictionary, Eighth Edition, on page 1169 is "a contractual provision
that assesses against a defaulting party an excessive monetary
charge unrelated to the actual harm."
66.    One of the contentions on behalf of Saisudhir in its arguments is
that NVVN has not proved any loss from the delay caused by
Saisudhir in commissioning the supply of solar power. From a reading
of the provision of
Section 74
of the Contract Act, it becomes
abundantly clear that when a genuine pre-estimate of damages for
breach of contract is provided in the contract, as agreed by the
parties, the party complaining of breach would be required to receive
such reasonable compensation whether or not actual damage or loss
is proved to have been caused thereby.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                     Page 48 of 72
67.    As far as back in 1969, while dealing with the provisions of
Section 73
and
74
of the Contract Act, three Judges Bench of the
Supreme Court made the following pertinent observations in the case
of
Maula Bux
(supra) :-
"6.   .........It is true that in every case of breach of
       contract the person aggrieved by the breach is not required
       to prove actual loss or damage suffered by him before he
       can claim a decree, and the court is competent to award
       reasonable compensation in case of breach even if no
       actual damage is proved to have been suffered in
       consequence of the breach of contract. But the expression
       'whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have
       been caused thereby' is intended to cover different classes
       of contracts which come before the courts. In case of
       breach of some contracts it may be impossible for the court
       to assess compensation arising from breach, while in other
       cases compensation can be calculated in accordance with
       established rules. Where the court is unable to assess the
       compensation, the sum named by the parties if it be
       regarded as a genuine pre-estimate may be taken into
       consideration as the measure of reasonable compensation,
       but not if the sum named is in the nature of a penalty.
       Where loss in terms of money can be determined, the
       party claiming compensation must prove the loss suffered
       by him..................."
68.    It is clear that in such contracts where it is difficult/impossible
to assess the actual loss, the genuine pre-estimate of damages as
agreed between the parties may be taken into consideration as the
measure of reasonable compensation. In the present case, the
agreement in question is a contract for supply of electricity which is
further to be bundled with power from other sources and supplied to
various distribution utilities for further supply to individual consumers.
The distribution of power which were to be generated by the Saisudhir
was supposed to be utilized by the consumers.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 49 of 72
69.
In the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra), the Supreme Court was
seized with an Arbitral Award arising out of a dispute regarding a
contract for supply of steel casing pipes. In that case, the respondent
had delayed the supply of casing pipes to the petitioner beyond the
agreed date of delivery. Clause 11 of the Contract
in that case
provided for the recovery of liquidated damages from the contractor
in case of delay in supply of the casing pipes. Despite holding that the
delay in supply could not be attributed to a Force Majeure event [as in
the present case], the Arbitral Tribunal passed its award in the
following terms:-
"34. ..........Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal considered
       various decisions of this Court regarding recovery of
       liquidated damages and arrived at the conclusion that it
       was for the appellant to establish that it had suffered any
       loss because of the breach committed by the respondent in
       not supplying the goods within the prescribed time-limit.
       The Arbitral Tribunal thereafter appreciated the evidence
       and arrived at the conclusion that in view of the statement
       volunteered by Mr. Arumoy Das, it was clear that shortage
       of casing pipes was only one of the other reasons which led
       to the change in the deployment plan and that it has failed
       to establish its case that it has suffered any loss in terms
       of money cecause of delay in supply of goods under the
       contract. Hence, the Arbitral Tribunal held that the
       appellant has wrongfully withheld the agreed amount of US
       $ 3,04,970.20 and Rs 15,75,559 on account of customs
       duty, sales tax, freight charges deducted by way of
       liquidated damages..........."
In the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra), it has been recorded by the
Supreme Court that the Arbitral Tribunal had come to the conclusion
that ONGC had failed to establish suffering of any loss.
It was also
observed that
Saw Pipes
(supra) was also not a case of force
majeure. The Tribunal, on such a finding that ONGC had not suffered
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 50 of 72
any loss, had held that the money retained by the ONGC was
wrongful. The said finding of the Arbitral Tribunal had been upheld by
both the Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the Bombay
High Court.
The Supreme Court had reversed the finding of the Arbitral
Tribunal and held that liquidated damages would be payable as
genuine estimate of the losses and made the following observations:-
"64. It is apparent from the aforesaid reasoning recorded
       by the Arbitral Tribunal that it failed to consider
Sections
       73
and
74
of the Indian Contract Act and the
ratio
laid
       down in
Fateh Chand
case wherein it is specifically held
       that jurisdiction of the court to award compensation in case
       of breach of contract is unqualified except as to the
       maximum stipulated; and compensation has to be
       reasonable. Under
Section 73
, when a contract has been
       broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to
       receive compensation for any loss caused to him which the
       parties knew when they made the contract to be likely to
       result from the breach of it. This section is to be read with
Section 74
, which deals with penalty stipulated in the
       contract, inter alia (relevant for the present case) provides
       that when a contract has been broken, if a sum is named
       in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such
       breach, the party complaining of breach is entitled,
       whether or not actual loss is proved to have been caused,
       thereby to receive from the party who has broken the
       contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the
       amount so named.
Section 74
emphasizes that in case of
       breach of contract, the party complaining of the breach is
       entitled to receive reasonable compensation whether or not
       actual loss is proved to have been caused by such breach.
       Therefore, the emphasis is on reasonable compensation. If
       the compensation named in the contract is by way of
       penalty, consideration would be different and the party is
       only entitled to reasonable compensation for the loss
       suffered. But if the compensation named in the contract for
       such breach is genuine pre-estimate of loss which the
       parties knew when they made the contract to be likely to
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 51 of 72
result from the breach of it, there is no question of proving
       such loss or such party is not required to lead evidence to
       prove actual loss suffered by him. Burden is on the other
       party to lead evidence for proving that no loss is likely to
       occur by such breach. Take for illustration: if the parties
       have agreed to purchase cotton bales and the same were
       only to be kept as a stock-in-trade. Such bales are not
       delivered on the due date and thereafter the bales are
       delivered beyond the stipulated time, hence there is breach
       of the contract. The question which would arise for
       consideration is -- whether by such breach the party has
       suffered any loss. If the price of cotton bales fluctuated
       during that time, loss or gain could easily be proved. But if
       cotton bales are to be purchased for manufacturing yarn,
       consideration would be different.........................
............... 66.
In
Maula Bux
case the Court has specifically
       held that it is true that in every case of breach of contract
       the person aggrieved by the breach is not required to
       prove actual loss or damage suffered by him before he can
       claim a decree and the court is competent to award
       reasonable compensation in a case of breach even if no
       actual damage is proved to have been suffered in
       consequence of the breach of contract. The Court has also
       specifically held that in case of breach of some contracts it
       may be impossible for the court to assess compensation
       arising from breach.
67. Take for illustration construction of a road or a
       bridge. If there is delay in completing the construction of
       road or bridge within the stipulated time, then it would be
       difficult to prove how much loss is suffered by the
       society/State. Similarly, in the present case, delay took
       place in deployment of rigs and on that basis actual
       production of gas from platform B-121 had to be
       changed................ In our view, in such a contract, it
       would be difficult to prove exact loss or damage which the
       parties suffer because of the breach thereof. In such a
       situation, if the parties have pre-estimated such loss after
       clear understanding, it would be totally unjustified to arrive
       at the conclusion that the party who has committed breach
       of the contract is not liable to pay compensation. It would
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                     Page 52 of 72
be against the specific provisions of
Sections 73
and
74
of
       the Indian Contract Act. There was nothing on record that
       compensation contemplated by the parties was in any way
       unreasonable. It has been specifically mentioned that it
       was an agreed genuine pre-estimate of damages duly
       agreed by the parties. It was also mentioned that the
       liquidated damages are not by way of penalty...............
       There was no reason for the Tribunal not to rely upon the
       clear and unambiguous terms of agreement stipulating
       pre-estimate damages because of delay in supply of
       goods............................
68.    From the aforesaid discussions, it can be held that:
(1)   Terms of the contract are required to be taken into
       consideration before arriving at the conclusion whether the
       party claiming damages is entitled to the same.
(2)   If the terms are clear and unambiguous stipulating
       the liquidated damages in case of the breach of the
       contract unless it is held that such estimate of
       damages/compensation is unreasonable or is by way of
       penalty, party who has committed the breach is required to
       pay such compensation and that is what is provided in
Section 73
of the Contract Act.
(3)
Section 74
is to be read along with
Section 73
and,
       therefore, in every case of breach of contract, the person
       aggrieved by the breach is not required to prove actual
       loss or damage suffered by him before he can claim a
       decree. The court is competent to award reasonable
       compensation in case of breach even if no actual damage is
       proved to have been suffered in consequence of the breach
       of a contract.
(4)    In some contracts, it would be impossible for the
       court to assess the compensation arising from breach and
       if the compensation contemplated is not by way of penalty
       or unreasonable, the court can award the same if it is
       genuine pre-estimate by the parties as the measure of
       reasonable compensation............"
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 53 of 72
70.    Yet in another decision in the case of BSNL v. Reliance
Communications Ltd., (2011) 1 SCC 394, the Supreme Court was
dealing with Clause 6.4.6 of the Interconnection Agreement between
BSNL and Reliance Communication which provided for damages in
case of wrongly routed calls. It was detected by BSNL that Reliance
was indulging in "call masking" so as to tamper with CLI (Calling Line
Identification)     of   International   Long   Distance   (ILD)    calls    and
camouflaging them as local calls, so as to avoid the higher charges
prescribed for ILD calls. In the said clause 6.4.6, it had been provided
that even if some unauthorized calls were detected, BSNL would be
liable to recover the highest applicable call charges for all the calls
recorded on the trunk group of Reliance for the preceding two
months. Relying on the said clause, BSNL raised bills on Reliance
levying "penalty" for illegal routing of calls.
On behalf of Reliance, it had been contended that not only is
Clause 6.4.6 itself penal in nature, further that BSNL was under an
obligation to draw distinction between unauthorized calls and calls
without/modified CLI. In other words, it had been contended on
behalf of Reliance that the Clause 6.4.6 providing for damages was
penal in nature, and that BSNL had not proved the amount of actual
loss suffered by it. It was, inter alia, contended by the counsel for
Reliance that:-
"20. The learned counsel submitted that under the
Contract Act
no party is entitled to recover punitive
       damages for any breach of contract. That, in terms of
Section 73
of the Act, the party which suffers by any
       breach of contract is entitled to receive, from the party
       who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or
       damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in
       the usual course of things from such breach. Such
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                        Page 54 of 72
compensation is not to be given for any remote or indirect
       loss or damage.
21. According to the learned counsel, in terms of
Section
       73
of the Contract Act in order to receive compensation for
       loss or damage, the party claiming such compensation
       must prove the alleged loss or damage. However,
Section
       74
carves out an exception to the ordinary legal
       requirement of proving loss or damage. In terms of
Section
       74
when a contract is breached, if a sum is named in the
       contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach or
       if the contract contains no other stipulation by way of
       penalty, the party complaining of the breach is entitled,
       whether or not actual loss or damage is proved to have
       been caused thereby, to receive from the party who has
       broken the contract, reasonable compensation not
       exceeding the amount so named or, as the case may be,
       the penalty stipulated for. It thus follows, according to the
       learned counsel, from
Section 74
of the Contract Act that
       regardless of whether the contract specifies a sum to be
       paid in the event of breach or whether it contains any
       other penal provision, the party complaining of the breach
       is only entitled to receive reasonable compensation.
22. In the alternative, the learned counsel submitted
       that inasmuch as Clause 6.4.6 provides for payment of an
       amount beyond reasonable compensation for loss or
       damage, it is to that extent unenforceable in law.
In this
       connection the learned Senior Counsel has placed reliance
       on the judgments,
Fateh Chand v. Balkishan Dass
; BSNL v.
       Motorola India (P) Ltd.;
Maula Bux v. Union of India
and
Union of India v. Raman Iron Foundry
. According to the
       learned counsel Clause 6.4.6 is wholly one-sided penal
       provision inasmuch as it entitles the appellant to receive
       monies from Reliance on account of breach and not vice
       versa............"
On the other hand, the contention on behalf of BSNL was in the
following terms:-
"10. .........In this regard, the learned Senior Counsel
       submitted       that   the    agreement    pertains   to
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 55 of 72
telecommunication services which is a capital intensive
       venture and which requires seamless and uninterrupted
       service. A disruption in such services would result not only
       in financial loss to BSNL and Reliance but also to a large
       number of subscribers of both the companies. Moreover,
       the learned Senior Counsel submitted that it is technically
       impossible for BSNL to trace or block a call with a
       tampered (masked) CLI. That, on a given day a single PoI
       handles millions of minutes of calls which are handed over
       to BSNL and in such a situation it is not commercially
       feasible to decipher which call is genuine and which call is
       without CLI/tampered CLI. Thus, Clause 6.4.6 should be
       interpreted against the background knowledge
referred to
       above
and, if so read, it becomes clear that the said clause
       is inserted in the agreement for commercial prudence as a
       thumb rule and should as such be interpreted in that
       manner..................
x      x     x     x       x
12. Lastly, according to the learned counsel, where a
       contract prescribes payment of a sum on default, even if
       the sum payable may be larger than the actual loss, when
       the contract is between parties with equal bargaining
       power, and as long as the sum payable is not extravagant,
       it should not be characterised as penalty. Similarly, where
       an agreed sum is payable upon a default, if the loss
       accruing to the claimant from the default in question
       cannot be accurately or even reasonably be ascertained,
       then such sum cannot be classified as penalty and once a
       stipulation is held not to be a penalty, there is no need for
       actual proof of loss................."
The Supreme Court while accepting the contentions of BSNL,
and rejecting the submissions made on behalf of Reliance, it held as
under:-
"46. .........It is not possible to trace each such
       unauthorised call, particularly its nature, as to from which
       place it originated and if it was possible the cost of tracing
       such call(s) may be much more than actual damage, if
       ascertainable, and therefore, a "rough and ready measure"
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 56 of 72
is provided in Clause 6.4.6 which measure is a reasonable
       pre-estimate of damage.
(iv) Whether Clause 6.4.6 represents penalty or pre-
             estimate of reasonable compensation for the loss?
47.     According to Chitty on Contracts

             "whether a provision is to be treated as a penalty is a
             matter of construction to be resolved by asking
             whether at the time the contract was entered into the
             predominant contractual function of the provision
             was to deter a party from breaking the contract or to
             compensate the innocent party for breach. The
             question to be always asked is whether the alleged
             penalty clause can pass muster as a genuine pre-
             estimate of loss." (See Paras 26-126 of Chitty on
             Contracts, 30th Edn.)

       The fact that damage is difficult to assess with precision
       strengthens the presumption that a sum agreed between
       the parties represents a genuine attempt to estimate it and
       to overcome the difficulties of proof at the trial.
48. According to the Law of Contract by G.H. Treitel
       (10th Edn.), a clause is penal if it provides for

             "a payment stipulated as in terrorem of the offending
             party to force him to perform the contract. If, on the
             other hand, the clause is an attempt to estimate in
             advance the loss which will result from the breach, it
             is a liquidated damages clause. The question whether
             a clause is penal or pre-estimate of damages
             depends on its construction and on the surrounding
             circumstances at the time of entering into the
             contract."
49. Lastly, the fact that a sum of money is payable on
       breach of contract is described by the contract as "penalty"
       or "liquidated damages" is relevant but not decisive as to
       categorisation................
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                     Page 57 of 72
x      x       x       x   x
52. ............... Thus, in our view, Clauses 6.4.6(a) and
       6.4.6(b) provide for pre-estimate of damages. It is so also
       for one more reason. The clause, as stated above, restricts
       the higher IUC rate made applicable for calls only for last
       two preceding months and not for last three years or the
       longer period. These time lines are an indicia showing that
       Clause 6.4.6 is not penal but a pre-estimate of reasonable
       compensation for the loss foreseen at the time of entering
       into the agreement.
53. Lastly, it may be noted that liquidated damages
       serve the useful purpose of avoiding litigation and
       promoting commercial certainty and, therefore, the court
       should not be astute to categorise as penalties the clauses
       described as liquidated damages. This principle is relevant
       to regulatory regimes. It is important to bear in mind that
       while categorising damages as "penal" or "liquidated
       damages", one must keep in mind the concept of pricing of
       these contracts and the level playing field provided to the
       operators because it is on costing and pricing that the loss
       to BSNL is measured and, therefore, all calls during the
       relevant period have to be seen. (See Communications Law
       in India by Vikram Raghavan at p. 639.) Since Clause 6.4.6
       represents pre-estimate of reasonable compensation,
Section 74
of the Contract Act is not violated. Thus, it is
       not necessary to discuss various judgments of this Court
       under
Section 74
of the Contract Act................."
As such, in
BSNL v. Reliance
, the Supreme Court held that:-
"a.   Where actual loss / damage is unascertainable, the
       clause for liquidated damages would be a "rough and
       ready" measure which would serve as a reasonable pre-
       estimate of damages.
b.      The fact that damage is difficult to assess with
       precision strengthens the presumption that a sum agreed
       between the parties represents a genuine attempt to
       estimate it and to overcome the difficulties of proof at the
       trial."
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 58 of 72
71.     It is contended by Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG that the
judgment in the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra), and the argument of
public utility service was placed before the Tribunal in the present
case.
It is only the judgment in the case of M/s Construction &
Design Service v. Delhi Development Authority, reported in
(2015) 14 SCC 263, which had become available after the hearing
before the Arbitral Tribunal was over, that was placed before the
Arbitral Tribunal and, admittedly, opportunity was given to the
counsel on behalf of Saisudhir to make its submissions.
72.     Mr.Maninder Singh has also referred another decision on utility
services rendered by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Saini Construction Company v. Delhi Jal Board
, decided on 29th
October, 2015 in RFA(OS) No. 48/2015. In the said case, which dealt
with a contract for laying water pipelines, "penalty" levied on the
contractor for causing delay in the performance of the contract, the
Single Judge of this Court, while dismissing the suit filed on behalf of
the petitioner, inter alia, held as under:-
"(i). .......The defendant was well within its right to levy
        penalty (10% of contract value) in terms of clause 2 of
        contract entered into between the parties in view of dictum
        of law
laid down by
Supreme Court in the decision reported
        as (2003) 5 SCC 705 ONGC Vs. Saw Pipes Ltd. that where
        contract itself has pre-estimated liquidated damages which
        would be incurred by the department in the case of breach,
        there is no necessity on the part of department to prove
        actual losses suffered by it............."
While dismissing the appeal against the judgment of the Single
Judge, the Division Bench of this Court held as under:-
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 59 of 72
"46. The upshot of the above discussion is that the delay
       in start/completion of execution of work is entirely
       attributable to the plaintiff.
47. Concededly, clauses 2 and 3 of the contract entered
       into between the parties prescribes levy of penalty @ 10%
       of contract value as also forfeiture of security deposit and
       invocation of performance guarantee upon the contractor
       (plaintiff) in case of breach of contract committed by the
       contractor.
48. Law on the subject has been authoritatively laid
       down in paragraph 68 of decision of Supreme Court
       reported as 2003 (5) SCC 705 ONGC vs. Saw Pipes Ltd.
       which reads as under.....................
49. In a nutshell, Supreme Court holds in Saw Pipes's
       case (supra) that a liquidated damage would be a damage
       which on the face of it ensues if there is a breach of a
       contract, but its estimation is not possible and thus the
       parties would be perfectly justified in quantifying the same
       as a reasonable pre-estimate of the loss. Such am amount
       would be recoverable as a loss; without proof of the
       quantum of the loss; because the quantum has been
       agreed to by the parties; and the loss is inherent.
50. Suffice it to state that observations made by
       Supreme Court in para 68 of
Saw Pipes
's case (supra) are
       squarely applicable in the present case as per which
       delayed constructions such as completing construction of
       road or bridges within stipulated time would be difficult to
       be linked with actual losses suffered by the State and in
       such cases the pre-estimated damages envisaged in the
       contract have to be paid.
51. Now, laying of water pipes is not something from
       which revenue would be generated by the State. It is a
       public utility service for providing water to its citizens. That
       apart, in a delayed project, interest on blocked capital
       would obviously be a measure of damages.
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                     Page 60 of 72
52. In view thereof, no fault can be found with the act of
       defendant of levying penalty in terms of clauses 2 and 3 of
       contract entered into between the parties upon the plaintiff
       for having delayed execution of work in question. 53. In
       view of above discussion, the present appeal is dismissed
       with cost against the appellant and in favour of the
       respondent..........."
73.    It is confirmed by Mr.Maninder Singh that the view of the
Division Bench of this Court has been upheld by the Supreme Court
vide order dated 29th February, 2016, wherein the Supreme Court had
dismissed the SLP filed against the abovementioned judgment of this
Court, being SLP(C) No.5324/2016.
74.    He has also referred the decision of a Single Bench of this Court
who has taken the same view in the case of M/s
Forbes Gokak Ltd.
v. Central Warehousing Corporation
, decided on 1st February,
2010 in OMP No.306/2000 wherein the argument for requirement of
actual proof of loss was rejected by the Single Judge of this Court and
it was held as under:-
"19. Mr. Alag thereafter referred to para 26 of the Award
       and contended that the respondent corporation had not
       proved any loss and he accordingly argued that thus
       liquidated damages could not have been awarded. Mr. Alag
       also in support of the proposition that loss should actually
       have been proved has relied upon the judgments of the
       Supreme Court in the cases of
Fateh Chand Vs. Balkishan
       Das
AIR 1963 SC 1405 and Maula Bux Vs. Union of India
AIR 1969 2 SSC 554.
20. In my opinion, the contention of Mr. Alag that since
       the admitted fact is that loss has not been proved,
       therefore, no amounts could have been awarded towards
       liquidated damages is not a correct argument. The
       Supreme Court in the judgment of ONGC Vs. Saw Pipes
       (2003) 5 SCC 705 has considered all earlier judgments as
       regards
Section 74
of the Contract Act, including the
       judgment in
Maula Bux
case. The Supreme Court in Saw
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 61 of 72
Pipe‟s case has said that there are two types of contracts
       when we talk of imposition of liquidated damages under
Section 74
of the Contract Act. In the first type of
       contracts, where loss is caused, the same can be proved,
       then, in such cases, the person who suffers loss must
       necessarily prove the loss in spite of the fact that there is a
       provision for liquidated damages and the figure of
       liquidated damages is only the upper limit of damages to
       be awarded. The second type of contracts are those
       contracts where losses cannot be easily proved. These
       contracts are such as for building of a toll road or
       construction of an oil rig.
These examples have been
       specifically given along with the law with respect to
Sections 73
and
74
of the Contract Act in paras 46, 64, 66
       and 67 of the
Saw Pipes
case............
21. I have recently had the occasion to consider the
       judgment in
Saw Pipe
's case in the OMPs 498/2007
       reported as Belco Enterprises Vs. DTC decided on 21st
       January, 2010 wherein by referring to the aforesaid paras
       in
Saw Pipes
case, I have held that where there is delay in
       supply of the buses after fabrication of the bus bodies by
       the contractor to the Delhi Transport Corporation, then,
       once there is a clause of liquidated damages, actual
       damages need not to be proved. In that judgment I have
       given the rationale that ridership in a bus is not something
       which can be easily proved and therefore parties were fully
       entitled to agree on a genuine pre-estimate of damages
       because either the buses could have run full or could have
       run empty or could have run partly full or partly empty.
It
       is to overcome these types of situations where losses
       cannot be easily proved that the concept of liquidated
       damages has been brought in by the legislature in the form
       of
Section 74
of the Contract Act and accordingly explained
       by the Supreme Court in the
Saw Pipes
case.
In the present case, on account of the delays and
       defaults in completion of the transportation in the
       prescribed time by the petitioner it cannot be disputed that
       there would have been loss of business, reputation, good
       will etc. to the respondent and which losses are such which
       cannot be easily proved. Once the quality of services of the
       respondent had fallen on account of the tardy action of the
       petitioner it was bound to cause loss of business to the
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                    Page 62 of 72
respondent and which loss cannot easily be proved
       inasmuch as how many customers the respondent lost on
       account of delays caused by petitioner and how many more
       customers respondent would have had if work had been
       done on time and the business profits consequently in each
       of the circumstance it would have generated or lost, cannot
       be easily proved. Consequently, it was fully open to the
       parties, in cases such as the present, to fix a clause with
       respect to liquidated damages as a genuine pre-estimate of
       damages and which they have so done.
In my opinion, therefore, the contention of Mr. Alag
       that losses have to be actually proved, is not a sound
       contention and in fact it has been rejected by the Supreme
       Court in the
Saw Pipes
case. I therefore, reject this
       contention as urged on behalf of the counsel for the
       petitioner....................."
75.    Lastly, Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG has heavily relied upon
the recent decision of the Supreme Court wherein the same principles
of law with respect to contracts where it is difficult/impossible to
assess the actual loss were reiterated by the Supreme Court in its
judgment in the case of M/s Construction & Design Service
(supra).
76.    From all the decisions referred by Mr.Maninder Singh, learned
ASG, it is clear beyond any doubt that
Section 74
of the Contract Act
stipulates that in case of breach of contract, the party complaining the
breach is entitled to receive reasonable damages whether or not
actual loss is proved to have been caused by such breach.
In the present case, breach of contract is admitted by the
Saisudhir. No doubt, loss is not proved. There are pleadings by way of
defence on behalf of NVVN that the loss has been suffered due to
non-supply of power to the consumers in time, which is public utility
service.    The    NVVN       was   pressing   for   compensation   named       in
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                         Page 63 of 72
Clause 4.6 of the Contract; it is genuine pre-estimated damages and
it is difficult to assess being the supply of power a subject of public
utility. Although, Saisudhir has tried to justify its position, by stating
that the present case does not cover with the guidelines and
principles laid down in
Saw Pipes
(supra), however, if any one
examine the pleadings and relevant clauses of the contract, the
situation is otherwise as canvassed by the Saisudhir.
77.    As admittedly, there was breach on the part of Saisudhir on
account of delay supply of power.      The electricity is utility service.
The facility was to be enjoyed by the consumers. There is a provision
for damages under Clause 4.6 which are in the nature of fixed
compensation and nothing to do with actual damages to be proved.
There was pleading that it is difficult of assess the same being a case
of public utility. It is a commercial contract. Both the parties have
signed with open eyes. NVVN is a Government concern. It is a nodal
agency for facilitating purchase and sale of Solar P.V. Power. Thus,
there is no force in the submissions of Mr.Rao that NVVN is nobody to
receive the compensation as it was merely working for Mission and if
compensation at all suffered, it was only Mission and not NVVN. It is
a matter of fact that NVVN has signed the contract who is a
responsible person in the dispute.      Even, Saisudhir has raised the
claims against NVVN and not against the mission. Thus, the
arguments are without any valid force.
78.    Under these circumstances, the facts of the present case and
law applicable thereon are directly covered under the decisions of
Saw Pipes
(supra) and recent judgment of the Supreme Court in
Construction and Design Services (supra) wherein the situation as
in the present case is similar to a large extent. The other set of
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 64 of 72
decisions referred by Mr.Rao are not applicable to the facts and
situations available in the present case. In those cases, the issue of
public     utility   services   and   the   difficulty   of   non-assessing     of
compensation were not involved. Thus, those decisions are clearly
distinguishable in the situation available in the present case.
79.      The point which falls for consideration is whether in a contract
involving public utility service in the absence of proof of any loss
suffered by the party complaining the breach, the Court has to grant
pre-estimated sum stipulated in the contract as damages in full or the
Court has any other alternative left to grant reasonable compensation
uptil the limit of stipulated damages as claimed in the contract.
80.      Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG is of the opinion that the Court
has to assume the amount stipulated as pre-estimated damages in
the contract, as the amount contemplated by the parties at the time
of contract as correct without any need for any formal sum, the Court
has to proceed further in granting the said stipulated amount in full
especially in a case of public utility services inasmuch as in such
cases, the compensation of actual loss is not possible due to non
financial nature of losses which are additionally required to be
considered along with financial losses. Thus, the Court has no option
but to assume the entire sum as correct and in such a case, the Court
shall not go into the aspect of the damages irrespective of the fact
whether the Court has the option to grant reasonable compensation
as damages in alternative to the pre-estimated damages in full as per
Section 74
of the Contract Act.
81.      The contention of Mr.Maninder Singh has been examined. The
point which the learned counsel wants this Court to consider has
already been revisited by the Supreme Court by examining its own
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                         Page 65 of 72
decision in the case of
ONGC
(Supra) in its another decision in the
case of Construction and Design Services which is heavily relied
upon by Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG wherein similar point fell for
consideration and the Supreme Court speaking through Justice
Adarsh Kumar Goel framed the said question in the following manner:
"2.    The question raised for our consideration is when and
       to what extent can the stipulated liquidated damages for
       breach of a contract be held to be in the nature of penalty
       in the absence of evidence of actual loss and to what
       extent the stipulation be taken to be the measure of
       compensation for the loss suffered even in the absence of
       specific evidence. The further question is whether burden
       of proving that the amount stipulated as damages for
       breach of contract was penalty is on the person committing
       breach."
The said case was also relating to the contract involving public
utility service which is for construction of sewerage pumping station
which can be evinced from para 4 of
the said judgment
. The said
contract also contained pre-estimated damages in the event of any
delay in completion of said project. Para 3 of
the said judgment
has
been reproduced herein below:-
"3.   The respondent, Delhi Development Authority,
       awarded a contract vide agreement dated 4-10-1995 to
       the appellant for constructing a sewerage pumping station
       at CGHS area at Kondli Gharoli at Delhi. Clause 2 in the
       agreement provided as follows:
"The contractor shall comply with the said time
           schedule. In the event of the contractor failing to
           comply with this condition, he shall be liable to pay as
           compensation an amount equal to one per cent or such
           smaller amount as the Superintending Engineer, Delhi
           Development Authority (whose decision shall be final)
           may decide on the said estimated cost of the whole
           work for everyday that the due quantity of work
           remains incomplete; provided always that the entire
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 66 of 72
amount of compensation to be paid under the
           provisions of this clause shall not exceed ten per cent
           of the estimated cost of work as shown in the tender."
The Supreme Court in the referred case after quoting the
findings rendered by the Courts below proceeded to examine the
decision passed in the case of
Saw Pipes
(supra) and other related
decisions like
Fateh Chand
(supra) and thereafter proceeded to
observe in para 14 of the judgment as under:
"14. There is no dispute that the appellant failed to
       execute the work of construction of sewerage pumping
       station within the stipulated or extended time. The said
       pumping station certainly was of public utility to maintain
       and preserve clean environment, absence of which could
       result in environmental degradation by stagnation of water
       in low lying areas. Delay also resulted in loss of interest on
       blocked capital as rightly observed in para 7 of the
       impugned judgment [DDA v.Construction & Design
       Services, U.P. Jal Nigam, RFA (OS) No. 35 of 2010, decided
       on 10-2-2012 (Del)] of the High Court. In these
       circumstances, loss could be assumed, even without proof
       and burden was on the appellant who committed breach to
       show that no loss was caused by delay or that the amount
       stipulated as damages for breach of contract was in the
       nature of penalty. Even if technically the time was not of
       essence, it could not be presumed that delay was of no
       consequence. Thus, even if there is no specific evidence of
       loss suffered by the respondent-plaintiff, the observations
       in the order of the Division Bench that the project being a
       public utility project, the delay itself can be taken to
       have resulted in loss in the form of environmental
       degradation and loss of interest on the capital are not
       without any basis."
82.    From reading of para 14, it is clear that the Supreme Court has
observed that delay in execution of the contract involving public utility
service where there is delay in completion of project, the loss could
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 67 of 72
be assumed even without formal proof and the said loss would also
include non financial loss like loss on environment degradation, loss
on interest on capital, etc. However, by saying so, Supreme Court has
not divested the powers of the court to examine the reasonability of
the grant of damages which may in terms of
Section 74
of the Act
mean that damages in part as a matter of compensation or uptil the
limit of pre-estimated sum as mentioned in the contract depending
upon the touchstone of principle of compensation which is governing
the rule of grant of damages.
83.    Of course, it is left to the discretion of the Court as to what can
constitute compensation to the party in a given case. This can be
seen by going through the decision of Construction (supra) in para
15 onwards of the said case wherein after observing that the loss
could be assumed in the cases involving delay in execution of public
utility contract, Supreme Court proceeded to venture into the
discussion of grant of compensation to the party complaining the
breach as against grant of full amount on presumptuous basis. Para
15 of the said judgment has been reproduced herein below:
"15. Once it is held that even in the absence of specific
       evidence, the respondent could be held to have suffered
       loss on account of breach of contract, and it is entitled to
       compensation to the extent of loss suffered, it is for the
       appellant to show that stipulated damages are by way of
       penalty. In a given case, when the highest limit is
       stipulated instead of a fixed sum, in the absence of
       evidence of loss, part of it can be held to be reasonable
       compensation and the remaining by way of penalty. The
       party complaining of breach can certainly be allowed
       reasonable compensation out of the said amount if not the
       entire amount. If the entire amount stipulated is genuine
       pre-estimate of loss, the actual loss need not be proved.
       Burden to prove that no loss was likely to be suffered is on
       the party committing breach, as already observed."
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                   Page 68 of 72
84.    Thereafter, the Supreme Court in that case proceeded to
exercise its discretion of treating half of the sum as claimed in the
contract as reasonable compensation. This can be evinced by reading
para 17 of the judgment which has been reproduced herein below:
"17. Applying the above principle to the present case, it
       could certainly be presumed that delay in executing the
       work resulted in loss for which the respondent was entitled
       to reasonable compensation. Evidence of precise amount of
       loss may not be possible but in the absence of any
       evidence by the party committing breach that no loss was
       suffered by the party complaining of breach, the court has
       to proceed on guesswork as to the quantum of
       compensation to be allowed in the given circumstances.
       Since the respondent also could have led evidence to show
       the extent of higher amount paid for the work got done or
       produce any other specific material but it did not do so, we
       are of the view that it will be fair to award half of the
       amount claimed as reasonable compensation."
85.    Upon fair reading of the relevant paragraphs of the judgment
passed by the Supreme Court in the case of Construction and
Design Services (supra), it is clear that the Supreme Court has
retained the power of the court to examine as to what extent the
party complaining the breach is entitled to compensation in the event
of breach in the contract involving public utility service containing
pre-estimated damages and the same is rightly so in view of the
provision of
Section 74
of the Act.
86.    In fact, the Supreme Court itself treated half of the sum
contemplated in the contract as reasonable damages. Therefore, the
submission of Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG for grant of full
compensation as provided in clause 4.6 has already been answered
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 69 of 72
by Supreme Court itself in its own judgment referred by him above
which has considered all the decisions referred by Mr.Maninder Singh
87.    Coming back to the present case, since the delay in execution is
at the stage of prior to commencement of the work in the contract
where the delay has been explained by Saisudhir on account of
various reasons and there is no evidence of any suffering of loss nor it
was proved. On the contrary, it is the case of Saisudhir that the
amount stipulated is terrorem in nature and his client in a way is
forcing to perform the contract and at the best, it should be the
amount of penalty.
88.    It was also canvassed that the provision of Clause 4.6 of the
Contract was kept only for the purpose to defer his client from
breaking the contract in-between period, although the main purpose
of the Mission was to ensure serious participation for project, to
facilitate speedier implementation of the new project and to enhance
the   confidence       in     the   project   development   and   to   provide
manufacturing in solar sector in India. It was submitted that though
Saisudhir had invested project cost of Rs.193 crores and it could not
complete the project in time due to reasons beyond its control.
89.    Considering the peculiar fact and circumstances in the present
case also which are somehow similar to the case of Construction
and Design Services (supra), I am of the view to award half of the
amount claimed by the NVVN as reasonable compensation as against
provided compensation by modifying the Award published by minority
Arbitrator and by setting aside the Award published by majority
Arbitrators as the findings arrived in the majority award are wholly
contrary to law, facts and the Clause 4.6 of the Contract. The said
findings are perverse, illogical and shake the conscious of the court
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                       Page 70 of 72
when the same are applied to the facts and circumstances of the
present case.      Now, the question is how to recover the payment of
50% LD by NVVN from Saisudhir. NVVN did not suffer any loss so as
to claim damages.         The reasons for awarding half of the amount in
this matter are that NVVN did not invest any amount in the project
nor the NVVN has proved any actual damage, although there was no
requirement in law. The objective of the Mission was to promote Solar
Power, though NVVN impliedly agreed that supply is not the objective
of the Mission. One of the reasons for providing steep LD's was that it
did not want any developers to abandon the contract.        The delay in
commissioning of the project in itself has not caused any loss.
Saisudhir has incurred Rs.193 crores on the project. The loan was
taken from the bank. The project is to last for 25 years. The delay is
only for few months. It is a clear case of hardship otherwise it would
put a death of knell of the project.
90.    As far as the mode of payment is concerned, balance has to be
strike in view of the situation in the matter. NVVN has claimed
damages of Rs.54,12,32,000/-.         Now, it is to be considered as how
half of the amount is to be received by NVVN. It is difficult because
of the reason that it is a solar project. It is a dream project of the
Government.        This Court does not wish that the project should be
killed. In view of such LD imposed by NVVN, the condition of the
Saisudhir is in bad shape, as I have been informed that the bank has
initiated the proceedings against the Saisudhir.
Thus, in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances, I am of
the view that half of the amount of damages, i.e. Rs.27,06,16,000/-
shall be received by the NVVN by adjusting Rs.25 lac every month
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                  Page 71 of 72
from the revenue of approximately Rs.2.25 crores per month which is
being received from NVVN.
The said amount of Rs.25 lac monthly adjustment of amount
would be deducted from 1st October, 2016 till the half of the amount
is paid by the NVVN. No objection by way of affidavit be filed within
two weeks from today.         Once the affidavit is filed, the bank
guarantees would be released and Saisudhir, however, would not be
entitled to claim maintenance charges and costs, as claimed.
91.    Both the petitions are accordingly disposed of.          Pending
applications also stand disposed of. Parties to bear their own costs.
92.    This Court wishes to put on record its appreciation for the
co-operation and fairness in making their submissions to the point by
Mr.Maninder Singh, learned ASG appearing on behalf of NVVN, as
usual, and also Mr.C.Mohan Rao, Advocate appearing on behalf of
Saisudhir who has argued the matter so well and, thus, this Court
feels that Mr.Rao possesses all the qualities of a Senior Advocate.
(MANMOHAN SINGH)
                                                    JUDGE
SEPTEMBER 08, 2016
OMP Nos.410/2015 & 446/2015                                 Page 72 of 72
