Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: AIR 2020 (NOC) 512 (DEL.), AIRONLINE 2019 DEL 1878, 2020 (1) ADR 707, (2019) 265 DLT 211, (2020) 1 DMC 180, (2020) 1 HINDULR 234
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/118150305/

[Cites
43
, Cited by
39
]
Delhi High Court
Vinay Varma vs Kanika Pasricha & Anr. on 29 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 (NOC) 512 (DEL.), AIRONLINE 2019 DEL 1878, 2020 (1) ADR 707, (2019) 265 DLT 211, (2020) 1 DMC 180, (2020) 1 HINDULR 234
Author:
Prathiba M. Singh
Bench:
Prathiba M. Singh
$~
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                      Reserved on: 29th August, 2019
                              Date of decision: 29th November, 2019
+               CM (M) 1582/2018 & CM APPL. 53645/2018
       VINAY VARMA                                    ..... Petitioner
                         Through:     Mr. Arun Kumar Varma, Sr.
                                      Advocate with Mr. Deepak Bashta &
                                      Ms.   Vandini,    Advocates   (M-
                                      9999149022)
                         versus
       KANIKA PASRICHA & ANR.                   ..... Respondents
                    Through: Mr. Harsh Jaidka, Advocate for R-1
                              (M-9811145052)
       CORAM:
       JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                    JUDGMENT
Prathiba M. Singh, J.
1.     The classic Saas-Bahu imbroglio, has now transformed into disputes
between parents/in-laws and their children. These disputes have raised
complex legal issues as to the interpretation of and balance between two
legislations i.e.
The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005
(hereinafter „
DV Act
‟) and
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
(hereinafter „PSC Act‟).
2.     Since the time that the
DV Act
has been enacted, the concepts of
`shared household‟ and `matrimonial home‟ have been considered in a large
number of judgments. The judgment of the Supreme Court in
S. R. Batra
and Anr. v. Taruna Batra
, (2007) 3 SCC 169 had considered the issue of
„shared household‟ and laid down various principles to determine whether
there was a „shared household‟ and what the rights of the daughter-in-law
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                Page 1 of 40
were. The question as to whether the daughter-in-law would be entitled as a
matter of right to live in the home of her in-laws has, thereafter, been dealt
in several judgments of this Court.
Subsequent to Taruna Batra
(supra),
there have been decisions where some Courts have held that irrespective of
whether the property belongs to the in-laws or not, so long as the daughter-
in-law was living in the said home and no alternate accommodation had
been made available to her by her husband, she could continue to live and
any attempt to evict her would constitute domestic violence. On the other
hand, there have been decisions where it has been held that if the house of
the in-laws belongs exclusively to them, the same would not constitute a
`shared household‟ under
Section 2(s)
of the DV Act. The only right of the
woman in such cases would be to seek maintenance from the husband or
children.
3.     The conundrum gets more complex with the enactment of the PSC
Act which permits senior citizens and parents to take proceedings for
removal of their children from the house which exclusively belongs to them
under the definition of `maintenance‟.
4.     There are several categories of disputes which have arisen between
parents/in-laws/children. The first category of cases are ones in which the
parents/in-laws have developed acrimony either with the son and daughter-
in-law jointly and/or individually resulting in the parents/in-laws seeking the
right of exclusive residence either in the form of possession and injunction
or seeking eviction of the son/ daughter-in-law. The second category of
cases are also those where there is a rift between the son and the daughter-
in-law and either in collusion with the son or otherwise, an attempt is made
to evict the daughter-in-law. In most cases, the son i.e. the husband either
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                     Page 2 of 40
simply does not appear in the proceedings or refuses/fails to provide
maintenance to the wife. Further, in some cases it is noticed that the son is in
collusion with the parents and leaves the residence of the parents only in
order to enable his parents to evict the daughter-in-law. In the third category
of cases, the son has actually moved out of the residence and lives in a
different residence. However, the daughter-in-law refuses to move from the
residence of the in-laws due to a lack of alternate accommodation or
otherwise.
5.     Disputes are pending either in the criminal courts, under the
DV Act
,
in the Family Courts, before the Special Tribunal constituted under the PSC
Act, Civil Courts and Writ Courts where possession and eviction is sought.
Though, there is no doubt that the decision in each case depends upon the
facts and circumstances, the overarching pattern is very clear that the
parents/in-laws rely on their rights under the PSC Act and the daughter-in-
law relies on the
DV Act
. Even in proceedings which are not filed under the
PSC Act, the same is cited to seek protection and enforcement of rights
recognised therein, in civil and criminal proceedings.
Facts of the present case
6.     In the present case, the Plaintiff is the father in law and the Defendant
no.1 is the daughter in law and the Defendant No.2 - Sh. U.K. Verma is the
son. The suit property is A-1/156, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi,
purportedly belongs to one Shri K. A. Sethi. He is the father-in-law of the
Plaintiff i.e. Shri Vinay Verma. As per the plaint, Shri Vinay Verma and his
family including his wife, Ritu Verma, their son Shri U.K. Verma and
daughter Prea Vani Verma all resided in the suit property.           However,
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 3 of 40
acrimony occurred between the son and daughter-in-law resulting in the son
leaving the house and allegedly staying with his grand-parents at E-1, Saket,
New Delhi. This fact is disputed by the daughter-in-law, who states that the
son is colluding with his parents and, in fact, lives in the same house i.e. the
suit property.
7.     The suit for mandatory injunction was filed by Sh. Vinay Varma,
before the Senior Civil Judge with the following relief:
"It is, therefore, respectfully prayed that this Hon‟ble
           Court may be pleased to pass a decree of Mandatory
           Perpetual Injunction, directing the first defendant to
           vacate the home and household of the plaintiff, at A-
           1/156, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi, and to restrain
           the first defendant from entering the home or personal
           space of the plaintiff."
8.     In her written statement, the daughter-in-law avers that after her
marriage on 30th January, 2015 which was solemnized in Delhi she had
moved into the suit property. In the written statement, she does not dispute
the contents of paragraph 12 of the Plaint that the property is owned by the
father-in-law of the Plaintiff. She merely states in paragraph 12 that the
Plaintiff has not placed any documents to show the ownership or the
arrangement with the father-in-law.
9.     According to the Plaintiff, the Defendant, therefore, admits that the
property does not belong to her or to her father-in-law. Thus, under Order
XII Rule 6 Civil Procedure Code ("
CPC
") since the ownership by Shri K. A.
Sethi is admitted and the suit property cannot be treated as `shared
household‟ as per the judgment in
Taruna Batra
(supra) under the
DV Act
,
a decree on admission is prayed.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 4 of 40
10.    In reply to the application under
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
, the daughter-
in-law denies that she had ever admitted ownership of Shri K. A. Sethi. In
reply to paragraphs 4 and 5 where it is specifically contended that Shri K. A.
Sethi is the owner that she has admitted this fact in DV proceedings, she
pleads that since the admitted case of the Plaintiff itself is that he is not the
owner, there is no admission by her.
11.    Under these circumstances, the application was heard by the ld. Trial
Court and was dismissed vide order dated 20th August, 2018. The trial judge
observed in the impugned order as under:
"7. It is pertinent to mention herein that vide order
           dated 18.07.2016, Ld. Predecessor had dismissed the
           application of plaintiff U/o XXXIX Rule 1 and 2
CPC
after giving detailed reasoning. Thereafter, plaintiff
           filed application u/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
. It seems that
           plaintiff is trying to seek the same relief vide this
           application U/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
which was denied to
           him at the time of dismissal of his application U/o
           XXXIX Rule 1 and 2
CPC
. Moreover, perusal of
           written statement and its comparison with plaint
           reveals that there are no clear admissions on behalf of
           defendant no.1 to enable the plaintiff to get the suit
           decreed U/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
.
8. Defendant no.1 has merely admitted the factum of
           her marriage with defendant no.2 and the fact that she
           is residing in the suit premises. However, she has
           clearly stated that she is residing in the suit premises
           in her legal right as it is a matrimonial home of
           defendant no.1. Moreover, plaintiff had himself
           admitted that he is not the absolute owner of the suit
           property, therefore, it cannot be said that defendant
           no.1 has no right to reside in the suit property. The suit
           property is the matrimonial house of defendant no.1
           and she has right to reside in the matrimonial home till
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                        Page 5 of 40
the subsistence of marriage with defendant no.2.
           Defendant no.2 has not appeared in Court and not put
           forth his stand. Therefore, in this case, he cannot be
           compelled to provide any alternate accommodation to
           defendant no.1 to reside in it, in lieu of the matrimonial
           home. Matrimonial home is the only place where
           defendant no.1 can reside till the subsistence of her
           marriage with defendant no.2. Therefore, no ground
           for allowing application U/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
is made
           out. Application of plaintiff U/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
stands
           dismissed.
9. Application of plaintiff U/o XII
Rule 6 CPC
r/w
Section 151
CPC stands disposed off accordingly."
12.    The Trial Court came to the conclusion that similar orders were
prayed for in the application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2
CPC
which
was rejected. The Trial Court held that since the suit property is the
matrimonial house, the Defendant No.1/ Respondent No.1(daughter-in-law)
has a right to reside in the same till the subsistence of the marriage.
13.    The present petition has been filed challenging the impugned order
dismissing the application under Order XII Rule 6. The submission of Mr.
Arun Verma, ld. Senior Counsel for the Petitioner is that the application has
been wrongly rejected as the daughter-in-law does not dispute the fact that
the property does not belong to her husband and in fact also does not belong
to her in-laws. Since the husband of the Defendant No.1 does not have any
rights in the property, the application ought to have been allowed.
According to ld. Senior Counsel, there is no triable issue in the present case.
He relies upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Taruna Batra
(supra).
14.    On the other hand, ld. Counsel for the Respondent Mr. Harsh Jaidka,
submits that the son is in collusion with the parents. It has been wrongly
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                          Page 6 of 40
projected in the plaint that he does not live in the suit property. However, in
reality he continues to live with the parents and, thus, the suit property
continues to be her matrimonial home. He relies upon the judgment of the
Supreme Court in
Hiral P. Harsora & Ors.               v. Kusum Narottamdas
Harsora & Ors.
, (2017) CRI.L.J. 509 which has interpreted the
DV Act
.
He further submits that similar reliefs sought in the injunction application
have also been rejected. He relies upon the order passed in the injunction
application wherein the Trial Court has observed as under:
"10. In the present case,, it is undisputed that the
           defendant no.1 after her marriage to the defendant
           no.2 resided at the suit property along with her
           husband and his parents and it is her matrimonial
           home, where she is still residing, though her husband
           has temporarily shifted with his grandparents,
           admittedly to avoid her company. It is also undisputed
           that in view of "
S.R. Batra Vs. Taruna Batra and
           Neetu Mittal
, 136 (2007) DLT 1 (SC) =I (2007) SLT
           1=1(2007) DMC 1(SC)=2007(3) SCC 169, the suit
           property is not the shared household of the defendant
           no.1 as her husband has no right, title or interest in the
           same.
11. Having, said so, it is noteworthy that even the
           plaintiff has no right, title or share in the suit property
           which is owned by father-in-law of the plaintiff and the
           latter is residing therein gratuitiously along with his
           family members, merely as permissive user thereof.
           Further, it is not the case of the plaintiff that he has
           been asked to vacate the suit property by his father-in-
           law for any reason. Moreover, the husband of the
           defendant no.1 is stated to have temporarily shifted to
           his grandparents' house. In such circumstances, the
           defendant no. 1, his wife has no place to go and her
           matrimonial home, where she was residing with her
           husband after her marriage appears to be the most
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                         Page 7 of 40
suitable residence for her till the time her husband
           provides her with an alternative accommodation or
           allowance for the same. As such, plaintiff has failed to
           establish any prima facie legal case in his favour to
           remove his daughter-in-law from the suit premises.
12. As regards the ingredient of irreparable loss, the
           plaintiff has alleged that due to erratic timings of
           defendant no.1 as well as persistent threats by her, the
           plaintiff feels harassed and also feels that her safety
           and security may be at risk, for which he may be held
           responsible. In my considered opinion, defendant no.1
           being a lady cannot be rendered roofless at the
           instance of her father-in-law who apprehends false
           complaints at her behest or feels indirectly responsible
           for the safety and security of his daughter-in-law if she
           is residing at her matrimonial house. On the contrary,
           in the given facts and circumstances, when the
           defendant no.1's husband has shifted out, and she has
           not     been     provided     with    any     alternative
           accommodation, irreparable loss in terms of safety and
           security, which cannot be compensated in terms of
           money shall be caused to her in case she is removed
           therefrom. Similarly, balance of convenience also tilts
           in favour of the plaintiff who requires the safety and
           security of her matrimonial home till the final disposal
           of the case on merits.
13. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I conclude that
           the plaintiff has failed to establish any of the three
           ingredients required for granting relief of interim
           mandatory injunction as expected in Dorab Cawasji
           Warden's case (supra).
Accordingly, application U/o XXXIX Rule 1 and 2
CPC
stands dismissed."
15.    Mr. Jaidka, ld. counsel also submits that in the suit, issues have been
framed and evidence by way of affidavit has also been filed. The case is at
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 8 of 40
the stage of cross-examination of the Plaintiff. Thus, he submits that this is
not a fit case for passing of decree under
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
.
Analysis and Findings
16.    The Court has considered the rival submissions of the parties. Before
coming to the merits of the dispute, it is necessary to review the various
decisions dealing with the two statutes at hand.
Supreme Court judgments
17.    The lead decision which is also relied upon by the Petitioner is
Taruna Batra
(supra), wherein the Supreme Court observed as under:
"24. Learned counsel for the respondent Smt. Taruna
           Batra stated that the definition of shared household
           includes a household where the person aggrieved lives
           or at any stage had lived in a domestic relationship. He
           contended that since admittedly the respondent had
           lived in the property in question in the past, hence the
           said property is her shared household.
25. We cannot agree with this submission.
26.     If the aforesaid submission is accepted, then it
           will mean that wherever the husband and wife lived
           together in the past that property becomes a shared
           household. It is quite possible that the husband and
           wife may have lived together in dozens of places e.g.
           with the husband's father, husband's paternal grand
           parents, his maternal parents, uncles, aunts, brothers,
           sisters, nephews, nieces, etc. If the interpretation
           canvassed by the learned counsel for the respondent is
           accepted, all these houses of the husband's relatives
           will be shared households and the wife can well insist
           in living in the all these houses of her husband's
           relatives merely because she had stayed with her
           husband for some time in those houses in the past.
           Such a view would lead to chaos and would be absurd.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 9 of 40
27.     It is well settled that any interpretation which
           leads to absurdity should not be accepted.
28. Learned counsel for the respondent Smt Taruna
           Batra has relied upon
Section 19(1)(f)
of the Act and
           claimed that she should be given an alternative
           accommodation. In our opinion, the claim for
           alternative accommodation can only be made against
           the husband and not against the husband's (sic) in-laws
           or other relatives.
29.    As regards
Section 17(1)
of the Act, in our
           opinion the wife is only entitled to claim a right to
           residence in a shared household, and a shared
           household would only mean the house belonging to or
           taken on rent by the husband, or the house which
           belongs to the joint family of which the husband is a
           member. The property in question in the present case
           neither belongs to Amit Batra nor was it taken on rent
           by him nor is it a joint family property of which the
           husband Amit Batra is a member. It is the exclusive
           property of appellant No.2, mother of Amit Batra.
           Hence it cannot be called a "shared household".
30. No doubt, the definition of "shared household" in
Section 2(s)
of the Act is not very happily worded, and
           appears to be the result of clumsy drafting, but we have
           to give it an interpretation which is sensible and which
           does not lead to chaos in society."
The above judgment was rendered by the Supreme Court in 2007.
18.
In
Vimalben Ajitbhai Patel and Ors. vs Vatslabeen             Ashokbhai
Patel and Ors.
(decided on 14th March, 2008) AIR 2008 SC 2675, the
Supreme Court considered a petition filed by the in-laws where it noticed
that both the in-laws were very old and the daughter in law was permitted to
pursue her remedies against her husband. The Court held as under:
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 10 of 40
"24.
The Domestic Violence Act
provides for a higher
           right in favour of a wife. She not only acquires a right
           to be maintained but also there under acquires a right
           of residence. The right of residence is a higher right.
           The said right as per the legislation extends to joint
           properties in which the husband has a share.
25.
Interpreting the provisions of the Domestic
           Violence Act this Court in
S.R. Batra v. Taruna Batra
(2007)3SCC169 held that even a wife could not claim a
           right of residence in the property belonging to her
           mother-in-law, stating:
17. There is no such law in India like the British
                   Matrimonial Homes Act, 1967, and in any case,
                   the rights which may be available under any law
                   can only be as against the husband and not
                   against the father-in- law or motherin-law.
18. Here, the house in question belongs to the
                   mother- in-law of Smt Taruna Batra and it does
                   not belong to her husband Amit Batra. Hence,
                   Smt Taruna Batra cannot claim any right to live
                   in the said house.
19. Appellant 2, the mother-in-law of Smt
                   Taruna Batra has stated that she had taken a
                   loan for acquiring the house and it is not a joint
                   family property. We see no reason to disbelieve
                   this statement.
....
28. The said orders might have been passed only on
           consideration that Sonalben is a harassed lady, but the
           fact that the appellant is also a much harassed lady
           was lost sight of. She has more sinned than sinning.
Appellant and her husband are old. They suffer from
           various diseases. They have been able to show before
           the Court that they had to go to the United States of
           America for obtaining medical treatment. They, we
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                        Page 11 of 40
would assume, have violated the conditions of grant of
           bail but the consequence therefore must be kept
           confined to the four corners of the statutes.
....
43. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of
           this Court we are of the opinion that the interest of
           justice shall be subserved if the impugned judgments
           are set aside with the following directions:
i) The property in question shall be released from
           attachment.
ii) The 3 rd respondent shall refund the sum of Rs. 1
           lakhs to the respondent with interest @ 6% per annum.
iii) The amount of Rs. 4 lakhs deposited by the 1st
           respondent shall be refunded to him immediately with
           interest accrued thereon.
iv) The 3 rd respondent should be entitled to pursue
           her remedies against her husband in accordance with
           law.
v) The Learned Magistrate before whom the cases filed
           by the 3d respondent are pending should bestow
           serious consideration of disposing of the same, as
           expeditiously as possible.
vi) The 3 rd respondent shall bear the costs of the
           appellant which is quantified at Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees
           fifty thousand) consolidated.
44. The appeals are allowed with the aforesaid
           directions."
19.    Recently, In
Hiral P. Harsora & Ors.        v. Kusum Narottamdas
Harsora & Ors.
, (supra), the Supreme Court analyzed the purpose of the
DV Act
including the Statement of Objects and Reasons. The Supreme
Court struck down
Section 2 (q)
of the DV Act in view of the definition of
„shared household‟ in
Section 2 (s)
and held that
Section 2 (q)
was
restrictive in nature. The Supreme Court considered the scheme of the DV
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                    Page 12 of 40
Act and in respect of `shared household‟ observed as under:
"18. It will be noticed that the definition of "domestic
           relationship" contained in
Section 2(f)
is a very wide
           one. It is a relationship between persons who live or
           have lived together in a shared household and are
           related in any one of four ways - blood, marriage or a
           relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption, or
           family members of a joint family. A reading of these
           definitions makes it clear that domestic relationships
           involve persons belonging to both sexes and includes
           persons related by blood or marriage. This necessarily
           brings within such domestic relationships male as well
           as female in-laws, quite apart from male and female
           members of a family related by blood. Equally, a
           shared household includes a household which belongs
           to a joint family of which the respondent is a member.
           As has been rightly pointed out by Ms. Arora, even
           before the 2005 Act was brought into force on
           26.10.2006, the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
was
           amended, by which
Section 6
was amended, with effect
           from 9.9.2005, to make females coparceners of a joint
           Hindu family and so have a right by birth in the
           property of such joint family. This being the case, when
           a member of a joint Hindu family will now include a
           female coparcener as well, the restricted definition
           contained in
Section 2(q)
has necessarily to be given a
           relook, given that the definition of „shared household‟
           in
Section 2(s)
of the Act would include a household
           which may belong to a joint family of which the
           respondent is a member. The aggrieved person can
           therefore make, after 2006, her sister, for example, a
           respondent, if the
Hindu Succession Act
amendment is
           to be looked at. But such is not the case under
Section
           2(q)
of the 2005 Act, as the main part of
Section 2(q)
continues to read "adult male person", while
Section
           2(s)
would include such female coparcener as a
           respondent, being a member of a joint family. This is
           one glaring anomaly which we have to address in the
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 13 of 40
course of our judgment."
Thus, the Supreme Court held that a household of a joint family would be a
„shared household‟. But, the question as to the title of the in-laws to the suit
property did not arise.
Delhi High Court judgments
20.    Post the judgment in
Taruna Batra
(supra) and Vimal Ben (supra)
rendered by the Supreme Court there have been various decisions rendered
by the Delhi High Court.
21.
In
Neetu Mittal v. Kanta Mittal & Ors.
, 2008 (106) DRJ 623, a Ld.
Single Judge held that the parents/ in-laws have a right to turn the son and
daughter-in-law out of the house if the property belongs to them. Only if it
is an ancestral house, the son can enforce partition. The right of the woman
to seek maintenance is only against the husband or her children but she
cannot thrust herself against the parents of the husband. The Court observed
as under:-
"8. As observed by the Supreme Court, 'Matrimonial
             home' is not defined in any of the statutory provisions.
             However, phrase "Matrimonial home" refers to the
             place which is dwelling house used by the parties, i.e.,
             husband and wife or a place which was being used by
             husband and wife as the family residence. Matrimonial
             home is not necessarily the house of the parents of the
             husband. In fact the parents of the husband may allow
             him to live with them so long as their relations with the
             son (husband) are cordial and full of love and
             affection. But if the relations of the son or daughter-in-
             law with the parents of husband turn sour and are not
             cordial, the parents can turn them out of their house.
             The son can live in the house of parents as a matter of
             right only if the house is an ancestral house in which
             the son has a share and he can enforce the partition.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                          Page 14 of 40
Where the house is self-acquired house of the parents,
           son, whether married or unmarried, has no legal right
           to live in that house and he can live in that house only
           at the mercy of his parents upto the time the parents
           allow. Merely because the parents have allowed him to
           live in the house so long as his relations with the
           parents were cordial, does not mean that the parents
           have to bear his burden throughout the life.
9. Once a person gains majority, he becomes
           independent and parents have no liability to maintain
           him. It is different thing that out of love and affection,
           the parents may continue to support him even when he
           becomes financially independent or continue to help
           him even after his marriage. This help and support of
           parents to the son is available only out of their love
           and affection and out of mutual trust and
           understanding. There is no legal liability on the
           parents to continue to support a dis-obedient son or a
           son which becomes liability on them or a son who dis-
           respects or dis-regards them or becomes a source of
           nuisance for them or trouble for them. The parents can
           always forsake such a son and daughter-in-law and tell
           them to leave their house and lead their own life and
           let them live in peace. It is because of love, affection,
           mutual trust, respect and support that members of a
           joint family gain from each other that the parents keep
           supporting their sons and families of sons. In turn, the
           parents get equal support, love, affection and care.
           Where this mutual relationship of love, care, trust and
           support goes, the parents cannot be forced to keep a
           son or daughter in law with them nor there is any
           statutory provision which compels parents to suffer
           because of the acts of residence and his son or
           daughter in law. A woman has her rights of
           maintenance against her husband or sons/daughters.
           She can assert her rights, if any, against the property
           of her husband, but she cannot thrust herself against
           the parents of her husband, nor can claim a right to
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                        Page 15 of 40
live in the house of parents of her husband, against
           their consult and wishes."
22.
In
Sardar Malkiat Singh v. Kanwaljit Kaur & Ors.
, 2010 (116) DRJ
295, the Ld. Single Judge held that the father-in-law has no obligation to
maintain his daughter-in-law.
In this judgment, the ld. Single Judge,
following
Taruna Batra
(supra), observed in paragraph 17 as under:
"...... The appellant is the sole and absolute owner of
           the suit property and at best the possession of the
           respondent No.1 during the subsistence of her
           marriage with the appellant's son could be said to be
           permissive in nature. This by itself cannot entitle the
           respondent No.1 to claim a right of residence against
           her father-in-law, who has no legal obligation to
           maintain his daughter-in-law during the lifetime of her
           husband, more so when the respondent No.1 has
           parted the company with her husband and is
           admittedly residing in Chandigarh since the year
           1992."
23.
In
Shumita Didi Sandhu v. Sanjay Singh Sandhu & Ors.
(2010) 174
DLT 79(DB), the ld. Division Bench was considering a judgment of the
Single Judge which had followed
Taruna Batra
(supra) and held that the in-
laws home cannot be a „shared household‟ or the „matrimonial home‟ and
hence the daughter in law has no legal right to stay in the house belonging to
her parents in law.
The ld. Division then approved the view of the Single
Judge and followed
Taruna Batra
(supra). It concluded that the right of
residence of the wife does not mean the right to reside in a particular
property but would mean the right to reside in a commensurate property.
The right of residence is not the same thing as a right to reside in a particular
property which the appellant refers to as her 'matrimonial home'. The Single
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 16 of 40
Judge‟s judgment was upheld and it was observed that the learned single
Judge had amply protected the plaintiff by directing that she would not be
evicted from the premises in question without following the due process of
law.
24. In Smt Preeti Satija v.Smt. Raj Kumari & Anr., 2014 SCC Online Del
188, however, another ld. Division Bench of the Delhi High Court held that
even a tenanted property of the in-laws where the husband has no share,
right, interest or title would constitute „shared household‟. The ld. Division
Bench held that the right of residence would exist irrespective of whether
the house is owned by the in-laws or is merely tenanted. Even if they are
tenants, the Court observed that the
DV Act
is a secular legislation. The
Court also considered the judgment in
Taruna Batra
(supra) and finally
concluded as under:
"20. Crucially, Parliament's intention by the 2005 Act
           was to secure the rights of aggrieved persons in the
           shared household, which could be tenanted by the
           Respondent (including relative of the husband) or in
           respect of which the Respondent had jointly or singly
           any right, title, interest, or "equity". For instance, a
           widow (or as in this case, a daughter in law, estranged
           from her husband) living with a mother-in- law, in
           premises owned by the latter, falls within a "domestic
           relationship". The obligation not to disturb the right to
           residence in the shared household would continue even
           if the mother- in-law does not have any right, title or
           interest, but is a tenant, or entitled to "equity" (such as
           an equitable right to possession) in those premises.
           This is because the premises would be a "shared
           household".       The     daughter-in-law,      in    these
           circumstances is entitled to protection from
           dispossession, though her husband never had any
           ownership rights in the premises. The right is not
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                         Page 17 of 40
dependent on title, but the mere factum of residence.
           Thus, even if the mother-in-law is a tenant, then, on
           that ground, or someone having equity, she can be
           injuncted from dispossessing the daughter in law. In
           case the mother in law is the owner, the obligation to
           allow the daughter in law to live in the shared
           household, as long as the matrimonial relationship
           between her and the husband subsists, continues. The
           only exception is the proviso to 19(1)(b), which
           exempts women from being directed to remove
           themselves from the shared household. No such
           exception has been carved out for the other reliefs
           under
Section 19
, especially in respect of protection
           orders. Had the Parliament intended to create another
           exception in favor of women, it would have done so.
           This omission was deliberate and in consonance with
           the rest of the scheme of the Act. There can be other
           cases of domestic relationships such as an orphaned
           sister, or widowed mother, living in her brother's or
           son's house. Both are covered by the definition of
           domestic relationship, as the brother is clearly a
           Respondent. In such a case too, if the widowed mother
           or sister is threatened with dispossession, they can
           secure reliefs under the Act, notwithstanding exclusive
           ownership of the property by the son or brother. Thus,
           excluding the right of residence against properties
           where the husband has no right, share, interest or title,
           would severely curtail the extent of the usefulness of
           the right to residence.
21. The other aspect, which this Court wishes to
           highlight, is that the 2005 Act applies to all
           communities, and was enacted "to provide more
           effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed
           under the Constitution who are victims of violence of
           any kind occurring within the family". The right to
           residence and creation of mechanism to enforce is a
           ground breaking measure, which Courts should be
           alive to. Restricting the scope of the remedies,
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 18 of 40
including in respect of the right to reside in shared
           household, would undermine the purpose of this
           enactment. It is, therefore, contrary to the scheme and
           the objects of the Act, as also the unambiguous text of
Section 2(s)
, to restrict the application of the 2005 Act
           to only such cases where the husband alone owns some
           property or has a share in it. Crucially, the mother-in-
           law (or a father-in-law, or for that matter, "a relative
           of the husband") can also be a Respondent in the
           proceedings under the 2005 Act and remedies
           available under the same Act would necessarily need to
           be enforced against them."
The Court thus held that under circumstances such as these, the decree under
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
would not be liable to be passed and that irrespective
of status of the in-laws qua the house i.e. whether they are owners, tenants,
the right of residence for the daughter-in-law would still continue.
25.    Thereafter, in
Navneet Arora v. Surender Kaur and Ors
, 2014 SCC
Online Del 7617, the ld. Division Bench considered
Taruna Batra
(supra)
and Preeti Satija (supra) and recognized the daughter-in-law‟s right to
residence.
This judgment distinguished
Taruna Batra
(supra) by holding
that Taruna Batra would be applicable only in a fact situation where she has
lived with the husband separately but not as a member of the joint family. It
was held that the
DV Act
gives statutory protection to the right of the wife
for a roof. Since the parties were living together with their parents and were
conducting joint business, the property would be „shared household‟. The
observations of the Division Bench are as under:
"106.
The Protection of Women from Domestic
           Violence Act, 2005
gives statutory recognition to the
           salutary principle that was sought to be advanced
           through judge made laws in the vacuum of legislative
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 19 of 40
prescription. The ideological framework which
           underscores the enactment is that a husband is bound
           to provide his wife a roof over her head and that she
           has a right to live in that house without the fear of
           violence.
...........................
118. Reverting back to the facts of the instant case,
           before Navneet Arora married Gurpreet Singh, he was
           living as one family with his parents Harpal Singh and
           Surinder Kaur. His brother Raman Pal Singh and his
           sister Sherry were also residing in the same house. The
           kitchen was one. The two sons and their father were
           joint in business and the kitchen used to be run from
           the income of the joint business. They were all living
           on the ground floor. Sherry got married and left the
           house. Navneet married Gurpreet. Raman Pal married
           Neetu. The two daughter-in-laws joined the company
           not only of their husbands but even of their in-laws in
           the same joint family house i.e. the ground floor of B-
           44, Vishal Enclave, Rajouri Garden, New Delhi. All
           lived in commensality. Navneet never left the joint
           family house. She was residing in the house when her
           husband died. She continued to reside there even till
           today. Under the circumstances her right to residence
           in the suit property cannot be denied, and as regards
           issues of title, we have already observed that the right
           of residence under the
Protection of Women from
           Domestic Violence Act, 2005
, the same would have no
           bearing. She may enforce it in civil proceedings. But
           her right of residence in the shared household cannot
           be negated."
The ld. Division Bench in Navneet Arora distinguishes the judgment of the
Supreme Court in
Taruna Batra
(supra) in the following manner.
"40. The submission of the learned Senior Counsel
           appearing on behalf of the Ms. Taruna Batra, as noted
           in paragraph 24 of the judgment, that merely because
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 20 of 40
Ms. Taruna Batra had lived in the property in question
           in the past, it fell within the ambit of „shared
           household' was rejected by the Supreme Court, which
           was of the considered opinion that such a view would
           lead to chaos in the society since the wife may insist on
           claiming „right of residence' in virtually any property
           in which she may have resided together with her
           husband in the past.
41. Furthermore, the Supreme Court also observed
           that in view of the admitted fact that Ms. Taruna Batra
           had shifted to the residence of her parents owing to
           matrimonial disputes with her husband and was thus
           no longer in possession of the said portion of suit
           property, the question of protecting her possession
           could not arise. The very foundation of her claim for
           injunction restraining the in-laws from dispossessing
           her was thus wholly misconceived.
42.
In light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the
           view that
Taruna Batra
's case (Supra) is only an
           authority for the proposition that a wife is precluded
           under the law from claiming „right of residence' in a
           premises, owned by the relatives of the husband,
           wherein she has lived with her husband separately, but
           not as a member of the „joint family' along with the
           relatives of the husband who own the premises.
43. However, in the later eventuality, if a couple live as
           members of „joint family' in a domestic relationship
           with the relatives of the husband in a premises owned
           by such relatives of the husband, statutory prescription
           would indeed enable the wife to claim „right of
           residence' since it would fall within the realm of
           „shared household' as contemplated under
Section 2(s)
of the Act irrespective of whether she or her husband
           has any right, title or interest in the "shared
           household‟.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                        Page 21 of 40
..............................
48. We are of the view that the plain language of the
           Act viz.
Section 2(s)
read in conjunction with
Section
           19 (1)(a)
is unambiguous and enables an aggrieved
           person to claim „right of residence' in a household
           even though the aggrieved person or the respondent
           may have no right, title or interest in the said
           household, if the aggrieved person and the respondent
           have lived therein by establishing a domestic
           relationship with the joint family of which the
           respondent is a member and to which such household
           belongs."
Thus, the Court recognized the daughter-in-law‟s rights to residence.
In an
SLP against the above judgement titled
Surender Kaur v. Navneet Arora
(SLP
no. 14416/2015 decided on 4th July, 2016), it was recorded that the
matter has been settled between the parties and the SLP was dismissed as
withdrawn.
26.
In
Ekta Arora v. Ajay Arora & Anr.
, AIR 2015 Del 180, the mother-
in-law was held to be the absolute owner of the property and hence the
property could not be a „shared household‟. The Court held that the property
belongs to the mother-in-law and accordingly, observed as under:
"21. Considering the facts noted above, it is clear that
           during the lifetime of respondent No.2, she is the
           absolute owner of the property in question and till
           then, said property cannot be held as a „shared
           household‟.
22. In view of the above discussion and on the basis of
           the „Will‟, the petitioner has no right in the property
           during the lifetime of her mother- in-law, i.e.,
           respondent No.2 herein. The property will devolve
           upon respondent No.1 only after her death. Before that,
           the petitioner cannot claim any right or title in the
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 22 of 40
property. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion
           that the order dated 25.08.2008 passed by the learned
           ASJ, whereby the order on residence dated 29.09.2007
           passed by the learned Trial Court was set aside, does
           not suffer from any illegality or perversity."
27.
In
Shilpa Tandon v. Harish Chand Tandon & Anr.
, [in RFA (OS)
113/2015 decided on 15th November, 2016]            - the Court followed the
judgment in
Navneet Arora
(supra) and held that the daughter in law had a
right of residence in the „shared household‟, though the property belonged to
the father-in-law.    However, the Court also observed that a workable
solution needs to be found in order to ensure that everyday acrimony
between the in-laws and the daughter-in-law does not continue. Thus, the
Court modified the impugned decree and order and directed as under:
"12. In light of its findings, the Division Bench held
           that since Navneet Kaur stayed with her husband and
           his parents in commensality sharing a common kitchen,
           that is, as a joint family, in the ground floor of B-44,
           Vishal Enclave, Rajouri Garden, New Delhi, she had a
           right to reside in such „shared household‟ under the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
           2005
.
13. In the instant case the pleading by the first
           respondent in the plaint, in paragraph 3, is an
           admission that after the appellant and respondent No.2
           were married they shared a common kitchen with him
           on the ground floor; though they slept on the
           barsati/first floor. That is to say, the shared residence
           would be the barsati/first floor of his property. As per
           his pleadings they shifted their kitchen on the
           barsati/first floor. Therefore, the barsati/first floor of
           the property owned by the first respondent would be
           the shared residence and the appellant would have a
           right of residence therein notwithstanding said fact.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                        Page 23 of 40
14. The impugned judgment is overruled.
15. But that is not the end of the matter.
16. Workable solutions have been found out by Courts
           where the estranged daughter-in-law and her in-laws
           are under threat of violence from each other.
           ............................
27. We dispose of the appeal modifying the impugned
           decree and dispose of the suit filed by the first
           respondent; decreeing that the appellant would vacate
           the barsati/first floor of property bearing Municipal
           No.D-3, Green Park Extension, New Delhi on or
           before the midnight of December 31, 2016, provided
           the first respondent deposits in this Court, under
           intimation to appellant‟s counsel ₹1,20,000/- being
           advance payment for four months commencing from
           the month of January, 2017. Thereafter, advance
           payment for the month of May, 2017 and ensuing
           months would be deposited in this Court on or before
           the 20th day of each preceding month with intimation to
           the appellant‟s counsel - with direction to the Registry
           that within two days of the deposit the deposited money
           would be paid over to the appellant by means of a
           cheque without any application filed by her. Learned
           counsel for the appellant would identify the appellant
           before the concerned officer of the Registry when the
           cheque would be handed over to her. We are
           constrained to make the payment a little onerous and
           cumbersome because there is complete lack of
           communication between the appellant and the
           respondent No.1. If however, the appellant were to
           provide her bank account to learned counsel for
           respondent No.1 within a period of four weeks from
           today, the respondent No.1 would transfer the money
           by RTGS i.e. instructing his banker to transmit the
           money to the account of the appellant. The first
           respondent would be bound by the statement made by
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 24 of 40
his counsel regarding sale of his house and the said
           statement would form part of the decree including the
           undertaking as per para 25 above."
The ld. Division Bench of the Delhi High Court followed
Navneet Arora
(supra) and held that since the daughter-in-law had a shared kitchen she
would have a right of residence as a „shared household‟.
28.
In
Anita Barreja v. Jagdish Lal Barreja [CM(M) No.
1043/2016
decided on 26.09.2017], a Ld. Single Judge of the Delhi High Court was
concerned with the PSC Act and an order passed by the maintenance
tribunal under the said Act and upheld the order by which the tribunal had
directed the daughter-in-law to vacate the property.
29.     In Darshna v.Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.,[ LPA 537/2018 decided
on 03rd
October, 2018] and Sunny Paul v. State of NCT of Delhi and
Ors.253
(2018) DLT 410, the ld. Division Benches of this Court again
considered the provisions of the PSC Act. In both these cases, the rights of
the in-laws to seek eviction of the son or daughter-in-law from their own
property was upheld on an interpretation of the PSC Act and the Rules of
2017 enacted in Delhi under the said Act. The ld. Division Bench of this
Court considered a case arising under the PSC Act wherein the District
Magistrate, in proceedings arising under the said Act, had directed the
eviction of the daughter-in-law. The writ petition was dismissed and the ld.
Division Bench was considering the LPA. In
the said judgment
, the ld.
Division Bench held that in view of the Rule 22(3)(1)(i) of Delhi
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment)
Rules, 2017, the son and the daughter-in-law could not claim any right in
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                   Page 25 of 40
the property. The ld. Division Bench observed as under:
"8. On perusal of Rule 22(3)(1)(i) as incorporated in
           the Delhi Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
           Senior Citizens Rules 2017 and noting the fact that the
           property in question had devolved on him by way of a
           registered Will executed by his mother, surely it
           follows that Dhani Ram‟s son or for that matter his
           daughter-in-law can claim no right in the same. In any
           case, under the Rules, a senior citizen / parent can seek
           eviction of son, daughter or legal heir from an
           ancestral or self-acquired property, the vires of which
           Rule has not been challenged by the appellant in these
           proceedings nor before the learned Single Judge. As
           long as the said Rules exist, the order of the Tribunal
           giving impugned directions cannot be faulted.
9.
In so far as the plea of the appellant before the
           learned Single Judge that Rule 22(3)(1)(i) applies to
           son, daughter and legal heir and not to the daughter-
           in-law is concerned, the same was also rejected by the
           learned Single Judge by holding that the said Rule
           cannot be interpreted in a restrictive manner; he relied
           upon the Judgment of the Division Bench in the case of
           the
Shadab Khairi and Anr. V. The State and Ors
,
           LPA 783/2017 decided on 22nd February, 2018
           wherein it was held that the Act, being a welfare
           legislation was required to be interpreted liberally. We
           concur with the said conclusion....."
Finally, the ld. Division Bench observed as under:
"13. Keeping in view the objective of the Act and it is
           high-time that senior citizens / parents are allowed to
           live in peace and tranquility, the orders passed by the
           Maintenance Tribunal and the learned Single Judge
           cannot be faulted. The Appeal is dismissed."
Thus, the ld. Division Bench upheld the rights of the parents/in-laws to evict
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 26 of 40
the children under Rule 22(3)(1)(i).
30.    Recently, two ld. Single Judges in
Dr. Rachna Khanna Singh v.
Santosh S. P. Singh & Ors.
(2019) SCC OnLine Del 8696 and Shachi
Mahajan      v.    Santosh Mahajan, 257 (2019) DLT 152 considered the
provisions of the
DV Act
.
In
Dr. Rachna Khana Singh
(supra) the facts
involved the grandson and grand daughter-in-law through the daughter of
Ms. Santosh S. P. Singh. The question was whether the grand daughter-in-
law could claim the right of residence.
Following Taruna Batra
(supra) it
was held that the property is not a „shared household‟. However, the Court
permitted the daughter-in-law to avail of her remedies under the
DV Act
.
The observations of the Ld. Single Judge are as under:
"19. A catena of verdicts has been relied upon on
           behalf of the appellant in support of the contentions
           that there being collusion between her spouse and the
           plaintiff/ respondent no.1, she cannot be deprived of
           her rights to reside in the premises in suit which form
           her matrimonial home and fall within the category of
           "shared household" in terms of
Section 2 (s)
of the
           Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
           2005.
20. Reliance has been placed on behalf of the appellant
           on the verdict of this Court in
Kavita Gambhir vs. Hari
           Chand Gambhir
162 (2009) DLT 459, on the verdict of
           the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay in Sarika
           Mahendra Sureka vs. Mahendra 2016 (
6) ABR 161,
           Eveneet Singh vs. Prashant Chaudhri
177 (2011) DLT
           124, on the verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
B.P. Achala Anand vs. S. Appi Reddy
(2005) 3SCC 313
           : AIR 2005 SC 986 and on the verdict of the Hon'ble
           High Court of Allahabad in
Neetu Rana vs. State of
           U.P.
2016 (2) Appellate Court Record 1797.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                     Page 27 of 40
21. Reliance was also placed on behalf of the appellant
           on the verdict of this Court in
Shilpa Tandon vs.
           Harish Chand Tandon
in RFA (OS) 113/2015,
Navneet
           Arora vs. Surender Kaur
in FAO (OS) 196/2014.
22. Reliance was also placed on behalf of the appellant
           on the verdict of this Court in
Smt. Preeti Satija vs.
           Smt. Raj Kumari
in CM APP.4236/2012, 4237/2012,
           5451/2013 decided on 15.01.2014, on the verdict of the
           Hon'ble High Court of Bombay in
Beryl Murzello vs.
           Ramchandra Bhairo Mane
2007 (4) Bom CR 397, on
           the verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
S.M. Asif
           vs. Virender Kumar Bajaj
in Civil Appeal No.6106-
           6108/2015 to contend that the decree under
Order 12
           Rule 6 of the CPC
which is a discretionary relief ought
           not to have been granted by the learned trial Court in
           favour of the respondent no.1 and the same ought not
           to have been upheld by the First Appellate Court in as
           much as all the issues which have been raised were
           required to be gone into at the time of trial and
           adjudication in relation thereto was essential.
ANALYSIS
23. On a consideration of the observations of the
           Hon'ble Supreme Court in
S.R. Batra vs. Taruna Batra
(2007) 3 SCC 169, on the verdict of this Court in
Eveneet Singh vs. Prashant Chaudhri
177 (2011) DLT
           124, on the verdict of the Hon'ble High Court of
           Bombay in
Rama Rajesh Tiwari vs. Rajesh Dinanath
           Tiwari
in Writ Petition No.10696/2017, it being
           apparent through the pleadings on the record that the
           premises in suit do not fall within the category of a
           shared household in terms of
Section 2 (s)
of the
           Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
           2005, the substantial questions of law sought to be
           urged by the appellant as referred to in para 18
           hereinabove do not arise for consideration in the
           instant case in as much as the rights of the appellant
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                     Page 28 of 40
and her daughter to live in the premises belonging to
           the respondent no.1 i.e. the plaintiff did not exist
           beyond the mere licence given to the parents of Aveka
           to live in the same, which has already been terminated.
24. However, as rightly observed by the First Appellate
           Court, the appellant being the wife of the defendant
           no.2/respondent no.2 herein is entitled to live in
           accommodation commensurate to that in which she
           lives presently with her child for which she may avail
           of appropriate civil legal remedy in relation thereto or
           under the
Protection of Women from Domestic
           Violence Act, 2005
for which there is no embargo."
Thus, the ld. Single Judge was of the opinion that the premises in the case
would not constitute a „shared household‟ but the Court gave her permission
to avail of proceedings for alternate accommodation.
Dr. Rachna Khanna
Singh
's(supra) case arose out of a civil suit for possession.
31. In Shachi Mahajan (supra) the ld. Single Judge of this Court held that
documents on record showed that the daughter-in-law was sharing the
kitchen and common areas. However, since the suit property has been sold
during the pendency of the proceedings, various directions including the
directions for procuring an alternate residence for the daughter-in-law along
with some amount to be deposited was passed by the Court.
Bombay High Court judgments
32.    In Mrs. Sarika Mahendra Sureka v. Mr. Mahendra & Anr. [Appeal
from order No.910 of 2014 decided on 19th September 2016], the divorce
proceedings between the son and daughter-in-law were pending. The Family
Court had granted interim protection to the daughter-in-law, thus, at the
interim stage the Bombay High Court had thought it appropriate not to
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 29 of 40
protect her possession.
The Bombay High Court distinguished
Taruna
Batra
(supra) in this case and followed
Preeti Satija
(supra) of the Delhi
High Court.
33.
In
Roma Rajesh Tiwari v. Rajesh Dinanath Tiwari, [Writ Pet
.
No.10696 of 2017 decided on 12th October, 2017], again the Bombay High
Court held that the title or right in property is not of relevance in the
DV Act
as the wife‟s right to reside in the matrimonial home cannot be defeated if
the same does not belong to the husband. It further held once it is a „shared
household‟ and they were in a matrimonial relationship, the wife gets a right
to reside. The Bombay High Court held that the shifting of the son from the
residence was a ploy. The house where the daughter-in-law resides would
have to be considered as matrimonial home or „shared household‟ under
Section 2(s)
of the DV Act. The Court observed as under:
"18...
The question of title or proprietary right in the
           property is not at all of relevance, when the provisions
           of the
DV Act
; especially
Section 19
thereof, are to be
           considered. As a matter of fact, it needs to be
           emphasized that, as the wife‟s right to reside in the
           matrimonial home was being defeated on this very
           ground that the house does not belong to the husband
           or does not stand in his name, this
DV Act
was brought
           in the Statute Book with the specific and clear
           language and the unequivocal Clause that the „title of
           the husband or that of the family members to the said
           flat‟, is totally irrelevant. It is also irrelevant whether
           the Respondent has a legal or equitable interest in the
           shared household. The moment it is proved that it was
           a shared household, as both of them had, in their
           matrimonial relationship, i.e. domestic relationship,
           resided together there and in this case, upto the
           disputes arose, it follows that the Petitioner-wife gets
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                         Page 30 of 40
right to reside therein and, therefore, to get the order
           of interim injunction, restraining Respondent-husband
           from dispossessing her, or, in any other manner,
           disturbing her possession from the said flat."
These two cases arose out of a civil suit and notice of motion seeking
injunction and a petition for divorce, respectively.
34.
In
Dattatrey Shivaji Mane v. Lilabai Shivaji Mane and Ors.
AIR
2018 Bom 229, the Bombay High Court was considering an order passed by
the maintenance tribunal under the PSC Act, in a writ petition. The Court
observed therein that the petition of the daughter-in-law under the
DV Act
was dismissed for default.
The Court then considered the decision of the
Delhi High Court in
Sunny Paul
(Supra) and held that once the senior
citizen is the owner of the property, the possession of the senior citizen
cannot be interfered with. Thus, the tribunal‟s order directing the son and
his family to vacate the property was upheld. In this judgment the objects
and reasons of the PSC Act were considered in detail by the Court. Thus, the
view of the Bombay High Court is that the question of title or proprietary
right is of no relevance.
Kerala High Court
35.
In
Hashir v. Shima ILR
2015 (2) Kerala 855, the Kerala High Court
was considering the provisions of the
DV Act
and the definition of „shared
household‟ and followed the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Taruna
Batra
(supra) to hold that a residence belonging to the in-laws would not be
a „shared household‟.
Punjab and Haryana High Court
36.
In two judgments, i.e., Major Harmohinder Singh v. State of Punjab
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 31 of 40
& Ors. (LPA No.
1588 of 2014 decided on 14.10.2014) and Hamina Kang
v. District Magistrate (U.T
.) and Ors 2016(2) Crimes 517 (P&H), the
Punjab and Haryana High Court considered the DV Act and the PSC Act.
In
Harmohinder Singh (supra), the Court observed as under:
"The provisions of the Act of 2007 and the Act of 2005,
           referred to above, cannot be used for cross purposes,
           one annihilating the other. A parent who invokes the
           provisions of the Act of 2007 cannot create a situation
           that makes irrelevant the right of a female for securing
           a protection which is guaranteed under the Act of
           2005. The provisons of the protection which is
           contemplated under Chapter V is an empowering
           provision for the welfare of a senior citizen that must
           be read cohesively that the right of a woman to be
           protected which is guaranteed under the Act of 2005."
The Court upheld the right of the divorced wife who was given protection
under the DV act. Thus, the rights of the in-laws to invoke the PSC Act was
recognised.
37.     However, subsequently, in
Hamina Kang
(supra) an order of the
tribunal under the PSC Act was considered in the context of the daughter-in-
law who had filed a petition under the
DV Act
. The Court considered the
objects and purposes of the 2007 Act.
The Single Judge of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court reviewed various judgments including
Taruna Batra
(supra), Vimal Ben(supra),
Navneet Arora
(supra),
Preeti Satija
(supra)
and
Hashir
(supra) of the Kerala High Court. The provisions of the PSC
and the DV Act were considered. The Court finally agreed with the view of
the Kerala High Court and differed from the view of the Delhi High Court.
It concluded that a house owned by a father-in-law is not a „shared
household‟ in which the daughter-in-law has a right of residence. The Court
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 32 of 40
observed that no right of the 2005
DV Act
is sought to be nullified by the
PSC Act. A status quo order had been passed in the
DV Act
. However,
finally, the Court directed the in-laws to pay a sum of Rs. 25,000 /- per
month to their daughter-in-law for a period of one year and permitted her to
seek remedies against her husband.
Gujarat High Court
38.    In Jayantram Vallabhdas Meswania v. Vallabhdas Govindram
Meswania AIR 2013 Guj 160, the tribunal under the PSC Act had directed
the son to hand over possession to his father. The Court again considered
the provisions of the PSC Act and held that a father who is not earning and
has no money to sustain can make an application under
Section 5
of the Act
to claim maintenance since the son is in possession of the property of the
father and is not taking sufficient care and not providing sufficient
maintenance. Thus, the father is entitled to have his own income from the
property and the order of eviction from the son was upheld.
Analysis of case law
39.    The analysis of the decisions by various High Courts shows that after the
judgment of
Taruna Batra
(supra) by the Supreme Court which dealt with the
DV Act
, there have been divergent views taken in the manner in which Taruna
Batra is to be applied.
The Delhi High Court in
Navneet Arora
(supra)
distinguished Taruna Batra and held that Taruna Batra would be applicable
only in the facts where the son and daughter in law were not residing as
members of the `shared household‟ since the residence and kitchen were
separated.
Similar view is taken in
Preeti Satija
(supra) by the Division Bench
of Delhi High Court.
However, in
Shumita Didi Sandhu
(supra) it was held
that in-laws home would not be a „shared household.
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                     Page 33 of 40
40.    The Kerala High Court in
Hashir
(supra) held that the manner in
which the Delhi High Court distinguishes
Taruna Batra
(supra) would not
be correct inasmuch as the Supreme Court has clearly laid down the
principles of defining `shared household‟ in
Taruna Batra
(supra).
The
Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Hamina Kang v. District Magistrate
(U.T
.)
and
Ors
(supra) agreed with the view of the Kerala High Court in
Hashir
(supra) and followed the view of the Supreme Court in
Taruna
Batra
(supra).
The Provisions of the two Acts
41.    The judgments and decisions of various Courts discussed above are
not exhaustive in nature.
42.
The DV Act
was enacted in 2005 and has been the subject matter of
innumerable decisions. One of the objects of the
DV Act
is to provide for
the rights of women to reside in their „matrimonial home‟ or „shared
household‟ irrespective of whether their husband or the in-laws have a title
to the property.
The DV Act
, thus, protects one of the three basic necessities
of human life - viz. shelter, for the woman. Thus, in several proceedings,
the right of the daughter-in-law to reside in her „matrimonial home‟ or
„shared household‟ has been recognised.
43.    The PSC Act of 2007 was not the subject matter of the Supreme Court
decisions either in
Taruna Batra
(supra) or in Vimal Ben (supra). The said
Act has been enacted to provide maintenance to parents and senior citizens.
The purpose of this Act is to ensure that parents and senior citizens are not
subjected to harassment by their children in any manner. An obligation has
been cast on the children to maintain senior citizens if the said children are
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                    Page 34 of 40
in possession of the property of the parent or lay claims to inherit the
property of the parents. This is clear from a reading of Section 4(4) of the
PSC Act which reads as under:
"(4) Any person being a relative of a senior citizen and
           having sufficient means shall maintain such senior
           citizen provided he is in possession of the property of
           such senior citizen or he would inherit the property of
           such senior citizen:
Provided that where more than one relatives are
           entitled to inherit the property of a senior citizen, the
           maintenance shall be payable by such relative in the
           proportion in which they would inherit his property."
A specific maintenance tribunal has also been constituted under
Section 7
for senior citizens to make applications for maintenance.          The whole
purpose of this Act is to ensure that children do not simply take control of
the assets of their parents while ignoring their well-being. In Delhi, the
Delhi Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Rules, 2009
has also been enacted which permits impleadment of children and relatives.
Standards have been set out in the rules for payment of maintenance. These
Rules have been amended from time to time.
44.    The question, however, is as to how the objectives and provisions of
these two Acts are to operate, considering the overlapping nature of the
relationships which they seek to govern. Both are special statutes. While,
the daughter-in-law‟s right to residence and a roof over her head is
extremely important, the parent‟s right to enjoy their own property and earn
income from the same is also equally important. There can be multitudinal
situations which may arise before Courts wherein a view would have to be
taken as to which rights are to be preferred over the other. This is so
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                       Page 35 of 40
because as captured in paragraph 4 above there are various categories of
cases and various fact situations wherein these disputes would arise.
45.    Though, in
Taruna Batra
(supra) the Supreme Court did not have the
occasion to consider the later enacted PSC Act, 2007, the Court struck a
balance between the rights of the parents/ in-laws and the rights of the
daughter-in-law by holding that the „shared household‟ would not include
property belonging to the relatives of the husband namely, the in-laws.
46.    However, later decisions of various High Courts have, while giving
divergent opinions on the concept of `shared household‟, followed one
uniform pattern in order to protect the daughter-in-law and to provide for a
dignified roof/ shelter for her. The question then arises as to whether the
obligation of providing the shelter or roof is upon the in-laws or upon the
husband of the daughter-in-law i.e., the son. Some broad guidelines as set
out below, can be followed by Courts in order to strike a balance between
the PSC Act and the DV Act:
1. The court/tribunal has to first ascertain the nature of the relationship
      between the parties and the son‟s/ daughter‟s family.
2. If the case involves eviction of a daughter in law, the court has to
      also ascertain whether the daughter-in-law was living as part of a joint
      family.
3. If the relationship is acrimonious, then the parents ought to be
      permitted to seek eviction of the son/daughter-in-law or daughter/son-
in-law from their premises. In such circumstances, the obligation of
      the husband to maintain the wife would continue in terms of the
      principles under the
DV Act
.
4. If the relationship between the parents and the son are peaceful or if
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 36 of 40
the parents are seen colluding with their son, then, an obligation to
      maintain and to provide for the shelter for the daughter-in-law would
      remain both upon the in-laws and the husband especially if they were
      living as part of a joint family. In such a situation, while parents would
      be entitled to seek eviction of the daughter-in-law from their property,
      an alternative reasonable accommodation would have to be provided to
      her.
5. In case the son or his family is ill-treating the parents then the
      parents would be entitled to seek unconditional eviction from their
      property so that they can live a peaceful life and also put the property to
      use for their generating income and for their own expenses for daily
      living.
6.        If the son has abandoned both the parents and his own
      wife/children, then if the son‟s family was living as part of a joint
      family prior to the breakdown of relationships, the parents would be
      entitled to seek possession from their daughter-in-law, however, for a
      reasonable period they would have to provide some shelter to the
      daughter-in-law during which time she is able to seek her remedies
      against her husband.
On facts of the present case
47.    The present suit does not specifically arise out of any proceedings
under the
DV Act
nor under the PSC. Act. It is a civil suit for mandatory
injunction, wherein, the relief being sought is in effect for eviction of the
daughter-in-law. There is a dispute as to whether the son is actually living
with the parents or not. The property does not even belong to the parents/
in-laws and in fact belongs to the maternal grand parent (Nana) of the
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 37 of 40
husband of the Defendant i.e., the father-in-law of the Plaintiff Shri Vinay
Varma.     By any stretch of imagination, this property cannot constitute
`shared household‟ under
Section 2 (s)
of the DV Act. Insofar as the
question of admission under
Order XII Rule 6 CPC
is concerned, this Court
holds that there has been no admission by the daughter-in-law who has
clearly challenged the rights of the father-in-law to maintain the suit.
48. Keeping in mind the provisions of the PSC Act as well, the Plaintiff
does have a right to secure a peaceful life for himself and his wife.
However, there is no doubt that the son is now living with his grandparents
which is the best case of the Plaintiff. Thus, the relationship between the in-
laws and the parents and the son does not seem to be acrimonious. The
daughter-in-law was clearly living with her in-laws and her husband till
disputes arose between her and her husband.
49.    Under these circumstances, I am of the opinion that a mechanism would
have to be devised to ensure that both the in-laws and the daughter-in-law live
peacefully while the matrimonial disputes are resolved. The property in which
the daughter-in-law has been residing is located in a posh South Delhi Colony
of Safdarjung Enclave. She is occupying the property and she has no children.
The relationship between the parties is not congenial. Considering this factual
background, the following directions are issued;
1. The Plaintiff - Mr. Vinay Varma/ his son Mr. U.K. Varma shall jointly
      or severally pay a total sum of Rs.50,000/- per month to the daughter-in-
      law in order to enable her to identify a commensurate residence for
      herself.
2. The said sum shall be paid to the daughter-in-law on a monthly basis
      on or before the tenth of every month directly into her bank
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                      Page 38 of 40
account.
3. Upon the said payment being commenced, the daughter-in-law -
      Defendant would vacate the suit property within a period of three
      months.
50.    Though the present is a civil suit, this Court observes that the said two
statutes i.e., the DV Act and the PSC Act, would have to be borne in mind
while passing orders, maintaining the balance between two warring parties,
namely the parents/in-laws and children/their families. The conflict between
the rights of the parents and the rights of the daughter-in-law which have
arisen out of the DV Act and the PSC Act requires to be resolved. The facts
of each case are different as there could be cases where the parents or senior
citizens do not wish to permit their son and daughter-in-law to continue in
their property due to issues of acrimony and misunderstanding. In such
cases also, the provisions of the
DV Act
may be invoked by the
son/daughter-in-law subjecting the parents to enormous suffering and
frustration. While the right of residence of the daughter-in-law is to be
recognized, the same also needs to be balanced depending upon the facts of
each case with the right of the peaceful living of the parents as well.       In
several cases, these rights have conflicted with each other and they have
flooded the Criminal and Civil Courts in abundance.
51.    The judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in
Preeti Satija
(supra) has been challenged before the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal
No.9723/2014.
Thereafter, in
Shabnam Ahmed v. Union of India & Ors.
in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.228/2019, the Supreme Court is also considering
the same issue. Considering that the issues are now pending adjudication
before the Supreme Court, in the present case, certificate of fitness to appeal
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                     Page 39 of 40
under
Articles 133(1)(a)
and
134A
of the Constitution of India, is granted.
52.    The petition is allowed in the above terms and all pending
applications are also disposed of. No order as to costs.
PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                                                         JUDGE
NOVEMBER, 29/ 2019/dk/dj
CM (M) 1582/2018                                                   Page 40 of 40
