Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 293].          According to the learned counsel for the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/132500248/

[Cites
37
, Cited by
0
]
Madras High Court
The Management Of India Pistons Ltd vs I.Inbakumar
Author:
V.Parthiban
Bench:
V.Parthiban
W.P.No.19736 of 2018



                                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS

                                               Reserved on: 19.06.2019

                                              Delivered on : 30.08.2019

                                                          Coram

                                        The Hon'ble Mr.Justice V.PARTHIBAN

                                               W.P.No.19736 of 2018
                                                       and
                                        W.M.P.No.23178/2018 and 404 of 2019

                      The Management of India Pistons Ltd.,
                      Huzur Gardens,
                      Sembiam,
                      Chennai-600 011                                   ... Petitioner

                                                           vs.


                      I.Inbakumar                                       ... Respondent


                                Petition filed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India
                      praying to issue a writ of certiorari calling for the records on the file of
                      the Presiding Officer, III Additional Labour Court, Chennai and quash
                      the order dated 15.05.2018 made in I.D.No.772 of 2009 (Preliminary
                      issue).


                             For Petitioner          ..     Mr.C.Mohan for
                                                            M/s.King & Patridge

                             For Respondent          ..     Mr.V.Prakash,Sr.counsel for
                                                            M/s.N.Suresh and
                                                            K.Sudalai Kannu


                      1/74


http://www.judis.nic.in
                                                                          W.P.No.19736 of 2018




                                                       ORDER
The facts and circumstances necessitating the filing of the

                      writ petition are stated hereunder:-
(a)The respondent workman was an employee of the

                      petitioner Management. He joined the service of the Management on

                      26.5.1980 as temporary worker and after four years of permanent

                      service, he was confirmed in service as Helper on 01.07.1984.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Attender on 01.01.1994 and on

                      01.04.1995 he was promoted as Junior Store Keeper. According to the

                      respondent/workman, he was actively involved in the Union activities

                      and as a measure of victimization, the Management placed him under

                      suspension along with other workers, who were also involved in the

                      union activities.    He was suspended from service by order dated

                      30.10.2008 stating that he was found missing from the work spot

                      every day for half an hour to one hour and was wasting his valuable

                      working time by often loitering and disturbing other co-workers while

                      on their duty.      The petitioner gave an explanation on 15.11.2008,

                      denying the charges.     At this, the Management replied on 24.11.2008
2/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
stating that his explanation was not satisfactory and it has been

                      decided to hold an enquiry against him.     Thereafter, an enquiry was

                      conducted and report was submitted by the Enquiry Officer holding the

                      charges proved against him.
(b)The petitioner was furnished with the copy of the

                      Enquiry Report along with show cause notice, dated 16.02.2009,

                      proposing to impose the penalty of 'dismissal from service.'            The

                      petitioner submitted his representation against the enquiry report and

                      the proposed penalty, on 07.03.2009.        The Management, however,

                      ultimately    passed   an   order   on    11.03.2009,     dismissing    the

                      respondent/workman      from   service.      The   respondent/workman

                      approached the Conciliation Officer, on 18.04.2009.          However, the

                      conciliation failed and the failure report was submitted on 22.06.2009.

                      Thereafter the dispute was referred for adjudication before the III

                      Additional Labour Court, Chennai, in I.D.No.772 of 2009.
(c)Before the Labour Court, a preliminary issue was

                      framed in regard to the fairness of enquiry conducted against the

                      petitioner.    In the proceedings, on behalf of the workman, the
3/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
workman examined himself and on behalf of the Management, one

                      witness was examined as M.W.1.            Five documents were marked on

                      behalf of the workman as Exs.W1 to W5 and 19 documents were

                      marked on behalf of the Management as Exs.M1 to M19.
(d)The Labour Court, after adverting to various materials,

                      viz., Exhibits and also the evidence tendered on behalf of both the

                      workman     and   Management,       has   ultimately   concluded   that   the

                      domestic enquiry had not been conducted in a fair and proper manner

                      by   the   Management     and     therefore,   the   enquiry   report   dated

                      21.01.2009 was set aside.         The preliminary award passed by the

                      Labour Court on 15.05.2018, holding the enquiry conducted by the

                      Management against the workman defective, is the subject matter of

                      challenge in the writ petition.
2.When the writ petition was taken up for hearing, on

                      behalf of the respondent/workman Mr.V.Prakash, the learned Senior

                      Counsel raised a strong objection as to the maintainability of the writ

                      petition stating that the writ petition against the preliminary award of

                      the Labour Court is not maintainable, as held by various decisions of
4/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and also this Court. According to

                      the learned Senior counsel, it is always open to the Management to

                      challenge both the preliminary as well as the final award and their

                      right to question the preliminary award is protected.     Therefore, no

                      prejudice would be caused to the Management if the writ petition is

                      held not maintainable. But on the other hand, great prejudice would

                      be caused to the workman, since he having been dismissed from

                      service, cannot wait for an indefinite period for the Labour Court to

                      pass final award. Taking into account the plight of the workmen, who

                      were always placed in a disadvantageous position against the

                      Managements, the Courts have consistently held that challenge to the

                      preliminary award ought to be discouraged by the Courts, particularly,

                      the Constitutional Court exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. Therefore, the learned Senior

                      counsel would implore this Court to address the concern of the

                      workman in this regard before dealing with the submissions to be

                      made on behalf of the Management.
3.Shri.C.Mohan, the learned counsel appearing for the

                      petitioner Management would       have strong reservation about the
5/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
submissions made by the learned Senior counsel appearing for the

                      workman stating that there are several decisions of the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court of India and the High Court entertaining the writ

                      petitions against the preliminary awards of the Labour Court/Tribunal

                      and therefore, it cannot be concluded that under all circumstances, the

                      Managements     are   barred   from   approaching   the   Courts   against

                      preliminary awards, even if it is a question of jurisdictional error or on

                      issues which go to the root of the matter.     According to the learned

                      counsel, it is always open to this Court to appreciate when there are

                      genuine challenges against preliminary awards passed by the Labour

                      Court/Tribunal. Therefore, he would request this Court to consider the

                      contention of the petitioner Management and take a final call as to

                      whether the final conclusion reached by the Labour Court holding that

                      the enquiry conducted against the petitioner was not fair and proper,

                      was supported by sufficient materials and whether the finding of the

                      Labour Court was premised on sound reasoning.
4.Having considered the submissions made by the learned

                      counsel appearing for the petitioner Management and the learned

                      Senior counsel Mr.V.Prakash for the respondent workman, this Court
6/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
proceeded to hear the parties, particularly, the objections of the

                      Management regarding the finding of the Labour Court. As this Court

                      having entertained the writ petition, decided to take a comprehensive

                      call both on the maintainability as well as on merits relating to the

                      objections raised by the Management.
5.The learned counsel Mr.C.Mohan appearing for the

                      petitioner Management would, at the outset, submit that in regard to

                      the maintainability of the writ petition he would rely on the following

                      decisions in support of his contention.          According to the learned

                      counsel, the Courts have entertained over the years writ petitions

                      challenging the preliminary awards depending upon the type of

                      challenge, which was involved in each of the cases. According to him,

                      this is a case where the Management is genuinely aggrieved by the

                      preliminary    finding   of   the   Labour   Court,   since   the   finding   is

                      unsupported by any materials and the same is not based on sound

                      reasoning.    According to the learned counsel, the Labour Court has

                      completely erred in concluding against the Management by overlooking

                      several crucial aspects and if those aspects are to be considered by

                      this Court, then the finding of the Labour Court may call for
7/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
interference. In such event, the Management would not be compelled

                      to lead fresh evidence before the Labour Court in order to establish the

                      charges against the respondent/workman.          Therefore, the learned

                      counsel would submit that in a case where the Labour Court finding is

                      completely    misconceived,   which finding   is perverse    and legally

                      unacceptable, this Court may consider the same and appreciate the

                      objections of the Management on the basis of the materials produced

                      before it and also submissions to be made in the proceedings.
6.In the light of the above, the learned counsel would draw

                      the attention of this Court to various decisions mentioned as under:
(i)Regarding the maintainability of the writ petition, as

                      objected to by the learned Senior counsel Mr.V.Prakash, the learned

                      counsel for the petitioner Management would cite the following

                      decisions:-
D.P.Maheshwari vs. Delhi Administration and Others
[1983(4) SCC 293].          According to the learned counsel for the

                      petitioner Management, this decision was rendered by the Hon'ble
8/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
Supreme Court of India on 14.09.1983. He would particularly rely on

                      Paragraph No.3 of the Judgment, which is extracted hereunder:
“3.The management was dissatisfied with
                             the decision of the Labour Court on the preliminary
                             issue. So, they invoked the High Court's extra-
                             ordinary   jurisdiction   under
Art.   226
of   the
                             Constitution. A learned single judge of the High
                             Court, by his judgment dated 12th July 1976 allowed
                             the Writ Petition and quashed the order of the
                             Labour Court and the reference           made by the
                             Government. A Division Bench of the High Court
                             affirmed the decision of the Single Judge on 25th
                             July 1980. The matter is now before us at the
                             instance of the workman who obtained special leave
                             to appeal under
Art. 136
on 4th April 1983. The
                             services of the workman were terminated on 28th
                             July 1969. A year later the dispute was referred to
                             the Labour Court for adjudication. Thirteen years
                             thereafter the matter is still at the stage of decision
                             on a preliminary question.
In our view, further
                             comment is needless.”



                      According to the learned counsel
,
the above decision
, which is a

                      landmark case,      being relied on by various Courts, including the

                      Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in regard to the maintainability of the
9/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
writ petitions against preliminary awards. The decision was rendered

                      in the facts and circumstances of that case, as could be seen from the

                      extracted portion above.   According to the learned counsel
,
the said

                      decision
did not emphatically lay down any law. Therefore, he would

                      submit that this decision cannot be taken to be a declaration of law

                      that no writ petition is maintainable against preliminary award.
(ii) The learned counsel would next draw the attention of

                      this Court to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in     ITC

                      LTD., Industrial Tribunal [(2009) I LLJ 90 Mad], wherein the

                      Division Bench of this Court has entertained W.A.No.597 of 2008,

                      aggrieved with the finding of the Tribunal holding that the enquiry was

                      not fair and proper.
(iii)The learned counsel would further rely on a decision of

                      the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Bharat Bhawan Trust vs.

                      Bharat Bhawan Artists Association and Another
[2001(7) SCC

                      630].   In this case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the

                      preliminary objection raised by the Management was valid and ought

                      to have been upheld by the Labour Court. The final conclusion of the
10/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India at paragraph No.13 is extracted

                      hereunder:-
“13.Thus we find that the preliminary objection

                           raised by the appellant is valid and ought to have

                           been upheld by the Labour Court. We, therefore,

                           allow this appeal and set aside the order made by

                           the Labour Court. No costs.”
(iv)The learned counsel would also rely on the decision of

                      the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Newspapers Ltd vs. State

                      Industrial Tribunal, UP and Others
[AIR 1957 SC 532], wherein a

                      challenge to the preliminary award was entertained.
(v)The learned counsel would further draw the attention of

                      this Court to the decision of this Court in W.P.No.8471 of 1998 (
The

                      Management of Tamilnadu, Electricity Board vs. The Presiding

                      Officer,     I   Additional    Labour
Court    and     M.Ganesan)

                      (Manu/TN/9555/2006].          He would particularly draw the attention

                      of this Court to Paragraph No.8 of the order, which is extracted

                      hereunder:
11/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
“8.From the decisions cited above, it
                               is    clear   that    the      petitioner/Management      is
                               entitled to raise the preliminary issue with regard
                               to the status of the second respondent as to
                               whether he is a "workman" or not within the
                               definition    of
Section    2(s)
of   the   Industrial
                               Disputes      Act,    1947,     and    whenever    such   a
                               preliminary issue is raised, it is for the Workman
                               to establish that he is a "Workman". Therefore
                               the finding given by the Labour Court based on
                               presumption is unsustainable and the same is to
                               be treated as perverse finding.
In
the above case
, the learned single Judge of this Court

                      has entertained the writ petition against the preliminary award and the

                      finding of the Labour Court was set aside.
(vi)Another decision of this Court was also relied on in

                      W.P.No.32031 of 2017 (JSW Steel Limited, rep.by its
General

                      Manager, vs. 1.The Presiding Officer, Labour
Court, Salem and

                      two others), dated 19.09.2018, wherein the learned Judge, in

                      paragraph Nos.5 to 7, has held as under:
“5. The above issue is no longer res
12/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
integra in view of the decision rendered in
Management of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board
                              vs. The Presiding Officer, I Additional Labour
Court        and   Anr.       (MANU/TN/9555/2006         ),
                              wherein the ratio
laid down by
the Supreme
                              Court in
Newspapers              Ltd. - Vs Industrial
                              Tribunal, U.P. & Ors.
(1957 (2) LLJ 1) is taken
                              into account.
6. In such view of the matter, it is always
                              open to the Management to raise the issue
                              regarding the status of the 3rd respondent and
                              on such issue being raised, the Labour Court
                              shall decide the said preliminary issue as to
                              whether the 3rd respondent was a workman or
                              not, as defined under
Section 2 (s)
of the
                              Industrial Disputes Act.
7.    Accordingly,      the    writ   petition   is
                              disposed of with a direction to the Labour Court
                              to decide the preliminary issue with regard to
                              the   status       of   the    3rd    respondent   before
                              proceeding further in the matter. The Labour
                              Court shall decide the said issue within a period
                              of two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy
                              of    this     order.     No     costs.   Consequently,
                              connected miscellaneous petition is closed.”
13/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
In the above matter, the learned Judge has followed the

                      decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Newspapers Ltd

                      vs. State Industrial Tribunal, UP and Others
[AIR 1957 SC 532],

                      mentioned supra.
(vii)The learned counsel would also rely on a Division

                      Bench decision of this Court in State Bank of India (represented by

                      its Assistant General Manager (Personnel and HRD), Chennai

                      [2007(3) L.L.N.422], wherein the Division Bench has clearly held as

                      follows:
“18.The learned counsel appearing
                                 for the second respondent/workman by drawing
                                 our attention to the decision of the Division
                                 Bench of this Court in the case of
Management
                                 of Engine Valves Ltd. vs. Presiding Officer,
                                 Industrial Tribunal, Madras & another
reported
                                 in 1996 (1) LLJ 566 submitted that, normally no
                                 writ petition is maintainable in respect of finding
                                 rendered in a preliminary issue. In
the said
                                 decision
, the Division Bench, in the concluding
                                 paragraph has observed, ".... We may point out
                                 here that the fact that this Court does not
14/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
interfere with such preliminary order and keeps
                              all the contentions open, is only intended to
                              ensure that there is no delay caused in the
                              disposal of the dispute by the Tribunal or Labour
                              Court and it does not in any way affect the right
                              of the Management to challenge the validity of
                              the order, in the event it become necessary for
                              it to challenge the award. ..."
Absolutely, there is no dispute with regard to
                              the above said proposition. In order to facilitate
                              both parties to get relief, normally no court
                              would entertain writ petition against the order
                              passed in a preliminary issue. But however, in
                              view of the peculiar factual circumstances and
                              as pointed out above that there is no specific
                              provision    either    in     the   bye-laws,     circular,
                              guidelines, enabling the workman to have the
                              legal assistance, and having participated on
                              several sittings, the workman abandoned the
                              enquiry     after   certain    stage,   and     copies   of
                              documents were also either supplied or allowed
                              to be perused by the workman, and already
                              adequate opportunity was given to him, we are
                              of the view that it is an exceptional case and the
                              Management-Bank is justified in approaching
                              this Court even against the order passed in a
                              preliminary issue. Accordingly, we reject the
15/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
said contention also.”


                                 The Division Bench has clearly held in
the above decision
that the Management was justified in approaching the Court against

                      preliminary award.
(viii)The learned counsel would also rely on another single

                      Judge's order passed in W.P.No.15080 of 2016 (
The Management

                      of ICICI Bank vs. 1.The Presiding Officer, Central Government

                      Industrial Tribunal
cum Labour Court, Sastri Bhavan, Chennai

                      and another), dated 19.01.2017, wherein, the learned Judge has

                      held as under:
“12.        While   restating   the       said
                                 principle, the First Bench of our High Court in
                                 N.Gurumurthy       v.    Second    Additional     Labour
                                 Court, Madras, 1995-1-LLN-1022, after restating
                                 the   reasons    for     non    interference    at    the
                                 preliminary stage, has also discussed that the
                                 interference    could      be   called   for,    if   the
                                 preliminary order was passed without notice to
                                 one of the parties and (ii) that the entertainment
                                 of the writ petition could be made, if the
                                 preliminary order does not contain any reason
                                 for its conclusion. Applying the said ratio, it has
16/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
been the contention of the petitioner Bank that
                                  the rule of interference with the preliminary
                                  award has been subsequently expanded with the
                                  rule of peculiar facts and circumstances of the
                                  case for interference. But, however, the case on
                                  hand does not pertain to any one of the two
                                  situations over the rule of peculiar facts and
                                  circumstances of the case, but could be with the
                                  perverse finding recorded by the Labour Court.”



                                  Therefore,   the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioner

                      Management would submit that there is absolutely no bar in

                      entertaining the writ petition, as made out by the learned Senior

                      counsel appearing for the workman.       Therefore, the learned counsel

                      for the petitioner Management would request this Court to hold the

                      writ petition maintainable and may proceed to examine the challenge

                      made in the writ petition, on merits.
7.The learned counsel for the Management would rely on

                      the following decisions in support of each one of his contentions, as to

                      how the finding of the Labour Court is unsustainable in law:
(
i)State of Haryana and Another vs. Rattan Singh
–
17/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
1977(2) SCC 491. He would rely on a portion of the finding of the

                      Hon'ble Supreme Court of India at Paragraph No.4, which is extracted

                      hereunder:
“4. It is well settled that in a
                                   domestic enquiry the strict and sophisticated
                                   rules of evidence under the
Indian Evidence Act
may not apply. Ail materials which are logically
                                   probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
                                   There is no allergy to hearsay evidence provided
                                   it has reasonable nexus and credibility. . . . .
                                   Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in
                                   proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is
                                   beyond scrutiny. Absence of any evidence in
                                   support of a ending is certainty available for the
                                   court to look into because it amounts to an error
                                   of law apparent on the record. . . . .
Therefore, we are unable to hold that the order
                                   is invalid on that ground.”



                                   According to the learned counsel, strict Rule of Evidence

                      cannot be applied in domestic enquiries.        Unfortunately, the Labour

                      Court has construed the domestic enquiry on par with criminal trial and

                      held that the enquiry was not fair and proper.
18/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
(
ii)Crescent Dyes and Chemicals Ltd., vs. Ram Naresh

                      Tripathi
– [1993(2) SCC 115].                This decision of the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court of India was relied on by the learned counsel in regard

                      to the objection that the workman was not given the assistance of a

                      lawyer to defend itself in the Domestic enquiry. He would rely on a

                      portion of the observations of the Ho'ble Supreme Court of India in

                      paragraph No.17, which is extracted hereunder:
“17. It is, therefore, clear from
the
                                 above case
law that the right to be represented
                                 through counsel or agent can be restricted,
                                 controlled     or    regulated   by    statute,     rules,
                                 regulations or Standing Orders. A delinquent
                                 has no right to be represented through counsel
                                 or agent unless the law specifically confers such
                                 a right. The requirement of the rule of natural
                                 justice insofar as the delinquent's right of
                                 hearing is concerned, cannot and docs not
                                 extend to a right to be represented through
                                 counsel or agent. In the instant case the
                                 delinquent's        right   to   representation       was
                                 regulated    by      the    Standing   Orders       which
                                 permitted a clerk or a workman working with
19/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
him in the same department . . . . . therefore,
                                 not correct to contend that the Standing Order
                                 or
Section 22(ii)
of the Act conflicts with the
                                 principles of natural justice.”
(iii)Oriental Insurance Co., L:td., vs. S.Balakrishnan –

                      [2003 (11) SCC 734]. In this case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of

                      India   has held that in the absence of any prejudice having been

                      caused to the delinquent, mere non-supply of enquiry report before

                      inflicting the punishment, not fatal to the proceedings.   One of the

                      main objections in the conduct of the domestic enquiry against the

                      workman was non-supply of the report, dated 30.10.2008, which was

                      the basis of the suspension order/charge memo against the workman.
According to the workman, non-furnishing of the basic document has

                      denied him reasonable opportunity and this was one of the primary

                      factors weighed with the Labour Court, while coming to its conclusion

                      against the Management.
20/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
The learned counsel would submit that the workman herein

                      participated in the enquiry fully and    during his participation in the

                      enquiry, there was no protest at all.         In fact, the report was also

                      furnished to him at the time of domestic enquiry. Having participated

                      in the enquiry, without protest, the workman cannot found to be

                      complaining    about    non-furnishing   of     the   basic   report     dated

                      30.10.2008.    According to the learned counsel for the Management

                      that no prejudice was shown, as the workman had understood the

                      charges, replied to the charges and participated in the domestic

                      enquiry.
(
iv)West   Bokaro    Colliery      (TISCO    Ltd)     vs.   Ram

                      Pravesh Singh
–[2008 (3) SCC 729]. The learned counsel would

                      reply on paragraph Nos.20 and 21 of the decision, which are extracted

                      hereunder:
“20.The Tribunal has set aside the report
                                   of the enquiry officer and the order of dismissal
                                   passed by the punishing authority by observing
                                   that the charges against the respondent were
                                   not proved beyond reasonable doubt.          It has
                                   repeatedly been held by this Court that the
21/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
acquittal in a criminal case would not operate as
                              a bar for drawing up of a disciplinary proceeding
                              against a delinquent. It is well-settled principle
                              of law that yardstick and standard of proof in a
                              criminal case is different from the one in
                              disciplinary proceedings. While the standard of
                              proof in a criminal case is proof beyond all
                              reasonable doubt, the standard of proof in a
                              departmental proceeding is preponderance of
                              probabilities.
21.Learned counsel for the respondent
                              cited   two cases – Workmen v. Firestone Tyre
                              and Rubber Co.,of India (P) Ltd. (
1973) 1 SCC
                              813]    and      South    Indian     Cashew        Factories
                              Workers'      Union      v.     Kerala     State    Cashew
                              Development Corporation Ltd.
[(2006) 5 SCC
                              201],     to contend that the Labour Court in
                              exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 11-A
could have come to a different conclusion.
There is no quarrel with this proposition of law.
                              The Labour Court could have awarded lesser
                              punishment        in      the      given      facts     and
                              circumstances of the case. In a case where two
                              views are possible on the evidence on record,
                              then the Industrial Tribunal should be very slow
                              in coming to a conclusion other than the one
22/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
arrived    at   by   the   domestic   tribunal   by
                                  substituting its opinion in place of the opinion of
                                  the domestic tribunal.”



                                  The learned counsel would emphasis the fact that the

                      standard of proof in a domestic enquiry is different from a criminal trial

                      and unfortunately, the Labour Court in this case has presumably

                      applied a strict standard of evidence and has ultimately held that the

                      enquiry was not fair and proper.
(
v)Biecco Lawrie Ltd., and another v. State of West

                      Bengal and Another
– 2009(10) SCC 32.               The learned counsel

                      would particularly rely on the following Paragraphs, which are

                      extracted hereunder:
“27.In the present case, the materials on
                                  record show that the respondent had been
                                  furnished with proper notices intimating him the
                                  date, time and place of hearing well before time
                                  and the respondent has also received notices as
                                  is indicated from the postal acknowledgements
                                  made by him in his own letters addressed to the
                                  management.
28. It was made the major bone of
23/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
contention that the charge sheet was bad as it
                              did   not   mention   specifically     the   abusive
                              language used by the respondent.
29.In this connection, reliance can be
                              placed on a decision of this Court in
Punjab
                              National Bank Ltd. v. Their Workmen
[(1959) 2
                              LLJ 666 (SC)] wherein it was held that before
                              the management could dismiss its workman, it
                              must hold a proper domestic enquiry into the
                              alleged misconduct of such a workman and such
                              an enquiry must begin with the supply of a
                              specific charge sheet to him.
30.In the instant case, on a perusal of the
                              charge sheet it is evident that the charges laid
                              down are precise and specific in nature along
                              with the relevant provision of the standing order
                              and neatly lays down the consequences thereof.
We do not also find from the said charge sheet
                              that there was any patent or latent vagueness
                              involved and they are unintelligible. This is
                              clearly evident from the explanation furnished
                              by the respondent dated 6th of August, 1984
                              where he clearly denied all the charges and also
                              mentioned the name of the four appellant-
witnesses who were examined in the enquiry
                              proceedings   subsequently.     This    is   a   clear
                              indication that the respondent was fully aware
24/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
of the charges and even their specifications and
                                 also the probable witnesses for his misconduct
                                 and hence the entire plea falls flat on the face
                                 of it.”
8.According to the learned counsel, the principal objection

                      to the charge memorandum is that it is extremely vague and did not

                      contain specific details regarding the time and date as to when the

                      workman was found to be absent and was wasting his time during

                      working hours.       In this case, the workman understood the charges

                      against him fully and has given a reply. From the reply, it could be

                      seen that the charges have been fully understood, but only in order to

                      wriggle out of the charges, the workman has come up with the

                      allegation of vagueness, which in fact, is not supported by any

                      materials other than his own objection.
9.The learned counsel would, therefore, submit that the

                      Labour Court has completely erred in accepting the objection of the

                      workman that the charges suffered from vagueness and therefore, the

                      domestic enquiry conducted into the charges cannot be fair and

                      proper.
25/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
(
vi) U.P.State Road Transport Corporation vs Suresh

                      Chand Sharma
– [2010 (6) SCC 555], wherein also the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court has held that in domestic enquiry, complicated

                      principles and procedures
laid down in
the Code of Civil Procedure
or
Evidence Act
, do not apply. The only right of a delinquent employee is

                      that he must be informed as to what are the charges against him and

                      he must be given full opportunity to defend himself on the said charge.
10.Therefore,    the   learned   counsel   for   the   petitioner

                      Management     would submit that the Labour Court has presumably

                      applied the strict principle of evidence, which led to erroneous

                      conclusion that the enquiry concluded against the workman was not

                      fair and proper.   The Labour Court ought to have seen that whether

                      the workman concerned was given sufficient opportunity to defend

                      himself in the enquiry.     It cannot appreciate the correctness of the

                      charges, as that situation would arise only after the preliminary finding

                      is rendered.   Unfortunately, in this case, the Labour Court has gone

                      into the correctness of the charges and held that no matter sufficient

                      opportunity was given to the workman, yet, in view of the vagueness

                      of the charges, the enquiry was to be held as not proper and not fair.
26/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
Therefore, the Labour Court has over reached its jurisdiction in regard

                      to rendering of preliminary finding in this matter.
11.In this regard, the learned counsel would rely on the

                      decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
M.L.Singla vs.

                      Punjab National Bank
[2018 SCC Online SC 1585]. The learned

                      counsel would rely on paragraph Nos.25 and 34, which are extracted

                      hereunder:
“25.While deciding this question, it was
                                   not necessary for the Labour Court to examine
                                   as to whether the charges are made out or not.
                                   In other words, the enquiry for deciding the
                                   question should have been confined to the
                                   factors such as what is the nature of the
                                   charge(s), its gravity, whether it is major or
                                   minor as per rules, the findings of the Enquiry
                                   Officer on the charges, the employee's overall
                                   service record and the punishment imposed etc.
34.In other words, the Labour Court failed
                                   to   see   that   it   would   have   assumed   the
                                   jurisdiction to examine the charges on the
                                   merits only after the domestic enquiry had been
                                   held illegal and secondly, the employer had
27/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
sought permission to adduce evidence on merits
                                   to prove the charges and on permission being
                                   granted he had led the evidence.”
12.According to the learned counsel for the petitioner

                      Management, the Labour Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in

                      examining the correctness of the charges at the preliminary stage and

                      such finding rendered by the Labour Court is contrary to the law
laid

                      down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
13.State Bank of India andn
Others vs. Narendra

                      Kumar Pandey
– [2013(2) SCC 740]. The learned counsel would

                      rely on paragraph Nos.20 and 23 of the judgment, which are extracted

                      hereunder:
“20.We are of the view that the High
                                   Court has committed an error in holding that
                                   the charge-sheet should have mentioned about
                                   the details of the documents and the names of
                                   the witnesses which the Bank proposed to
                                   examine and a list to that effect should have
                                   been appended to the charge sheet. We may
                                   point out that the charge-sheet need not
                                   contain the details of the documents or the
28/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
names    of   the     witnesses   proposed   to   be
                                 examined to prove the charges or a list to that
                                 effect unless there is a specific provision to that
                                 effect. Charge-sheet, in other words, is not
                                 expected to be a record of evidence. Fair
                                 procedure does not mean giving of copies of
                                 the documents or list of witnesses along with
                                 the charge-sheet. Of course, statement of
                                 allegations has to accompany the charge-
                                 sheet, when required by the Service Rules.
23.The Inquiring Authority has examined each
                                 and every charge levelled against the charged
                                 officer and the documents produced by the
                                 presenting officer and came to the conclusion
                                 that most of the charges were proved. In a
                                 departmental inquiry, the disciplinary authority
                                 is   expected    to     prove     the   charges   on
                                 preponderance of probability and not on proof
                                 beyond reasonable doubt.....”


                      The learned counsel for the petitioner Management would submit that

                      the charges need not contain all the details in domestic enquiry and

                      the proof is also to be based on preponderance of probabilities and not

                      beyond reasonable doubt. Unfortunately, the Labour Court concluded

                      that the charge did not contain details and therefore, is suffered from
29/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
vagueness. Such finding of the Labour Court is contrary to the above

                      Ruling of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
14.General Manager (Operations) State Bank of India

                      and another vs. R.Periyasamy – [2015(3) SCC 101].                    The

                      learned counsel would rely on paragraph No.11, which lays emphasis

                      on 'preponderance of probabilities' concept in domestic enquiries.

                      Paragraph No.11 reads as under:
“11.It is interesting to note that the
                                 learned Single Judge went to the extent of
                                 observing that the concept of preponderance of
                                 probabilities is alien to domestic enquiries. On
                                 the contrary, it is well known that the standard
                                 of proof that must be employed in domestic
                                 enquiries is in fact that of the preponderance of
                                 probabilities.
In
Union of India Vs. Sardar
                                 Bahadur
[3], this Court held that a disciplinary
                                 proceeding is not a criminal trial and thus, the
                                 standard    of   proof   required    is   that   of
                                 preponderance of probabilities and not proof
                                 beyond reasonable doubt. This view was upheld
                                 by this Court in State Bank of India & ors. Vs.
                                 Ramesh Dinkar Punde[4].
More recently, in
30/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
State   Bank   of     India   Vs.    Narendra    Kumar
                                  Pandey
[5],     this    Court        observed    that   a
                                  disciplinary authority is expected to prove the
                                  charges leveled against a bank-officer on the
                                  preponderance of probabilities and not on proof
                                  beyond reasonable doubt.”
15.The learned counsel for the Management would submit

                      that from the collective decisions cited above of the Hon'ble Supreme

                      Court of India as well as this Court, several errors emerge in regard to

                      the finding of the Labour Court against the Management on merits and

                      on the preliminary objection of the maintainability of the writ petition,

                      the decisions as cited above would clearly point to the fact that there is

                      absolutely no bar in entertaining the writ petitions against preliminary

                      awards.
16.As far as the present case on hand is concerned, the

                      learned counsel for the Management would submit that when the

                      finding of the Labour Court is not supported by sound reasons and

                      materials, this Court certainly could interfere with such findings. The

                      learned counsel, after placing reliance on the above decisions,

                      proceeded to draw the attention of this Court to various portions of the
31/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
preliminary award passed by the Labour Court. He would submit that

                      the foundation of the domestic enquiry is a fulfillment of principles of

                      natural justice and in this case, the principles of natural justice have

                      been entirely complied with and no violation of the same has been

                      specifically pointed out by the workman. Further, the correctness of

                      the charges can only be gone into at a later stage by the Labour Court

                      and the Labour Court has to see in the preliminary stage is as to

                      whether the Management has provided sufficient opportunity to the

                      workman and whether the procedure has been followed in line with the

                      established principles of natural justice.
17.In this case, the learned counsel for the petitioner

                      Management would submit that the workman had not protested about

                      any violation and he fully participated in the enquiry and in such event,

                      the Labour Court could not have held that the enquiry was not fair and

                      proper.   According to the learned counsel, the decisions cited above

                      were also cited before the Labour Court, but unfortunately, the Labour

                      Court has overlooked all these decisions and accepted the case of the

                      workman blindly. To the exclusion of all the decisions cited on behalf

                      of the Management, the Labour Court completely relied on two
32/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
decisions cited on behalf of the workman and proceeded to hold that

                      the enquiry was not fair and proper. According to the learned counsel,

                      the Labour Court has completely misdirected itself and hence, the

                      findings of the Labour Court is deeply flawed and liable to be interfered

                      with. In fact, the learned counsel would also submit that the workman

                      himself had admitted, during his examination in the domestic enquiry,

                      that he was helped/assisted by an Advocate, though service of the

                      advocate was not allowed to be engaged in the domestic enquiry.

                      Therefore, he would submit that the writ petition is to be held

                      maintainable and the findings of the Labour Court are to be interfered

                      with.
18.Per contra, Mr.V.Prakash, the learned Senior counsel

                      appearing for the respondent/workman would submit that the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court has consistently held that the writ petition against

                      preliminary award is not maintainable and this Court has also followed

                      the dictum
laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in this

                      regard.   He would rely on the following decisions in regard to the

                      maintainability of the writ petition:
33/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
(i)At the outset, the learned Senior counsel would rely on

                      the decision rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Cooper Engineering Limited vs. Shri P.P.Mundhe
[(1975) 2

                      Supreme Court Cases 661]. The learned Senior counsel would rely

                      on paragraph No.22, which is extracted hereunder:-
“22.We are, therefore, clearly of
                                 opinion that when a case of dismissal or
                                 discharge   of   an   employee   is   referred   for
                                 industrial adjudication the labour court should
                                 first decide as a preliminary issue whether the
                                 domestic enquiry has violated the principles of
                                 natural justice. When there is no domestic
                                 enquiry or defective enquiry is admitted by the
                                 employer, there will be no difficulty. But when
                                 the matter is in controversy between the parties
                                 that question must be decided as a preliminary
                                 issue. On that decision being pronounced it will
                                 be for the management to decide whether it will
                                 adduce any evidence before the labour court. If
                                 it chooses not to adduce any evidence, it will
                                 not be thereafter permissible in any proceeding
                                 to raise the issue.. We should also make it clear
                                 that there will be no justification for any party
                                 to stall the final adjudication of the dispute by
34/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the labour court by questioning its decision with
                                  regard    to the preliminary issue         when the
                                  matter, if worthy, can be agitated even after
                                  the final award. It will be also legitimate for the
                                  High Court to refuse to intervene at this stage.
                                  We are making these observations in our
                                  anxiety   that   there   is   no   undue   delay   in
                                  industrial adjudication. “
19.The learned Senior counsel would submit that the

                      Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has emphatically held that there will

                      not be justification for any party to stall the final adjudication of the

                      dispute by the Labour Court, by questioning its decision with regard to

                      preliminary issue. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it will be

                      legitimate for the High Court to refuse to entertain such dispute.
(ii)The learned Senior counsel would also rely on a Division

                      Bench decision of this Court in
ITC Ltd., Tiruvottiyur, Chennai-600

                      019 vs. Industrial Tribunal
, second Floor, City Civil Court

                      Buildings, Madras and 22 others [2008 (4) CTC 465].
He would

                      draw the attention of this Court to paragraph No.8, wherein, the

                      Division Bench has relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
35/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
of India in the
Cooper Engineering Limited
case, referred supra,

                      that interference at the preliminary stage is not to be encouraged.

                      Paragraph No.8 of the judgment is extracted hereunder:
“8.Apart from that the Hon'ble Apex Court
                                  right from the case of Cooper Engineering
                                  Ltd.v.P.P.Mundhe,         AIR   1975    SC    1900   and
                                  D.P.Maheswari v. Delhi Administration, 1983(2)
                                  LLJ 425 SC frowned upon interference by the
                                  Courts on a preliminary point when the point on
                                  which the interference is sought for can be
                                  challenged after the final award is passed.
                                  Such interference was never encouraged by the
                                  Supreme Court in the interest of expediting
                                  quick    disposal    of    cases   by   the    Industrial
                                  Tribunal.”
(iii) Next, the learned Senior Counsel would rely on the

                      decision   of this Court in     Sundaram Textiles Ltd., Numbi Nagar,

                      Nanguneri Post, Tirunelveli Distrit vs. The Presiding Officer,

                      Labour Court, Tirunelveli and Others [W.P.(MD) Nos.9980 to

                      9983 of 2011, dated 14.10.2011]. The learned Judge of this Court,

                      in the above writ petition, has held in paragraph No.12 that it is wrong
36/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
on the part of the Management to have challenged the preliminary

                      award. Paragraph No.12 is extracted hereunder:
“12.In such circumstances, it is wrong on
                                  the part of the management to have challenged
                                  the preliminary order. It is always open to them
                                  to challenge a final Award as and when any
                                  adverse award is passed against them by the
                                  Labour Court. This Court is not inclined to
                                  entertain these writ petitions and hence, all the
                                  writ   petitions   stand   dismissed.   No     costs.
                                  Consequently,        connected      miscellaneous
                                  petitions are closed. “
(iv) Apart from the above, the learned Senior counsel

                      would also rely on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India

                      in
D.P.Maheshwari
's case.
The said case is a landmark case, apart

                      from
Cooper
's case, which laid emphasis that preliminary award

                      should not be a subject matter of challenge in the higher Courts, by

                      staling the final adjudication of the Labour dispute.
20.The learned Senior Counsel would submit that               as

                      stated in the preliminary objection raised as to the maintainability of
37/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the writ petition, no prejudice would be caused to the Management,

                      since the right to challenge the preliminary award will always remain

                      intact even after the final order was passed by the Labour Court.

                      Therefore, the learned Senior counsel would submit that as far as the

                      present case on hand is concerned, the challenge to the preliminary

                      finding rendered by the Labour Court is completely misplaced and

                      misconceived, particularly, in view of the fact that the Labour Court

                      has premised its finding on the basis of sufficient materials and sound

                      reasons. Therefore, the challenge by the Management lacks in bona

                      fides and the same is intended to frustrate the workman from getting

                      his dispute adjudicated finally. Therefore, the learned Senior counsel

                      would implore this Court to dismiss the writ petition as being not

                      maintainable, without going into the merits of the objections raised on

                      behalf of the Management.
21.As regards the merits of the objections raised on behalf

                      of the Management, the learned Senior counsel would submit that the

                      preliminary award of the Labour Court was a well considered decision

                      and the learned Senior counsel in his turn would draw the attention of

                      this Court to the basis of the findings of the Labour Court. The learned
38/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
Senior counsel would draw the attention of this Court to Paragraph

                      Nos.14 to 20 of the preliminary award, which are extracted hereunder:
“14.   In   the   light   of   the   above
                                 judgements, the rival factors considered.            In
                                 every domestic enquiry, no doubt the charge
                                 memo is the base. As rightly pointed out by the
                                 learned counsel for the prtitioner, from the face
                                 of the said charge memo, in respect of the
                                 charge
u/s.24 (24)
, it is not specific on the time
                                 of the shift and the name of the Supervisor who
                                 reported the misconducts were to mentioned.
                                 Further, it is not clear and specific from the
                                 Ex.M5 memo that, what are all the dates on
                                 which the petitioner was found missing from the
                                 work spot.    Further, it is not mentioned in the
                                 Ex.M5 memo regarding the date, time, place,
                                 the abusive language and the name of the
                                 worker against whom the petitioner used such
                                 filthy words. Further, in the said memo, there is
                                 no specific mention as to, the date, time, place
                                 and the threatening words and the name of the
                                 new apprentices against whom the petitioner
                                 used such words.         Even during the domestic
                                 enquiry, from the cursory view of the evidence
                                 adduced by the MW.1 Mr. Natarajan, for the
39/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
limited purpose of this issue, it is seen that , no
                              names of the affected workers were mentioned.
                              Further, it is not clear as to, whether the witness
                              Natarajan has personally witnessed all these
                              misconducts or whether the affected workmen
                              have reported the same to him. It is seen from
                              the cursory view of the report of Mr. Natarajan
                              in Ex.M15 dated 30.10.2008 that, he has not
                              mentioned the names of the affected workmen
                              or apprentices or the nature of the language
                              used by the petitioner, and the date, time and
                              place.         Without     these    basic       details,     the
                              management would not expect the workman to
                              reply for the charges. On that score, the claim
                              of the petitioner that the charge memo is vague
                              has to be accepted.
15.   The     facts   of   the     case         further
                              considered. It is learnt from the charge memo
                              that, the misconducts of the petitioner were
                              reported to the management on 30.10.2008 and
                              only on the basis of the said report, the charges
                              were levelled on this petitioner. From the reply
                              sent     by    the     petitioner   on      Ex.M6          dated
                              15.11.2008,          the   petitioner     has     specifically
                              mentioned that, the said report which is the
                              base     for   all   the   allegations    has      not     been
                              furnished      the     copy    of   the     report         dated
40/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
30.10.2008 to the petitioner in order to submit
                              his detailed reply. On the other hand, they have
                              not furnished and the said report has been
                              served on the petitioner only during the time of
                              domestic    enquiry.       What     prevented     the
                              respondents to serve the copy of the Ex.M15
                              even in the initial stage itself has not been
                              properly explained. The above lapse on the part
                              of the management goes to squarely hit the
                              fairness of the domestic enquiry.
16. On considering the facts in further, it is
                              seen from the enquiry proceedings that, so
                              specific charges were read over to the petitioner
                              by the Enquiry officer before commencement of
                              the enquiry proceedings.          During the cross
                              examination of the MW.1 done by the petitioner,
                              the   Enquiry   officer   has   recorded   only   the
                              answers in three numbers and has not recorded
                              any of the questions put to the witness by the
                              petitioner. On the other hand, the cursory view
                              of the Ex.M12 enquiry report for the very limited
                              purpose of this issue, it is seen that, the Enquiry
                              officer has mentioned the dates and time of the
                              absence of the petitioner during his duty hours
                              and also the names of the workmen and the
                              apprentices, who were alleged to have been
                              intimidated by the petitioner.       On the other
41/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
hand, none of the above facts were mentioned in
                              the Ex.M11 and M12.
17.     From         the    above        facts      and
                              circumstances, this court is of the considered
                              view that, the charges were not specific and
                              precise and the material documents were not
                              supplied to the petitioner and the report of the
                              Enquiry officer is lacking in all the above
                              aspects, and hence it has tobe concluded that
                              the     Enquiry    officer    has       not   conducted     the
                              domestic enquiry in a fair and proper manner
                              and his report has to be set aside for the reason
                              stated above.
18. At this juncture, the learned counsel
                              for the respondent would submit that, in case, if
                              the enquiry is found to be defective by this
                              court, then necessarily, they have to be given a
                              fair chance to prove the charges before this
                              court     and      if   such        a     situation      arises,
                              unfortunately, due to the lapse of time, they
                              were in a handicapped position to locate the
                              concerned witnesses to prove the charges before
                              this court.       Further, it is his contention that,
                              since the delay has been caused only by the
                              conduct of the petitioner, they               should not be
                              placed in a disadvantageous position which will
                              affect the interest of the respondent company.
42/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
19. Considered.     The dispute has been
                              raised in the year 2009 and for so many
                              reasons, the proceedings were pending for long
                              time and this court is not inclined to go into
                              those details as to, who is the reason for the
                              delay. When the report of the Enquiry officer is
                              exfacie lacking in merits, then the respondents
                              cannot be permitted to take advantage of the
                              delay caused in this proceedings.         When the
                              interest     of   both   parties   were   taken   for
                              consideration, this court is of the view that, the
                              balance of convenience has to lien in favour of
                              the workman, who is in a disadvantageous
                              position than the management.        On that score,
                              the contention raised by the learned counsel for
                              the respondents cannot be accepted.
20. From the facts discussed above, this
                              court concludes that the domestic enquiry has
                              not been conducted in a fair and proper manner
                              by the respondent and this preliminary issue is
                              answered accordingly.
In the result, it is held that the domestic
                              enquiry has not been conducted in a fair and
                              proper manner by the respondent and the
                              enquiry report dated 21.01.2009 is hereby set
                              aside.
43/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
22.In regard to the vagueness of the award, on behalf of

                      the workman, the learned Senior Counsel would rely on two decisions

                      of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as under:
(
i) Anil Gilurker v. Bilaspur Rajpur Kshetriya Gramin

                      Bank and another
– [2011 (14) SCC 379]. The learned Senior

                      counsel would draw the attention of this Court to paragraph Nos.11 to

                      14, which are extracted hereunder:-
“11.A plain reading of the charges and the
                                 statement of imputations reproduced above
                                 would show that only vague allegations were
                                 made    against   the   appellant   that   he   had
                                 sanctioned loans to a large number of brick
                                 manufacturing       units      by      committing
                                 irregularities, but did not disburse the entire
                                 loan amount to the borrowers and while a
                                 portion of the loan amount was deposited in the
                                 account of the borrowers, the balance was
                                 misappropriated by him and others. The details
                                 of the loan accounts or the names of the
                                 borrowers have not been mentioned in the
                                 charges. The amounts of loan which were
                                 sanctioned and the amounts which were actually
                                 disbursed to the borrowers and the amounts
44/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
alleged to have been misappropriated by the
                              appellant have not been mentioned.
12.We   also find that along with the
                              charge-sheet dated 31.01.1989 no statement of
                              imputations giving the particulars of the loan
                              accounts or the names of the borrowers, the
                              amounts of loans sanctioned, disbursed and
                              misappropriated      were    furnished   to    the
                              appellant, and yet the disciplinary authority has
                              called upon the appellant to submit his written
                              defence statement in reply to the charges. We
                              fail to appreciate how the appellant could have
                              submitted his written statement in defence in
                              respect of the charges and how a fair enquiry
                              could be held unless he was furnished with the
                              particulars of the loan accounts or the names of
                              the borrowers, the amounts of loan sanctioned,
                              the   amounts     actually   disbursed   and   the
                              amounts misappropriated were also furnished in
                              the charge- sheet.
13.As has been held by this Court in
Surath Chandra Chakrabarty v. State of West
                              Bengal
(supra):
"5. .....The grounds on which it is proposed to
                              take action have to be reduced to the form of a
45/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
definite charge or charges which have to be
                              communicated to the person charged together
                              with a statement of the allegations on which
                              each    charge    is   based     and    any        other
                              circumstance which it is proposed to be taken
                              into consideration in passing orders has also to
                              be stated. This rule embodies a principle which
                              is one of the basic contents of a reasonable or
                              adequate opportunity for defending oneself. If a
                              person is not told clearly and definitely what the
                              allegations are on which the charges preferred
                              against him are founded he cannot possibly, by
                              projecting his own imagination, discover all the
                              facts and circumstances that may be in the
                              contemplation     of   the     authorities    to     be
                              established against him....."
14.This position of law has been
                              reiterated in the recent case of
Union of India &
                              Ors. v. Gyan Chand Chattar
(supra) and in Para
                              35 of the judgment as reported in the SCC, this
                              Court   has   observed   that    the   law    can    be
                              summarized that an enquiry is to be conducted
                              against any person giving strict adherence to
                              the statutory provisions and principles of natural
                              justice and the charges should be specific,
                              definite and giving details of the incident which
46/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
formed the basis of charges and no enquiry can
                                 be sustained on vague charges.”
(ii) The learned Senior counsel would also rely another

                      decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Anant R Kulkarni

                      vs. Y.P.Educational Society and another
– [2013(6) SCC 515].
He would rely on Paragraph No.16, which would run thus:
“16.Where      the        charge-sheet        is
                                 accompanied by the statement of facts and the
                                 allegations are not specific in the chargesheet,
                                 but are crystal clear from the statement of facts,
                                 in such a situation, as both constitute the same
                                 document, it cannot be held that as the charges
                                 were not specific, definite and clear, the enquiry
                                 stood    vitiated.   Thus,   nowhere      should      a
                                 delinquent be served a charge-sheet, without
                                 providing to him, a clear, specific and definite
                                 description of the charge against him. When
                                 statement of allegations are not served with the
                                 charge-sheet, the enquiry stands vitiated, as
                                 having    been   conducted   in    violation    of   the
                                 principles of natural justice. Evidence adduced
                                 should not be perfunctory, even if the delinquent
                                 does not take the defence of, or make a protest
47/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
with against that the charges are vague, that
                                  does not save the enquiry from being vitiated,
                                  for the reason that there must be fair-play in
                                  action,    particularly      in   respect     of    an      order
                                  involving adverse or penal consequences. What
                                  is required to be examined is whether the
                                  delinquent      knew     the      nature    of     accusation.
The charges should           be   specific,      definite    and
                                  giving details of the incident which formed the
                                  basis     of   charges    and      no   enquiry       can     be
                                  sustained on vague charges.”
23.In both the decisions above, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

                      of India has laid emphasis on the definiteness of the charges, as the

                      charge must be specific, definite, clear, as otherwise the enquiry would

                      stand vitiated.     In fact, the Labour Court has relied on the said

                      decisions   in    coming     to    the     conclusion        adverse      against   the

                      Management.
24.The learned Senior counsel Mr.V.Prakash, apart from

                      the maintainability and vagueness of the charges, would also rely on

                      the following decisions in support of his other contentions:
48/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
(i)Rangarajan (S.) and Srirangam Janopakara Bank

                      Ltd., and another [W.P.No.380 of 1960, dated 18.7.1962]. The

                      learned Senior counsel would rely on the following passage from the

                      judgment:
“Domestic enquiry – Principles of natural
                                  justice and reasonable opportunity – A board of
                                  directors enquiring into the allegations levelled
                                  against the employee – Two of such directors
                                  had already made statements in support of the
                                  charges – Copies of the statements of such
                                  witnesses not furnished to the employee – The
                                  employee called upon in the forenoon to attend
                                  the domestic enquiry to be held in the same
                                  evening    –   The     domestic    enquiry   and   the
                                  conclusions arrived at such enquiry in the
                                  circumstances, held, vitiated by violation of
                                  principles of natural justice.”
                                         “3.Under the first point it is said that out
                                  of thirteen directors of the Board, two had
                                  admittedly given statements in support of the
                                  charges. It appears to be also a fact that two
                                  other directors including the ad hoc president
                                  gave      additional      evidence     before      the
                                  Commissioner.        In   such    circumstances    the
                                  argument is that these directors were liable to
                                  be charged with bias and at any rate their
49/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
participation in the enquiry was likely to raise
                              the petitioner's apprehension as to whether he
                              could at all have an impartial and objective
                              enquiry and decision. A further point also is
                              made that since the statements of the two
                              directors were taken behind the petitioner's
                              back and he was not supplied with copies
                              thereof and as only a short time was given on
                              10th June, 1954 to get ready for his defence,
                              he has had no reasonable opportunity to defend
                              himself against the charges. It seems to me
                              that every one of these contentions is well
                              founded.
7.The other grievance of the petitioner
                              that he was not given a reasonable opportunity
                              to defend himself also appears to be well
                              founded. The statements of the two directors
                              were never brought home to the petitioner. No
                              copies of them were given to the petitioner and
                              not even an indication was given to him that
                              those statements were going to be relied on
                              against him. Naturally therefore, he could not
                              ask for cross-examining the directors in respect
                              of   them.   It   seems      to   me     that   in     such
                              circumstances      it   cannot    be   said     that    the
                              petitioner   had        a   reasonable     opportunity.
Reasonable opportunity means not only framing
50/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
of charges and asking for explanation but much
                                   more. He must be apprised of the material on
                                   which the charges were framed so that he could
                                   have   a   proper    opportunity   of    testing    or
                                   challenging that material so far as would be
                                   possible for him.......”
25.In the above matter, the learned Judge of this Court

                      has held that reasonable opportunity includes furnishing of basic

                      documents.    In this case, admittedly, the basic report, on which the

                      charges   framed    against   the   workman,    was     not     furnished   and

                      therefore, the learned Senior counsel would submit that the conclusion

                      by the Labour Court is perfectly in line with the legal principles
laid

                      down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and also by this Court

                      and in such view of the matter, the present writ petition has to be

                      dismissed on merits also.
26.The learned Senior counsel would also rely on the

                      decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Chairman and

                      Managing Director, Central Bank of India and Others vs. Central

                      Bank of India, SC/ST Employees Welfare Association and

                      Others
[Manu/SC/0019/2016], in order to highlight what is error
51/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
apparent on the face of the record. The learned Senior counsel would

                      submit that in this case, no such error could be found in the

                      preliminary award passed by the Labour Court, since, the preliminary

                      award was passed on sound reasoning with supportive materials.
(
ii)Ebrahim Aboobakar and Others vs. Custodian

                      General of Evdacuee Property
[Manu/SC/0058/1952].                    The

                      learned Senior counsel would reply on Paragraph No.14 of the order,

                      which is extracted hereunder:
“14.The remaining three questions canvassed
                           before us, unless they are of such a nature as would
                           make the decision of the respondent dated the 13th
                           May, 1950, a nullity, cannot be the subject-matter of
                           a writ of certiorari. It is plain that such a writ cannot
                           be granted to quash the decision of an inferior court
                           within its jurisdiction on the ground that the decision
                           is wrong. Indeed, it must be shown before such a writ
                           is issued that the authority which passed the order
                           acted without jurisdiction or in excess of it or in
                           violation of the principles of natural justice. Want of
                           jurisdiction may arise from the nature of the subject
                           matter, so that the inferior court might not have
                           authority to enter on the inquiry or upon some part of
52/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
it. It may also arise from the absence of some
                            essential preliminary or upon the existence of some
                            particular facts collateral to the actual matter which
                            the court has to try and which are conditions
                            precedent to the assumption of jurisdiction by it. But
                            once it is held that the court has jurisdiction but while
                            exercising it, it made a mistake, the wronged party
                            can only take the course prescribed by law for setting
                            matters right inasmuch as a court has jurisdiction to
                            decide rightly as well as wrongly. The three questions
                            agitated before us do not seem to be questions which
                            bear upon the jurisdiction of the court of appeal, or its
                            authority to entertain them.”
27.In
the above case
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India

                      has held as early as in 1952 that in case any party feels wrong by the

                      decision of the Court, it can only take recourse prescribed by law.

                      Therefore,   the   learned   Senior   counsel   would    submit   that   by

                      implication, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the

                      preliminary award need not be put to challenge at the instance of the

                      Management, when the Management has a recourse to challenge the

                      preliminary award along with the final award, in case, it is aggrieved.
53/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
(
iii) Pratap Mehta and Others vs. Sunil Gupta and

                      Others
[Manu/SC/1253/2018]. The learned Senior counsel would

                      rely on paragraph No.31 of the judgment, which is extracted

                      hereunder:
“31.The above decision in no manner
                                   support the case of the appellant rather it
                                   reiterates that the High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
can interfere with an arbitrary order
                                   passed by an authority. The next judgment
                                   relied by the appellant is Constitution Bench
                                   judgment of this Court in Syed Yakoob (supra).
                                   This Court had elaborately considered the scope
                                   of
Article   226
of   the   Constitution   in   the
                                   aforesaid case. This Court held that a writ of
                                   certiorari can be issued for correcting errors of
                                   jurisdiction committed by inferior courts or
                                   tribunals. It was further held that jurisdiction of
                                   High Court under
Article 226
to issue a writ of
                                   certiorari is a supervisory jurisdiction and the
                                   High Court exercising it is not entitled to act as
                                   an appellate court.”
28.The learned Senior counsel would submit that as per
54/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the above decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, the

                      jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India

                      in undertaking judicial review is rather limited to see error apparent on

                      the face of the record and the jurisdiction is not appellate jurisdiction.
29.The learned Senior counsel would therefore submit that

                      unless there is a grave error committed by the Labour Court, the same

                      does not call for interference by this Court.
30.To sum up, the learned Senior counsel would submit

                      that the Labour Court in principal accepted the two decisions relied on

                      by the respondent/workman, viz.,
(i)Anil Gilurker vs. Bilaspur Raipur Kshetriya Gramin Bank

                      and Another [2011 (14) SCC 379] and
(
ii)Anant R Kulkarni vs. Y.P.Educational Society and

                      Another
[2013(6) SCC 515].
55/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
31.In regard to the vagueness of charges, the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court of India has in clear terms held that if the charges

                      were vague, the enquiry stood vitiated. Therefore, the Labour Court

                      has correctly followed the legal principle
laid down by
the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court of India and come to the right conclusion holding that

                      the domestic enquiry conducted against the workman was not fair and

                      proper.
32.The       learned     Senior          counsel        for        the

                      respondent/workman would therefore submit that the writ petition is

                      liable to be dismissed on both counts, viz., not maintainable in regard

                      to the challenge of the preliminary award passed by the Labour Court

                      and also on merits, as the findings of the Labour Court are well

                      founded, which cannot be construed as legally unacceptable or

                      perverse.
33.This    Court    bestowed      upon     itself     its     anxious

                      consideration   to    various   objections    both     in    regard       to   the

                      maintainability of the writ petition and also on merits of the conclusion

                      reached by the Labour Court, raised on behalf of both the Management
56/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
as well as the workman.
34.This Court while endeavoring to set at rest the

                      controversy between the Management and the workman both in

                      regard to the maintainability of the writ petition as well as on merits,

                      has decided to answer both the points, on the basis of various

                      decisions relied on by the learned counsels appearing on either side

                      and submissions made on their behalf.
35.The   foremost   objection   raised   on   behalf   of   the

                      respondent/workman is to the maintainability of the writ petition, since

                      the writ petition is against the preliminary award passed by the Labour

                      Court, dated 15.05.2018, in I.D.No.772 of 2009, holding that the

                      domestic enquiry conducted against the workman, which culminated in

                      the order of dismissal passed against him, was not fair and proper.
36.In regard to the preliminary objection of maintainability

                      of the writ petition, this Court has to take into consideration the rival

                      submissions made by the learned counsels both for the Management

                      and for the Labour and the decisions relied on by them. As far as the
57/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
decision relied on by the learned counsel for the Management, it is

                      seen that there is no legal bar in absolute terms to entertain the writ

                      petitions against preliminary award passed by Labour Courts/Tribunal.

                      In fact, the learned counsel for the Management would rely on host of

                      decisions in order to emphasize the fact that the Courts have

                      entertained writ petitions against preliminary award. This Court cannot

                      have any quarrel over such submission made on behalf of the

                      Management. However, in the larger perspective of finding a final

                      resolution to the dispute between the management and the labour, the

                      ultimate task of this Court is to ensure that the weaker party is not

                      prejudiced at all if the higher Courts start interfering in preliminary

                      matters as a matter of routine. Ofcourse, when the issue regarding

                      maintainability of the dispute is seriously raised and answered in the

                      negative, it is open to the aggrieved party to approach the higher

                      Courts seeking appropriate remedies at that stage itself. But it is

                      certainly not open to the Management to challenge the preliminary

                      award as a matter of course, with a view to drag the proceedings

                      pending before the Industrial Adjudicator. When the Management

                      embarks upon such litigious journey even at the preliminary stage, the

                      person truly affected is the workman, since he would not be in a
58/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
position to fight the dispute with unflagging vigor and strength till a

                      final resolution is found for the dispute, after a lapse of several years.

                      Therefore,   any   attempt     by   the   management   to   challenge   the

                      preliminary award has to be evaluated critically by this Court, so that

                      by entertaining such writ petitions, the right of the workman shall not

                      be prejudiced or frustrated.
37.This is precisely what the Hon'ble Supreme Court of

                      India has held in
Cooper Engineering
case [(1975) 2 SCC 661] in

                      paragraph No. 22 which is extracted supra, followed by a Division

                      Bench decision of this Court in
ITC Ltd.
, case [2008 (4) CTC 465],

                      paragraph No. 8 of which was also extracted supra. Further the

                      learned Judge of this Court has also held in paragraph No.12, as

                      extracted above, that it is always open to the management to

                      challenge the preliminary award along with the final award and no

                      prejudice would be caused to the management. Therefore, ultimately

                      as between the right of the Management and the Labour, what

                      emerges is that the right of the Management does not suffer any

                      prejudice if the management is turned away from its attempt to

                      challenge the preliminary award, since as held by this Court, it is
59/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
always open to the Management to challenge the adverse preliminary

                      award along with the main award in case they are aggrieved.
38.On the other hand, the right of the workman to have

                      the final resolution to the dispute gets derailed midstream by sheer

                      pendency of challenge before the higher forum and that pendency

                      would ultimately and invariably result in subverting the legitimate

                      expectation of the workman to have the dispute resolved finally.

                      Therefore, the balance of convenience in such situation is to ensure

                      that the weaker party ought not to suffer any prejudice by the acts of

                      the Courts. In such consideration, this Court has to necessarily come

                      to the conclusion that normally the challenge against preliminary

                      award ought not to be entertained and the Courts must be wary of

                      entertaining such writ petition, as the adverse effect of such

                      entertainment of the writ petition would befall the workman and take

                      away the essence of challenge and push the workman to precipice

                      despair and helplessness. In the said circumstances, this Court has to

                      see, as far the present case on hand is concerned, whether challenge

                      by the Management here is bona fide and whether if the challenge is

                      not entertained, the Management would suffer irreparable prejudice, if
60/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the industrial adjudicator is not allowed to proceed with finalization of

                      the dispute.
39.In this case, the Labour Court has passed a preliminary

                      award holding that the domestic enquiry conducted against the

                      workman was not fair and proper. The said finding of the Labour Court

                      was premised on the most crucial aspect of the charges leveled against

                      the workman, viz., the vagueness as being imprecise and              non-

                      specific. Admittedly, there was no imputation to the charge memo

                      issued to the workman and what was placed before the lLbour Court

                      was Ex.M5, which was the suspension order, in which charges were

                      mentioned under 24(12), 24, 25, 33, 26(b) of Certified Standing

                      Orders. The charges as mentioned in the suspension order reads as

                      under:
“It is reported that on 30.10.2008, in
                            your respective shift, you were given the allotted
                            work of oil ring loading at Cr4 Department.        You
                            refused to perform the allotted work          by your
                            supervisor.     It is also reported that you are found
                            missing from the work spot everyday half an hour to
                            one hour before or after the lunch (i.e. Between
61/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
10.00 a.m. to 11.30 a.m. and wasting your valuable
                            working time by often loitering and disturbing other
                            co-workers while in their duty.        You also have the
                            habit of using filthy and abuse languages in the
                            department and also often instigate and threaten the
                            new apprentices to leave the company.
The above are serious acts of misconduct
                            which    amount    to     gross   indiscipline,   which    is
                            detrimental to the interest of the discipline and
                            affects the production work adversely.”
40.The   Labour    Court,   after   carefully     examining   the

                      contents of the charges and also after relying on (
i)Anil Gilurker vs.

                      Bilaspur Raipur Kshetriya Gramin Bank and Another
[2011 (
14)

                      SCC 379] and (ii)Anant R Kulkarni vs. Y.P.Educational Society

                      and Another
[2013(6) SCC 515], cited on behalf of the workman,

                      has held that the charges were imprecise, vague and not specific. The

                      two decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, which were relied

                      on by the learned Senior counsel laid down the principle that if the

                      charges were bereft of specific details, the same could vitiate

                      consequential disciplinary action. The Labour Court, after analysing the
62/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
contents of the charges had therefore come to the conclusion that the

                      domestic enquiry conducted on the vague charges was      not fair and

                      proper. The Labour Court, in fact has also premised its reason on the

                      admitted fact that the basic report dated 30.10.2008, which was

                      marked as Ex.M15 before the Labour Court, was not furnished to the

                      workman along with the charge memorandum. In the absence of the

                      basic report being furnished to the workman, though the workman has

                      given his reply to the charge memorandum, the fact remained that the

                      basis of the charges was not disclosed to the workman and non-

                      furnishing of the basic report therefore amounted to not affording

                      reasonable opportunity to the workman. This was more particularly so

                      when the charges did not contain any details as to the date and time

                      where the workman was found to be loitering and disturbing the other

                      workers on their duty. The other charges of using filthy language,

                      instigating and threatening of the new apprentices, which were also

                      alleged without disclosing any specific date and time of such conduct

                      exhibited by the workman during the period of his employment. In the

                      above circumstances, the Labour Court was left with no option except

                      to come to the conclusion that the domestic enquiry, on the basis of

                      such vague charges, could not be held to be proper and fair, which
63/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
conclusion by the Labour Court, in the opinion of this Court, does not

                      suffer from any infirmity.    As a consequence of such finding, the

                      management could have sought permission of the Labour Court to let

                      in fresh evidence to establish the charges against the workman, as the

                      right of the Management to take action against the workman for

                      proved charges is not taken away by the preliminary award.
41.Ultimately what remains to be seen is as to whether the

                      Management could be said to have lost their right in the face of the

                      preliminary award passed by the Labour Court. As held by the Hon'ble

                      Supreme Court of India and this Court, the right of the Management to

                      question the preliminary award is rather protected and such right can

                      be enforced even after the final award is passed. Even assuming for a

                      moment, the      right of the Management suffered prejudice as a

                      consequence of the adverse preliminary award and the Labour Court

                      proceeding with the passing of final award, such prejudicial effect on

                      the Management is only transitory and not irreversible, as the right to

                      challenge both the preliminary award as well as the final award is fully

                      preserved for the Management. Therefore, in that view of the matter

                      this Court is unable to appreciate as to how the management could
64/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
said to be irreparably prejudiced in the teeth of the preliminary award

                      passed by the Labour Court.
42.Considering the above facts and the finding of the

                      Labour Court regarding the preliminary conclusion, this Court is of the

                      view that there cannot be any other conclusion except the conclusion

                      as reached by the Labour Court. When such is the position, the

                      challenge by the Management to the preliminary award passed by the

                      Labour Court appears to be lacking in bona fides and the same has to

                      be discountenanced by this Court.
43.In these circumstances, this Court is of the firm view

                      that the writ petition filed by the Management against the preliminary

                      conclusion is not maintainable, as the preliminary award passed by the

                      Labour Court against the Management did not finally determine the

                      rights of parties, which could be prejudicial to the interest of one party

                      against the other. As narrated above, there may be some cases, as a

                      matter of exception, where any finding of the Labour Court on a

                      preliminary framing of issue may go to the root of the matter like

                      whether the Management is an industry or not? Whether the workman
65/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
comes within the definition of the
Industrial Disputes Act
or not? and

                      any such substantive maintainability issues are raised and any adverse

                      finding is given, the party aggrieved need not be subjected to full

                      fledged trial towards final resolution of the dispute. In such exceptional

                      circumstances, the preliminary awards can be a subject matter of

                      challenge. However, this is not one such case, which can be treated as

                      exceptional one calling for intervention at the preliminary stage.
44.Be that as it may. As regards the second challenge is

                      concerned, viz., the merits of the findings of the Labour Court, this

                      Court, in the earlier part of the order, has in extenso extracted

                      paragraph Nos. 14 to 20 of the preliminary award. From the contents

                      of the reasons and the analysis of the Labour Court, it could be clearly

                      discerned that the Labour Court has discharged the task of rendering a

                      preliminary finding appreciably and effectively. The contents of the

                      charges do not spell out any specific instances of the act of misconduct

                      committed by the workman. The tone and tenor of the charges appear

                      to be too generic of allegations, bereft of any details. In fact,

                      admittedly,    there   was   no   separate   imputation   to   the   charge

                      memorandum issued. The basic report on which the charges were
66/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
framed, dated 30.10.2008, a copy of which was not furnished to the

                      workman along with the charge memorandum. Ofcourse, the basic

                      report was furnished to the workman at the time of domestic enquiry,

                      nevertheless, non furnishing of the basic report, which was a

                      foundation of the charges, is deemed to have affected the right of the

                      workman to defend the charges effectively.
45.The learned counsel appearing for the Management

                      cited several decisions, which were
referred to above
, contending that

                      the strict Rules of evidence need not be followed. No prejudice

                      suffered by the workman was          shown. The standard of proof in

                      domestic enquiry is different from the standard of proof in the criminal

                      proceedings.   No   details   need   to   be   mentioned   in   the   charge

                      memorandum. The Labour Court cannot also go into the correctness of

                      the charges at the stage of giving a preliminary finding. This Court,

                      while   appreciating   the    arguments   advanced    on   behalf     of   the

                      management by the learned counsel, is in agreement with the

                      submissions made in regard to each of those objections and

                      contentions. However, ultimately the action of the Management has to

                      be tested on the touch stone of prejudice. According to the learned
67/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
counsel for the Management no prejudice was shown by the workman

                      and therefore, the charges could not be termed as vague.
46.This Court is unable to comprehend and appreciate the

                      arguments for the reason that the prejudice is writ large on the

                      vagueness of charges, particularly when the charges were not

                      accompanied by imputations. No doubt, the charge memorandum need

                      not contain all details, but at the same time, in the absence of

                      imputations of misconduct, the charge memorandum without specific

                      details, has to be held as being vague and any disciplinary action

                      initiated on such charges has to be held as vitiated.
47.In the case on hand, according to the learned counsel

                      for the Management, no prejudice was shown by the workman, as he

                      fully participated in the domestic enquiry and hence, there was

                      absence of prejudice. Such contention cannot be countenanced both in

                      law and on facts for the simple reason that the participation of the

                      workman in the domestic enquiry does not absolve the Management

                      from its responsibility of levelling specific charges         against the

                      workman, which could be understood by him in clear terms. The
68/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
workman's participation in the enquiry was out of compulsion, as he

                      had no choice and because of the fact that he participated in the

                      enquiry, the workman cannot said to be not prejudiced at all. The

                      prejudice can be noticed and found in the entirety of circumstances of

                      the case and in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the

                      charges suffer from vagueness. Once the charges were found to be

                      vague, any domestic enquiry held into those charges cannot be held to

                      be fair and proper and that is what precisely the Labour Court finding

                      is.
48.So much so was argued in regard to non application of

                      Rules of Evidence, advocates assistance taken by the workman,

                      standard of proof in the domestic enquiries etc. All that would have

                      relevance only when charges are precise and specific. When the

                      charges itself are proved imprecise, not specific and vague, these

                      contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the Management will

                      pale into insignificance. The finding of vagueness of the charges by the

                      Labour Court is well founded and that finding of fact by the Labour

                      Court can be interfered with by this Court, exercising its extraordinary

                      jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, if only the
69/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
finding is legally unacceptable and perverse. The impugned finding of

                      the Labour Court does not suffer from either of the infirmities and

                      therefore, this Court has to conclude that the findings of the labour

                      Court do not call for interference.
49.The learned counsel for the Management would also

                      submit that the Labour Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in going into

                      the correctness of the charges.
In fact, the learned counsel would rely

                      on a specific decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in this

                      regard in
M.L.Singla vs. Punjab National Bank
[2018 SCC Online

                      SC 1585]. The learned counsel placed reliance on paragraph No. 34

                      of the decision, which was extracted supra. This Court once again is of

                      the view that the observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India

                      would have relevance only if the Llabour Court has gone into the

                      correctness of the charges and rendered a finding on a preliminary

                      issue. But as far as the present case is concerned, the Labour Court

                      found that the charges itself were vague after a detailed consideration.

                      When the charges itself were found to be vague, the question of

                      appreciating the    correctness   of the charges does not arise         at all.

                      By implication, when the     charges       were    found    to be   vague,   it

                      becomes         non        est.       Therefore,       the          arguments
70/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
advanced on behalf of the Management on this aspect is misconceived

                      and does not merit serious consideration.
50.In the conspectus of the above discussion, this Court is

                      of the view that the present challenge by the Management has to fail

                      on two grounds, viz., (i) the challenge to the preliminary award, in the

                      facts and circumstances of the case, is not maintainable in terms of

                      several orders passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as well

                      as this Court starting from
Cooper Engineering
case [(1975) 2 SCC

                      661], followed by
ITC Ltd.
, case [2008 (4) CTC 465] and orders

                      passed by this Court, which were
referred to above
. Even otherwise,

                      the finding of the Labour Court in regard to the conduct of the

                      domestic enquiry being not fair and proper has to be upheld, since

                      such    finding   is   premised   on   concrete   material   and   proper

                      understanding of the facts and circumstances and the legal principle as

                      relied on by the learned Senior counsel for the workman. This Court

                      does not find anything amiss in the finding, calling for interference

                      The charges, even in the opinion of this Court, as it framed, are

                      extremely vague and the Labour Court had no option except to come

                      to the conclusion that any disciplinary action by the Management and
71/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
the conduct of the    domestic enquiry into the vague charges, stand

                      vitiated.
51.In the said circumstances, this Court holds that the

                      preliminary finding of the labour Court is perfectly in order and the writ

                      petition shall stand dismissed. The Labour Court is directed to

                      complete the proceedings and pass final award within a period of six

                      months from the date of receipt of copy of this order. It is also made

                      clear that in case the management wants to pursue its option to lead

                      any evidence to establish the charges against the workman, it may

                      approach the Labour Court with appropriate application and if such

                      application is made, the same may be considered by the Labour Court.

                      No costs.      Consequently connected miscellaneous petitions are

                      dismissed.
mrm/msk                                                      30.08.2019



                      To
                      1.The Presiding Officer,
                      III Additional Labour Court, Chennai
72/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
V.PARTHIBAN,J.


                                            mrm/msk




                              Pre-delivery order in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
30.08.2019
73/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.No.19736 of 2018
74/74
http://www.judis.nic.in
