Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 45 of 1860
Citation: SCC    598    and    Kalyan   Chandra   Sarkar    v    Rajesh
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/135048839/

[Cites
57
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Haryana vs Dharamraj on 29 August, 2023
1


2023INSC784


                                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.     OF 2023
                                      (@ OUT OF SLP (Crl.) No.2256/2022)


       STATE OF HARYANA                                                         Appellant(s)

                                                      VERSUS

       DHARAMRAJ                                                               Respondent(s)

                                                  J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.                  Leave granted.
3.                  The   present    appeal   filed     by   the   State   of     Haryana

       seeks cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the

       sole respondent vide Order dated 03.12.2021 (hereinafter

       referred                  to    as   the   “Impugned     Order”)      passed    in   CRM-M

       No.49115/2021 by a learned Single Judge of the High Court

       of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. The respondent is

       accused                   in     First     Information       Report     No.0239      dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
31.07.2020 at Police Station Badshahpur, Gurugram lodged
  Indu Marwah
  Date: 2023.09.01
  17:01:27 IST
  Reason:
under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
325
,
341
,
342
and
427
2
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to

as the “
IPC
”). Later,
Sections 186
,
353
and
364
of the

IPC were also included.
4.       Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submits

that in the background of the nature of the allegations

and the materials collected as well as the respondent

having          been         declared             a     proclaimed               offender1,               grant         of

indulgence under Section 4382 of the Code of                                                             Criminal
1
82. Proclamation for person absconding.—(1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or
not) that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing himself so that such
warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place
and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation.
(2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:—
(i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village in which such person ordinarily resides;
(b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily resides or to
some conspicuous place of such town or village;
(c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the Court House;
(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be published in a daily newspaper circulating
in the place in which such person ordinarily resides.
(3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly published
on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub-section (2), shall be conclusive evidence that the
requirements of this section have been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.
 (4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person accused of an offence punishable
under
Sections 302
,
304
,
364
,
367
,
382
,
392
,
393
,
394
,
395
,
396
,
397
,
398
,
399
,
400
,
402
,
436
,
449
,
459
or 460 of the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), and such person fails to appear at the specified place and time required by the
proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and make a
declaration to that effect.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court under sub-section (4) as
they apply to the proclamation published under sub-section (1).
2
438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.— (1) Where any person has reason to believe that he
may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court
of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court
may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely:—
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
3
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “
CrPC
”)

was erroneous and misplaced. It was submitted that there

is       enough            evidence               to        show       the        complicity               of       the

appellant and further, based on this very order, other

co-accused                 persons             have          been      granted             the          benefit       of
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously undergone imprisonment on
conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by having him so
arrested,
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed any interim order
under this sub-section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer in-
charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended in such
application.
(1-A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less than
seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of
Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be
finally heard by the Court.
(1-B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of final hearing of the
application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor, the Court
considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions
in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit, including—
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police
officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of
Section 437
, as if the bail were granted under that
section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station on such accusation,
and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be
released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should issue in the first
instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under sub-
section (1).
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of having committed
an offence under sub-section (3) of
Section 376
or
Section 376-AB
or
Section 376-DA
or
Section 376-DB
of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).
4
anticipatory       bail,   which    does   not   serve   larger     public

interest.
5.   Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent,

supporting     the     Impugned      Order,      submitted     that     the

Investigating Agency has tried to unnecessarily harass

and implicate the respondent which would be clear from

various manipulations done in the record in the course of

investigation. Further, it is submitted that the State is

trying to show the respondent as the culprit only on the

ground that he shares common name with one accused.
6.   Learned counsel for the State disputes that fact and

submits that the respondent is the person who has been

duly identified and against him the allegations levelled

are found true, per the Investigation Agency.
7.   A foray, albeit brief, into relevant precedents is

warranted.    This    Court      considered   the    factors   to     guide

grant of bail in
Ram Govind Upadhyay v Sudarshan Singh
,

(
2002)   3   SCC    598    and    Kalyan   Chandra   Sarkar    v    Rajesh

Ranjan
, (2004) 7 SCC             528.
In
Prasanta Kumar        Sarkar v

Ashis    Chatterjee
,       (2010)    14    SCC    496,   the    relevant

principles were restated thus:
5
‘9. ... It is trite that this Court does not,
        normally, interfere with an order passed by the
        High Court granting or rejecting bail to the
        accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon
        the High Court to exercise its discretion
        judiciously,   cautiously    and   strictly    in
        compliance with the basic principles
laid down in
a plethora of decisions of this Court on the
        point. It is well settled that, among other
        circumstances, the factors to be borne in mind
        while considering an application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or
        reasonable ground to believe that the accused had
        committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
        conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing,
        if released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and
        standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
        being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being
        thwarted by grant of bail.’
8.
In
Mahipal v Rajesh Kumar
alias Polia, (2020) 2 SCC

118, this Court opined as under:
‘16. The considerations that guide the power of
        an appellate court in assessing the correctness
        of an order granting bail stand on a different
        footing from an assessment of an application for
        the cancellation of bail. The correctness of an
        order granting bail is tested on the anvil of
        whether there was an improper or arbitrary
        exercise of the discretion in the grant of bail.
The test is whether the order granting bail is
        perverse, illegal or unjustified. On the other
        hand, an application for cancellation of bail is
6
generally examined on the anvil of the existence
                 of supervening circumstances or violations of the
                 conditions of bail by a person to whom bail has
                 been granted. …’
9.
In
Bhagwan Singh v Dilip Kumar @ Deepu @ Depak
, 2023

INSC 7613, this Court, in view of
Dolat Ram v State of

Haryana
, (1995) 1 SCC 349;
Kashmira Singh v Duman Singh
,

(1996) 4 SCC 693 and X v State of Telangana, (2018) 16

SCC 511, held as follows:
‘13. It is also required to be borne in mind that
                 when a prayer is made for the cancellation of
                 grant   of    bail   cogent    and    overwhelming
                 circumstances must be present and bail once
                 granted cannot be cancelled in a        mechanical
                 manner    without   considering    whether     any
                 supervening circumstances have rendered it in
                 conducing to allow fair trial. This proposition
                 draws support from the Judgment of this Court in
                 Daulat Ram and others v. State of          Haryana
                 reported in (1995) 1 SCC 349, Kashmira Singh v.
Duman Singh (1996) 4 SCC 693 and xxx v. State of
                 Telangana (2018) 16 SCC 511.’
10.        In     XXX     v    Union    Territory      of   Andaman     &   Nicobar

Islands,            2023       INSC    7674,    this   Court    noted   that     the

principles              in     Prasanta        Kumar   Sarkar    (supra)       stood

reiterated in Jagjeet Singh v Ashish Mishra, (2022) 9 SCC
321.
3
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1059.
4
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1062.
7
11.       The     contours    of        anticipatory         bail      have    been

elaborately       dealt    with    by    5-Judge          Benches    in
Gurbaksh

Singh Sibbia v State of Punjab
, (
1980) 2 SCC 565 and

Sushila Aggarwal v State (NCT of Delhi
), (2020) 5 SCC 1.
Siddharam       Satlingappa       Mhetre       v     State     of    Maharashtra
,

(2011) 1 SCC 694 is worthy of mention in this context,

despite     its    partial        overruling          in
Sushila      Aggarwal
(supra).    We    are     cognizant          that    liberty    is    not     to   be

interfered with easily. More so, when an order of pre-

arrest bail already stands granted by the High Court.
12.   Yet, much like bail, the grant of anticipatory bail

is to be exercised with judicial discretion. The factors

illustrated by this Court through its pronouncements are

illustrative, and not exhaustive. Undoubtedly, the fate

of each case turns on its own facts and merits.
In
Vipan

Kumar Dhir v State of Punjab
, (2021) 15 SCC 518, taking

note of
Dolat Ram
(supra) and
X v State of Telangana
(supra),    the     Court     cancelled             the    anticipatory        bail

granted to the accused therein. Keeping all the aforesaid

in mind, we turn our attention to the facts in praesenti.
13. Having considered the matter, this Court finds that,
8
in the facts and circumstances of the present case, it

was   not   proper       for    the   High   Court   to    have   granted

anticipatory bail to the respondent.
14.    As would be manifest from the Impugned Order, the

reasoning thereof is contained in Paragraphs 7-12. Closer

perusal reveals what weighed with the High Court:
(a) That the maximum sentence for the offences in the

      First Information Report did not exceed 7 years.
(b)   That     the        possibility     of    the    respondent

      influencing        the     investigation,      tampering       with
evidence et al, could be taken care of by imposing

      stringent conditions.
(c) That the respondent’s declaration as a proclaimed

      offender     was    not    on   account   of   him    deliberately

      avoiding court.
(d) That the respondent was a first-time offender and

      deserved a chance to ‘reform and course correct’.
15.    The logic of the High Court does not commend itself

to us. The High Court placed reliance on
Arnesh Kumar v

State of Bihar
, (2014) 8 SCC 273 to the effect that where

the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
9
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to

seven years, whether with or without fine, there is to be

no        automatic           arrest.
Having       gone      through
the        said

judgment
as also its most recent reiteration in
Md. Asfak

Alam v State of Jharkhand
, 2023 INSC 6605, we are in full

agreement             with         the       propositions          enunciated       therein.

However,
Section 364
, IPC carries a term of imprisonment

for life or rigorous imprisonment of ten years and fine.
We are a bit perplexed as to how, despite addition of
Section           364
,        IPC,      the   High       Court     took    the   view       that
Arnesh          Kumar
(supra)        would       aid   the   respondent        in   his

quest for pre-arrest bail.
16.         What the High Court (also) lost sight of was that

the respondent was a declared proclaimed offender. The

High         Court       notes,         at    Paragraph        28,    that     it   was      not

dealing            with           the    prayer          seeking      quashing      of       the

proclamation proceedings as the same were not made part

of the petition before it. As things were, the respondent

was        declared           a   proclaimed         offender        on   05.02.2021,       and

sought          anticipatory             bail    from      the     High    Court    only     in
5
2023 SCC OnLine SC 892.
10
October, 2021. As such, it was not correct for the High

Court    to   brush       aside     such       factum,     on    the    basis    of

averments alone, purporting to explain the backdrop of

such declaration by mere advertence to a similar-sounding

name,    in       the   petition      before         it,   as    recorded        at

Paragraphs        9     and   10    of        the    Impugned     Order.        The

declaration of the respondent as a proclaimed offender,

and    such   declaration          subsisting        on    the   date    of     the

Impugned Order, we are              unable to agree with                the High

Court that the respondent was entitled to ‘reform and

course correct’.
16. The respondent, without first successfully assailing

the order declaring him as a proclaimed offender, could

not have proceeded to seek anticipatory bail. Looking to

the factual prism, we are clear that the respondent’s

application under
Section 438
, CrPC should not have been

entertained, as he was a proclaimed offender. We may note

that in
Lavesh v State (NCT of Delhi
), (2012) 8 SCC 730,

this Court was categoric against grant of anticipatory

bail    to    a    proclaimed       offender.
In   the    same      vein,

following
Lavesh
(supra)     is       the   decision     in
State   of
11
Madhya Pradesh v Pradeep Sharma
, (2014) 2 SCC 171, where

this Court emphasised that a proclaimed offender would

not be entitled to anticipatory bail. Of course, in an

exceptional and rare case, this Court or the High Courts

can consider a plea seeking anticipatory bail, despite

the applicant being a proclaimed offender, given that the

Supreme Court and High Courts are Constitutional Courts.

However, no exceptional situation arises in the case at

hand.
Following Pradeep Sharma
(supra), in
Prem Shankar

Prasad v State of Bihar
, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 955, this

Court was unequivocal that the High Court therein erred

in granting anticipatory bail ignoring proceedings under
Sections    82
and
83
,   CrPC.
In
Abhishek   v   State   of

Maharashtra
, (2022) 8 SCC 282, this Court concluded:
’68. As regards the implication of proclamation
           having been issued against the appellant, we have
           no hesitation in making it clear that any person,
           who is declared as an “absconder” and remains out
           of reach of the investigating agency and thereby
           stands directly at conflict with law, ordinarily,
           deserves no concession or indulgence. By way of
           reference, we may observe that in relation to the
           indulgence of pre-arrest bail in terms of
Section
           438
CrPC, this Court has repeatedly said that
           when an accused is absconding and is declared as
           proclaimed offender, there is no question of
           giving him the benefit of
Section 438
CrPC. [For
           example,
Prem Shankar Prasad v. State of Bihar
,
12
(2022) 14 SCC 529: 2021 SCC OnLine SC 955] …’
17.    Accordingly,     in    view       of    the     discussions   made

hereinabove,    the    Impugned      Order      granting    anticipatory

bail to the respondent is set aside. The respondent shall

surrender before the Court concerned within four weeks

from   today   and    may    seek    regular     bail    which   will   be

considered on its own merits without being prejudiced by

the present judgment.
18. The appeal stands allowed                 in the   aforesaid terms.

Pending applications stand consigned to records. As far

as the submission of the State is that the Impugned Order

is the basis for co-accused to obtain anticipatory bail,

it is for the State to take steps, if so advised, in

accordance with law, in that behalf.
…………………………………………………J.
                                                [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]



                                                  …………………………………………………J.
                                                 [S.V.N. BHATTI]

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 29, 2023
