Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 149, Supreme
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/136076909/

[Cites
14
, Cited by
13
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Hukam Chand @ Bhura Ram vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 28 September, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1




    IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AT SHIMLA

               ON THE 28th DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2021




                                                             .

                                   BEFORE

              HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANOOP CHITKARA





    CRIMINAL MISC. PETITION (MAIN) U/S 482 CRPC No. 427 of 2021


      Between:-





    1. HUKAM CHAND @ BHURA RAM,
       S/O SH. BANGALI RAM,

    2. RAVINDER @ SONU
       S/O SH. JEET RAM


    3. CHAMAN LAL,
       S/O SH. CHANDU RAM

    4. RAKESH KUMAR @ RISHU,
       S/O SH. HUKAM CHAND



      ALL RESIDENTS OF
      VILLAGE JANED,
      P.O. SIKROHA,
      TEHSIL SADAR,




      SUB TEHSIL NAMHOL,
      DISTRICT BILASPUR, HP.                                       ....PETITIONERS





      (BY SH. NARESH KUMAR VERMA, ADVOCATE)





       AND

    1. STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH

    2. GURDEV,
       S/O SH. SHYAM LAL,
       R/O VILLAGE DOLRU,
       POST OFFICE DOLI,
       TEHSIL RAMSHEHAR,
       DISTRICT SOLAN, HP.                                      ....RESPONDENTS

      (BY SH. NAND LAL THAKUR,
      ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL,




                                            ::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
                                      2




         SH. KUNAL THAKUR, DEPUTY ADVOCATE GENERAL &
         SH. SUNNY DHATWALIA,
         ASSISTANT ADVOCATE GENERAL
         FOR RESPONDENT No. 1.




                                                                       .

         SH. ASHOK KUMAR VERMA, ADVOCATE,
         FOR RESPONDENT No. 2)

         RESERVED ON : 27.09.2021





         DECIDED ON       : 28.09.2021



           This petition coming on for admission this day, the Court passed the





    following:

                                         ORDER
FIR No.     Dated
                      r     Police Station      Sections

     23/2020     09.03.2020 Ramshehar,          452, 323/34 IPC
                            Police     District
                            Baddi, HP.
Seeking quashing of FIR and subsequent proceedings, the accused came



    up before this Court by filing the present petition under Section 482 of Criminal
    Procedure, 1973. They have arraigned the victim as 2nd respondent.
2.      On 8th March, 2020,          police officials of Police Station Ramshehar,
    received an informatin about a quarrel. On reaching the spot the complainant /2nd





    respondent herein, informed the police officials about the incident. He alleged
    that on 8th March, 2020, at about 7.00 p.m., when he reached his home, then he





    noticed one boy sitting in the kitchen alongwith his wife. He asked the boy about
    his identity but he kept quiet. His wife told him that the boy had come from her
    maternal home. When such boy refused to leave then he slapped him, on which
    he left the house. After that, he took dinner and slept with his wife in the room.
    At about, 9.00 p.m., that boy broke open the door of his room and three persons
    caught him and asked him why he gave beatings to the boy. After that they
    administered beatings to him. Based on this information, the above captioned FIR
    has been registered against the present petitioners.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
3
3          Ld. Counsel for the parties submitted that the parties have resolved the
    criminal dispute between them and seek quashing of the FIR mention above and
    closure of all consequential proceedings.
.
4.         Ld. Additional Advocate General contended that the High Court could not
    quash FIR solely based on the settlement/compromise between the complainant
    and the accused, without even considering the gravity and seriousness of the





    offences alleged against the accused person because the offences alleged were
    against the society at large and not restricted to the personal disputes between the
    parties.
ANALYSIS:
5.         The following aspects would be relevant to conclude this petition:-
a.     The reason for quarrel was that the complainant had slapped the

               boy on whose complaint the accused, who are related to him, got agitated
               and questioned the complainant. Be that as it may,             the parties have
               compromised the matter between them because they are close relatives.
b.     The parties have amicably settled the matter between them in terms
               of the compromise (Annexure P-2). The 2 nd respondent stated that he has
               no objection in case present FIR and consequent proceedings are quashed.
Statements of the parties stand recorded and placed on record.
c.     In the given facts, the occurrence does not affect public peace or
               tranquility.
d.     The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will, and the





               purpose of criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to work for
               bringing peace in family and society.
e.     The pendency of trial affects career and happiness.
               f.     Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to maintain the
               stand they have taken in this compromise, which is expected to result in
               the accused's acquittal.
g.     Accused are the first offenders.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
4
h.      The accused are facing prosecution for the last more than one and a
           half years.
6.
In
Ram Prasad v State of Uttar Pradesh
, (1982) 2 SCC 149, Supreme




                                                                     .
Court holds,
         The appellants, who are the accused and the complainant, Shri Ram,
         who was the person injured as a result of firing, have appeared before





         us and stated that they wish to compound the offence. The offence for
         which both the appellants have been convicted is one under Section
         307 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, but having regard
         to the nature of the injury sustained by Shri Ram, we think that the
         proper offence for which the appellants should have been convicted





         was under
Section 324
read with
Section 34
. Shri Ram received only
         one injury on the shoulder and that was also in the nature of simple
         hurt. We would, therefore, convert the conviction of the appellants to
         one under
Section 324
read with
Section 34
. Since the parties belong
         to the same village and desire to compound the offence, we think, in

         the larger interest of peace and harmony between the parties and
         having regard to the nature of the injury, that it would be proper to

         allow the parties to compound the offence.
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
7.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the
    propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process




    need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds,





    "...This argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as merely because an
    accused has a right to plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no
    sufficient material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the





    Criminal Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even at an
    earliest (sic earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the
    offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that the very issuance of
    the order of taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said
    to have been made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition. It has
    been held in a number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised
    sparingly and in the interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to
    continue even where the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
5
offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore,
    there cannot be any dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the Code
    can be exercised..."
.
8.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd. and another
,
    (2002) 2 SCC 383, Para 8, Hon'ble Supreme Court Held that "...There is no hard
    and fast rule that the objection as to cognizability of offence and maintainability





    of the complaint should be allowed to be raised only at the time of framing the
    charge."
JURISPRUDENCE ON QUASHING:
9.     In the present case, the offences are not compoundable under
Section 320
CrPC. However, the law is almost settled by larger benches judgments of
    Supreme Court that the offences, those are not listed as compoundable, under
Section 320
CrPC, can also be compounded, and the procedure to follow would

    be by quashing the FIR, and consequent proceedings.
10.
In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three-member Bench
    of Hon'ble Supreme Court holds,


          "[6]. ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of the High
          Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case either to
          prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure
          the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against




          an accused person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and
          the High Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said





          proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or
          expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the
          exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
          categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be





          exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be cases where it
          may be possible for the High Court to take the view that the institution
          or continuance of criminal proceedings against an accused person may
          amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of
          the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the
          criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to
          have been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears
          that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the
          said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in quashing the
          proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may,
          for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise
          where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint,
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
6
even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety,
          do not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question of
          appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of looking at the
          complaint or the First Information Report to decide whether the




                                                                       .
offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate





          for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow
          the process of the criminal Court to be issued against the accused
          person. A third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of





          the High Court can be successfully invoked may also arise. In cases
          falling under this category the allegations made against the accused
          person do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no legal
          evidence adduced in support of the case or evidence adduced clearly
          or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing with this class of





          cases, it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case
          where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
          manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and
          cases where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or
          may not support the accusation in question. In exercising its

          jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High Court would not embark upon
          an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not.
That is the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not
          be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction
          and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the
          accusation made against the accused would not be sustained. Broadly


          stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the
          High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of quashing criminal
          proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point
          (Vide : In Re: Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat




          Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar
          Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (
AIR 1954 Punj 193),





          Nripendra Bhusan Roy v. Gobina Bandhu Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal
          1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47
          Mad 722 : (AIR 1925 Mad 39).
11.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir v State of Gujarat
, (2017) 9 SCC 641, a three Judges
    Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for quashing of
    FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
[16]. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
          subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
16 (i)
Section 482
preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to
          prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of
          justice. The provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises
          and preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
7
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a
     First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a
     settlement has been arrived at between the offender and the victim is
     not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of




                                                                  .
compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the power





     of the court is governed by the provisions of
section 320
of the Code
     of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under
Section 482
is attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
     complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482
, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of justice
     would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit
     and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or
(ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information
     Report should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim

     have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and
     circumstances of each case and no exhaustive elaboration of
     principles can be formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under
Section 482
and while
     dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High Court
     must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous
     and serious offences involving mental depravity or offences such as




     murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed though the
     victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such





     offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a serious
     impact upon society. The decision to continue with the trial in such
     cases is founded on the overriding element of public interest in
     punishing persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal
     cases which have an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil
     dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the
     inherent power to quash is concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
     commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar transactions
     with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall for
     quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
8
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
          proceeding if in view of the compromise between the disputants, the
          possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of a criminal
          proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and




                                                                      .
16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions
(viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving the financial and
          economic well-being of the state have implications which lie beyond





          the domain of a mere dispute between private disputants. The High
          Court would be justified in declining to quash where the offender is
          involved in an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
          misdemeanour. The consequences of the act complained of upon the
          financial or economic system will weigh in the balance.
REASONING:
12.    The incident pertains to the year 2020 and the accused are facing
    prosecution for the last more than one and a half years. In case the proceedings

    are not quashed it will lead to ill will and animosity. Thus, keeping in view the

    nature of allegations and in the entirety of facts and circumstances of this case,
    this is a fit case where the FIR needs to be quashed based on the compromise
    entered into between the complainant and the accused.
13.    This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter. Given the entirety of the case and




    judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the continuation of these
    proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever. The Court is





    inclined to invoke the inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC to quash the
    FIR and all subsequent proceedings in the peculiar facts and circumstances.
14.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh
,
    2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[47]. As far as Writ Petition
    (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court
    challenging the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was
    already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the
    order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the
    FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
9
entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of
    cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
15.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p




                                                                     .
642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of Justice arises
    propitiously when parties, who fell apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of
    fellowship or reunion.
16.    Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit case where the
    inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure is invoked to quash the proceedings mentioned above. The FIR





    mentioned above is quashed, and all the consequential proceedings are also
    quashed and set aside. The bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All pending
    application(s), if any, stand closed.
In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is allowed

    in the aforementioned terms.
Copy dasti.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                                     Judge.
September 28 , 2021 (PK)
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:08:19 :::CIS
