Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 667, Hon'ble Supreme
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/139140833/

[Cites
13
, Cited by
2
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Prithvi Chand & Another vs State Of H.P.& Others on 5 August, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                                   Cr.MMO No. 332 of 2019
                                   Reserved on: 16th July, 2021.
.
Date of Decision: 5th August, 2021.
Prithvi Chand & Another                                                ...Petitioners.





                                   Versus

    State of H.P.& Others                                                 ...Respondents.
    Coram:





    The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
    Whether approved for reporting?1 NO
    For the petitioner     r:      Mr. Anubhav Chopra, Advocate.
    For the respondents :          Mr. Nand Lal Thakur Addl. Advocate General,
                                   with Mr. Ram Lal Thakur, Assistant Advocate

                                   General and Mr. Rajat Chauhan, Law Officer for
                                   respondents No.1 to 4.
                                   Mr. Ramakant Sharma, Advocate for respondent
                                   No.5.


                            THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE
        FIR No. Dated           Police Station                      Sections
        129/2018 10.05.2018     Hamirpur, District Hamirpur         498-A & 120-B
IPC
Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Seeking quashing of FIR captioned above, father-in-law and mother-in-law of
    the complainant-5th respondent, have come up before this Court under
Section 482
,





    Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2.      Facts necessary to decide the present petition are that on 10th May 2018, 5th
    respondent-Anju Kumari gave a written complaint to SHO of the aforesaid Police
    Station. She alleged that on 20th March 2017, her marriage with Ravi Kumar (son of
    petitioner) was performed as per Hindu rites. She lived with her husband only for
    five days, and during this period, they cohabited and established sexual relations.
    She stated that at that time, she could not make out that Ravi Kumar and his parents
    are cheating on her by this marriage. After realizing the entire episode, she feels that
    Ravi Kumar and her parents had solemnized the marriage intending to cheat her.
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
2
After five days of the wedding, Ravi Kumar left for Australia and stated that he
    would join the job. In his absence, Prithvi Chand and Prakash Devi started taunting
    and troubling her. During the absence of Ravi Kumar, her father-in-law and mother-
.
in-law started taunting her so that she, on her own, leaves their house. They started





    building pressure upon her to hand over her land to them under the pretext that they
    need to construct a house over it. They also started manipulating and instigating her





    son, born out of her previous marriage. She informed the Panchayat and told them
    that now they are not telling their son's address and phone number (husband of the
    complainant). After that, they removed her from their house and now living in Delhi.
    They keep on talking to their son and do not reveal his number to the complainant.
Her husband, Ravi, also does not call her. Whenever she visits her in-law's house,
    her father-in-law and mother-in-law threatened her and levelled false allegations
    against her. When she stayed in her marital home, her father-in-law and mother-in-
law made phone calls and threatened her. She also stated that her husband had not

    given any maintenance expenditure, forcing her to sustain with incredible difficulty.
    Despite various opportunities, her husband is not taking her call and, on his own, not
    calling her back.    She stated that she fully believes that the accused persons



    performed the marriage intending to deprive her of her property. Based on such
    allegations, the police registered the FIR mentioned above.
ANALYSIS & REASONING:
3.    The complainant herself stated that her husband, Ravi Kumar, is not giving any





    money, and due to which she is unable to sustain herself. It means that she is not a
    wealthy lady. The crux of allegations leveled against the petitioner's father-in-law





    and mother-in-law are that they have solemnized marriage intending to grab her
    property. In the complaint, the complainant does not even hint about the property,
    which she owns, or its value. On the contrary, her allegations that she is sustaining
    with great difficulty contradict her stand. As per the complainant's averments in the
    FIR, the wedding had taken place on 20th March 2017, and after five days, Ravi
    Kumar had left her. She also states that she is residing with her parents. The
    allegations that her father-in-law and mother-in-law are not giving the phone number
    of Ravi Kumar would not make out an offense of cruelty under
Section 498-A
IPC or
    of a criminal conspiracy under
Section 120-B
IPC. The allegations against the
    petitioners are too general to make out any case. Even if the entire allegations in the
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
3
FIR are taken on its face value, still no case is made out against the petitioners. It
    appears that the complainant, whose second marriage also failed because her
    husband deserted her, also tried to involve her father-in-law and mother-in-law by




                                                                          .
leveling allegations. Still, such allegations do not make out any case under
Section





    498-A
and
120-B
IPC.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING UNDER SECTION 498-A
IPC
:
4.
In
Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand
, (2010) 7 SCC 667, Hon'ble Supreme
    Court observed that [30] "It is a matter of common experience that most of these
    complaints under
Section 498-A
Indian Penal Code are filed in the heat of the





    moment over trivial issues without proper deliberations. We come across a large
    number of such complaints which are not even bonafide and are filed with oblique
    motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the number of genuine cases of dowry

    harassment are also a matter of serious concern. [32] Unfortunately, at the time of

    filing of the complaint the implications and consequences are not properly visualised
    by the complainant that such complaint can lead to insurmountable harassment,
    agony and pain to the complainant, accused and his close relations. [33]. The
    ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and punish the guilty and protect the



    innocent. To find out the truth is a herculean task in majority of these complaints.
    The tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate relations is also not




    uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult to
    ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious in





    dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic realities into consideration
    while dealing with matrimonial cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's





    close relations who had been living in different cities and never visited or rarely
    visited the place where the complainant resided would have an entirely different
    complexion. The allegations of the complaint are required to be scrutinized with
    great care and circumspection. Experience reveals that long and protracted criminal
    trials lead to rancour, acrimony and bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties.
    It is also a matter of common knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the
    husband or the husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it would
    ruin the chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of suffering is
    extremely long and painful."
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
4
5.
In
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P.
, 2012(10) SCC 741, Para 28, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds that "We, therefore, deem it just and legally appropriate to
    quash the proceedings initiated against the appellants Geeta Mehrotra and Ramji




                                                                         .
Mehrotra as the FIR does not disclose any material which could be held to be





    constituting any offence against these two appellants. Merely by making a general
    allegation that they were also involved in physical and mental torture of the





    complainant-respondent No. 2 without mentioning even a single incident against
    them as also the fact as to how they could be motivated to demand dowry when they
    are only related as brother and sister of the complainant's husband, we are pleased to
    quash and set aside the criminal proceedings in so far as these appellants are





    concerned and consequently the order passed by the High Court shall stand
    overruled."          r
    STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
6.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble
    Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as regards the propriety
    of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process need not


    necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court holds, "...This
    argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch as merely because an accused
    has a right to plead at the time of framing of charges that there is no sufficient




    material for such framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal
    Procedure Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic





    earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and
    summons the accused to appear to contend that the very issuance of the order of





    taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that no offence can be said to have been
    made out on the allegations made in the complaint petition. It has been held in a
    number of cases that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in
    the interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue even where
    the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any offence would be
    tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore, there cannot be any
    dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
5
7.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full
    Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court observed that the High Court need not wait for
    completion of investigation and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
8.    The law is almost settled by various pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme





    Court that when the FIR and the investigation do not make out any case or the
    prosecution is inherently and patently illegal, and the matters that fulfill the criteria
    for quashing, the High Court resorting to
S. 482
CrPC can quash such FIR and
    consequent proceedings.
In
R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a





    three-member Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court holds, "[6]. ...It is well established
    that the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings
    in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise

    to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an

    accused person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
    would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It
    is not possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would


    govern the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
    categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for
    quashing the proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possible for the High




    Court to take the view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings





    against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or
    that the quashing of the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If
    the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have been





    committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar
    against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding, the High Court would
    be justified in quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite
    sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise
    where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they
    are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the
    offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
    matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to decide
    whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
6
for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of
    the criminal Court to be issued against the accused person. A third category of cases
    in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may




                                                                           .
also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations made against the





    accused person do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence
    adduced in support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to





    prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is important to bear in mind
    the distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is
    evidence which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and
    cases where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not support





    the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High
    Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is
    reliable or not. That is the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not

    be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that

    on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the accused
    would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent
    jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of quashing criminal



    proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re:
Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen




    Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 :
(AIR 1954 Punj 193), NripendraBhusan Roy v. GobinaBandhu Majumdar, AIR 1924





    Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 :
    (AIR 1925 Mad 39)."
9.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
,
    1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges' bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[7].
    The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at the initial stage is asked
    to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted
    allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take
    into consideration any special features which appear in a particular case to consider
    whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to
    continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique
    purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is
    bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
7
prosecution to continue, the court may while taking into consideration the special
    facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary
    stage."
.
CONCLUSION:
10.   This Court has inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter.
11.   An analysis of the entire allegations and the investigation does not contain
    legally admissible evidence and thus, does not make out any prima facie case against
    the petitioners.
12.   Given the entirety of the case and judicial precedents, I am of the considered
    opinion that the continuation of these proceedings will not suffice any fruitful
    purpose whatsoever.
13.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh
,

    2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[47]. As far as Writ Petition
    (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court
    challenging the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was



    already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the
    order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet.
Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In any
    case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of cognizance would





    automatically stands vitiated."
14.   Given above, this is a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court





    under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the
    proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is quashed qua the
    petitioners, and all the consequential proceedings qua the petitioners are also quashed
    and set aside. The bail bonds of the petitioners are accordingly cancelled and
    discharged. All pending application(s), if any, stand closed.
15.   In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is allowed in
    the aforementioned terms.
Copy Dasti.
(Anoop Chitkara),
    August 05, 2021(ps).                                                Judge.
::: Downloaded on - 05/08/2021 20:13:29 :::HCHP
