Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 30 of 2004
Citation: SCC 275 (
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/143013917/

[Cites
130
, Cited by
23
]
Bombay High Court
Jalgaon Janta Sahakari Bank Ltd. And Anr vs Joint Commissioner Of Sales Tax Nodal 9 ... on 30 August, 2022
Bench:
Makarand Subhash Karnik
,
N. J. Jamadar
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Jvs/UI/SP.



             IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
               ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                     WRIT PETITION NO. 2935 OF 2018

        Jalgaon Janta Sahakari
        Bank Ltd. & Anr.                          ..Petitioners
                    Vs.
        Joint Commissioner of Sales
        Tax Nodal 9, Mumbai, & Anr.               ..Respondents

                                 WITH
                     WRIT PETITION NO. 3197 OF 2019

        ICICI Bank Ltd.                           ..Petitioner
                    Vs.
        The State of Maharashtra & Ors.           ..Respondents

                               WITH
                   WRIT PETITION NO. 436 OF 2021
                               And
                INTERIM APPLICATION NO. 868 OF 2022

        Fullerton India Credit Company Ltd.       ..Petitioner
              Vs.
        Tornado Motors Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.           ..Respondents


                                 WITH
                    WRIT PETITION (L) NO. 939 OF 2020

        Bank of Baroda                            ..Petitioner
                    Vs.
        State of Maharashtra                      ..Respondent




                               1
                                  1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

                      WITH
        WRIT PETITION (L) NO. 7999 OF 2021

Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction
Company Ltd.                             ..Petitioner
         Vs.

Principal Commissioner of
GST and Central Excise & Ors.            ..Respondents

                       WITH
           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          WRIT PETITION NO. 2720 OF 2021

The Authorized Officer
Bharati Sahakari Bank Ltd.               ..Petitioner

         Vs.
The Dy. Commissioner of Sales
Tax and Ors.                             ..Respondents

                      WITH
          WRIT PETITION NO. 3553 OF 2021

JM Financial Asset Reconstruction
Company Ltd. & Anr.                      ..Petitioners
         Vs.
State of Maharashtra & Anr.              ..Respondents

                      WITH
          WRIT PETITION NO. 2248 OF 2021

Saraswat Co-Op. Bank Ltd. & Anr.         ..Petitioners
         Vs.
State of Maharashtra & Ors.              ..Respondents




                    2
                                    1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

                       WITH
           WRIT PETITION NO. 2251 OF 2021

Saraswat Co-Op. Bank Ltd. & Anr.           ..Petitioners
          Vs.
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.            ..Respondents

                       WITH
           WRIT PETITION NO. 2336 OF 2021

Dr. Prince John Edavazhikal                ..Petitioner
          Vs.
The Union of India & Ors.                  ..Respondents

                       WITH
           WRIT PETITION NO. 6297 OF 2021

Asset Reconstruction Company Ltd.          ..Petitioner
          Vs.
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.            ..Respondents

                       WITH
           WRIT PETITION NO. 3120 OF 2021

JM Financial Asset Reconstruction
Company Ltd. & Anr.                        ..Petitioners
          Vs.
State of Maharashtra & Ors.                ..Respondents


Mr. Rajiv Narula a/w Ms. Mehek Choudhary i/b. Jhangiani
Narula and Associates for the petitioners in WP/2935/2018.
Mr. Shakib Dhorajiwala a/w Mr. Rushab Chopra i/b. Vidhi
Partners for the petitioners in WP/3197/2019.
Mr. Venkatesh Dhond-Senior Advocate with Mr. Sanjeev
Sawant, Mr. Murlidhar Kale, Ms. Garima Joshi, Ms. Juhi Bhogle,


                       3
                                    1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Ms Vinodini Shrinivasan Mr Pratik Pansare i/b. OM Gujar Law
Chambers for the petitioners in WP/436/2021.
Mr. Ranbir Singh a/w Mr. Nahush Shah i/b. Nahush Shah Legal
for the petitioners in WPL/939/2020.
Dr. Birendra Saraf-Senior Advocate a/w Mr. Vaibhav Charalwar
a/w Mr. Sachin Chandarana a/w Mr. Vijayendra Purohit i/b M/s.
Manilal Kher Ambalal & Co. for the petitioners in
WPL/7999/2021.
Mr. Nitin Deshpande for Petitioner in W.P.No.2720/2021.
Mr. J. P. Sen, Sr. Advocate a/w. Mr. Nikhil Rajani, Mr. Apoorva
Kulkarni, Mr. Rupak Sawangikar i/b. M/s. V. Deshpande and co
for Petitioner in W.P.No.2336/2021.
Mr. Charles De'Souza a/w. Mr. Nikhil Rajani, Mr. Apoorva
Kulkarni, Mr Rupak Sawangikar i/b. M/s. V. Deshpande and Co.
for Petitioner in W.P.No.3553/2021 and W.P.No.3120//2021.
Mr. Nikhil Rajani a/w Mr. Apoorva Kulkarni a/w Mr. Rupak
Sawangikar i/b M/s. V. Deshpande and Co. for Petitioner in
WP/2248/2021 and WP/2251/2021.
Mr. Charles De Souza a/w Priyansh Jain i/b. M/s. Apex Law
Partners for Petitioners in W.P.No.6297/2021.
Mr. Karan Adik i/b Mr. Padmakar S. Patkar for respondent No.1
in WPL/7999/2021.
Mr. D. P. Singh for Respondent No.10/UOI in W.P.No.436/2021.
Ms. Naira Jeejeebhoy - Special Counsel with Mr. Himanshu B.
Takke-AGP for State in WP/2935/2018.
Mr. Himanshu B. Takke-AGP for State in WP/3197/2019 and in
WPL/939/2020.
Mr. V. A. Sonpal-Special Counsel with Mr. Himanshu B. Takke-
AGP for State in WP/436/2021.
Ms. Jyoti Chavan-AGP for State in WPL/7999/2021.
Mr. Mohamedali M. Chunawala a/w Mr Parshuram S. Gujar i/b.
A. A. Ansari for R.No.1/ UOI in W.P.No.2336/2021.

                       4
                                     1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Mr. Rakesh L. Singh a/w. Heena Shaikh i/b. M. V. Kini and Co.
for R.No.7 in W.P.No.2336/2021.
Mr P. P. Kakade, GP a/w Mr. B.V. Samant - AGP for State in
W.P.No.2720/2021, W.P.No.2336/2021, W.P.No.6297/ 2021 and
W.P.No.3120/ 2021.
Mr. P. P. Kakade, GP a/w Mr. M. M. Pable - AGP for State in
WP/2251/2021.
Mr. P. P. Kakade, GP a/w Mrs. R. A. Salunkhe - AGP for State in
WP/2248/2021.
                C0RAM: DIPANKAR DATTA, CJ.,
                            M. S. KARNIK &
                            N. J. JAMADAR, JJ.


        RESERVED ON: APRIL 7, 2022
     PRONOUNCED ON: AUGUST 30, 2022



JUDGMENT:
INTRODUCTION
1.   A Division Bench of this Court (cor. Chief Justice and M.S.
Karnik, J.) while considering this batch of writ petitions was of
the view that the issues emerging for decision therein can be
advantageously heard and disposed of by a larger Bench. In
deference to the order dated 25th November 2021 passed by
such Bench and in exercise of power conferred on the Chief
Justice by rule 8 of Chapter I of the Bombay High Court
Appellate Side Rules, 1960, this larger Bench was constituted.
The parties were put on notice and heard at length on multiple
legal and factual issues.
5
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
2.   The controversy lies in a narrow compass, with the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement    of   Security   interest   Act,   2002   (hereafter
"
SARFAESI Act
", for short) and the Recovery of Debts and
Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (hereafter "RDDB Act", for short) taking
centre-stage. Who between a secured creditor [as defined in
section 2(1)(zd)
of the SARFAESI Act and section 2(1)(la) of
the RDDB Act], and the taxing/revenue departments of the
Central/State Governments, can legally claim priority for
liquidation of their respective dues qua the borrower/dealer
upon enforcement of the 'security interest' [as defined in
section 2(1)(zf)
of the SARFAESI Act] and consequent sale of
the 'secured asset' [as defined in
section 2(1)(zc)
of the
SARFAESI Act], in view of the extant laws, is the broad question
that we are tasked to decide. This question, in turn, raises
certain other substantial questions of law, which would also call
for answers and we propose to answer them too.
3.   The parties have, in course of their arguments, referred
to the provisions of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966
(hereafter "MLR Code", for short), the
Maharashtra Value Added
Tax Act, 2002
(hereafter "
MVAT Act
", for short), the Bombay
Sales Tax, 1959 (hereafter "BST Act", for short) and the
Maharashtra Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
(hereafter
"
MGST Act
", for short), more particularly sections 37 and 38C
of the MVAT Act and the BST Act, respectively. These similarly
worded sections, starting with non-obstante clauses, provide
that any amount of tax, penalty, interest, sum forfeited, fine or
any other sum payable by a dealer or any other person shall be
6
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

the first charge on the property of the dealer or the person, as
the case may be, subject to any provision regarding creation of
first charge in any Central Act for the time being in force.
Section 82
of the MVAT Act is similarly worded, except that
creation of such first charge would be subject to any Central
Act for the time being in force is not to be found there. These
provisions have necessarily to be read with
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act and section 31B of the RDDB Act to ascertain the
correct legal position.
4.   Several decisions of various High Courts, including
decisions rendered by Division Benches of this Court, have been
brought to our notice by learned advocates appearing for the
secured creditors on the effect of 'priority' that
section 26E
of
the SARFAESI Act and section 31B of the RDDB Act accord to
secured creditors, but none directly on the point rendered by
the Supreme Court as on date the judgment on these writ
petitions was reserved. We propose to notice all such decisions
separately at a later part of this opinion.
BACKGROUND FEATURES
5.   It would be appropriate to preface our opinion by briefly
tracing the developments in the field of law relating to recovery
of dues of banks and financial institutions (hereafter "lenders",
for short, when referred to collectively) relevant for the purpose
of answering the questions of law formulated infra.
6.   Prior to 1993, for effecting recovery of debts, the lenders
were required to institute suits regulated by the provisions
of
the Code of Civil Procedure
(hereafter "
CPC
", for short).
7
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

However, the normal time-consuming process of recovery
through suits did not suit the recovery of dues. Multifarious
problems surfaced. Drying up of financial liquidity, thereby
retarding economic progress, emerged as the prime problem.
Without recovery of the dues, the lenders found it difficult to
lend further financial assistance. It is at this stage that the
Parliament enacted the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993
(hereafter "RDBFI Act", for
short) making provisions for establishment of Tribunals for
expeditious adjudication and recovery of debts due to the
lenders and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. The RDBFI Act, which came into force w.e.f. 24 th June
1993 all over the country except Jammu and Kashmir, was the
legislative source of creation of Debts Recovery Tribunals
(hereafter "DRTs", for short) in various states. Upon becoming
functional, the lenders started pursuing their remedy before the
DRTs    by   instituting   recovery   proceedings   before   it   in
accordance with the RDBFI Act.
7.     Challenges to the constitutional validity of the RDBFI Act
were laid before the Delhi High Court, the Gauhati High Court
and the Karnataka High Court. Such challenges succeeded.
However, the Supreme Court by its decision reported in (2002)
4 SCC 275 (
Union of India vs. Delhi High
Court Bar
Association) overruled the judgment and order impugned
before it and upheld the provisions of the RDBFI Act.
8.     In due course of time, recourse taken by the lenders to
the DRTs under the RDBFI Act on a large scale coupled with
other reasons, which we need not discuss here, led to the
8
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

perception that the desired results were not being achieved.
This led to constitution of various committees to suggest
ameliorative measures keeping in view the changing times and
the economic situation for overcoming old and conventional
methods of financing and recovery of dues. Based on the
suggestions    that   were           received    and    after    thorough
deliberations, the Parliament enacted the
SARFAESI Act
and
made it applicable throughout the country three days short of
the eighth birthday of the RDBFI Act, on 21 st June 2002, to be
precise.   Securitisation       of    debts,    classification   of   Non-
Performing Assets (hereafter "NPA", for short) and evolving
means for faster recovery of dues without judicial intervention
were, inter alia, the key features of the
SARFAESI Act
, with
quick enforcement of security interest at its heart.
9.
The SARFAESI Act
having been challenged before the
Supreme Court as ultra vires, the Court by its decision reported
in (2004) 4 SCC 311 (
Mardia Chemicals Ltd. vs Union of
India
) upheld all but one of the provisions, i.e.,
section 17(2)
.
Also
,
the said decision
resulted in amendment of
section 13
and
consequent insertion of sub-section (3A) in
section 13
.
10.
Provisions of the SARFAESI Act
vis-à-vis the RDBFI Act
came up for consideration before the Supreme Court within
three years of the decision in
Mardia Chemicals Ltd.
(supra).
In the decision reported in AIR 2007 SC 712 (
Transcore vs
Union of India
), the Court was, inter alia, seized of the
question as to whether withdrawal of an original application
instituted in terms of the first proviso to section 19(1) of the
RDBFI Act (inserted by
Amending Act
30 of 2004) is a condition
9
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

precedent for taking recourse to the
SARFAESI Act
. The Court
noticed the reasons for enactment of the
SARFAESI Act
and
made a deep analysis of both the Acts. Upon hearing learned
counsel for the parties and on consideration of
Order XXIII, CPC
and the relevant two enactments, the Court answered this
question in the negative.
11. Within a couple of years therefrom came the decision
reported in (2009) 4 SCC 94 (
Central Bank of India vs. State
of Kerala
). The questions arising out of the several civil
appeals for decision were, whether section 38C of the BST Act,
1959 and
section 26B
of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963
and similar provisions contained in other State legislations by
which first charge was created on the property of the dealer or
such other person, who is liable to pay sales tax, etc., are
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the RDBFI Act for
recovery of 'debt' and the
SARFAESI Act
for enforcement of
'security interest', and whether by virtue of non-obstante
clauses contained in section 34(1) of the RDBFI Act and
section
35
of the SARFAESI Act, the said two Central Acts will have
primacy over the several State legislations. Here too, the Court
considered the scheme of the two Central Acts in depth as well
as several other Central legislations providing for creation of
first charge, viz. the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
, the
State   Financial   Corporations   Act,   1951
,   the
Employees
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
, the
Estate Duty Act, 1953
, the
Companies Act, 1956
, the
Mines and
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
and the
Gift
Tax Act, 1958
.
10
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
12. It would be profitable for us to reproduce below the
relevant paragraphs from
the said decision
, which learned
counsel for the parties referred to and relied upon. Such
paragraphs read thus:
"108. The DRT Act and the Securitisation Act were
     enacted      by    Parliament  in  the    backdrop    of
     recommendations made by the Expert Committees
     appointed by the Central      Government for examining
     the causes for enormous delay in the recovery of dues of
     banks and financial institutions which were adversely
     affecting fiscal reforms.
***
110.
The DRT Act
facilitated establishment of two-tier
     system of tribunals. The tribunals established at the first
     level have been vested with the jurisdiction, powers and
     authority to summarily adjudicate the claims of banks and
     financial institutions in the matter of recovery of their
     dues without being bogged down by the technicalities
of
     the Code of Civil Procedure
.
The Securitisation Act
drastically changed the scenario inasmuch as it enabled
     banks, financial institutions and other secured creditors to
     recover their dues without intervention of the courts or
     tribunals.
The Securitisation Act
also made provision for
     registration     and     regulation     of   securitization/
     reconstruction companies, securitisation of financial
     assets of banks and financial institutions and other related
     provisions.
111. However, what is most significant to be noted is that
     there is no provision in either of these enactments by
     which first charge has been created in favour of banks,
     financial institutions or secured creditors qua the property
     of the borrower.
112. Under
Section 13(1)
of the Securitisation Act, limited
     primacy has been given to the right of a secured creditor
     to enforce security interest vis-à-vis Section 69 or
Section
     69-A
of the Transfer of Property Act. In terms of that sub-
     section, a secured creditor can enforce security interest
     without intervention of the court or tribunal and if the
11
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

borrower has created any mortgage of the secured asset,
the mortgagee or any person acting on his behalf cannot
sell the mortgaged property or appoint a Receiver of the
income of the mortgaged property or any part thereof in
a manner which may defeat the right of the secured
creditor to enforce security interest. This provision was
enacted in the backdrop of Chapter VIII of the
Narasimham Committee's Second Report in which specific
reference was made to the provisions relating to
mortgages under the
Transfer of Property Act
.
113. In an apparent bid to overcome the likely difficulty
faced by the secured creditor which may include a bank
or a financial institution, Parliament incorporated the non
obstante clause in
Section 13
and gave primacy to the
right of secured creditor vis-à-vis other mortgagees who
could exercise rights under Sections 69 or 69-
A of the
Transfer of Property Act
. However, this primacy has not
been extended to other provisions like
Section 38-C
of the
Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the Kerala Act by which
first charge has been created in favour of the State over
the property of the dealer or any person liable to pay the
dues of sales tax, etc. Sub-section (7) of
Section 13
which
envisages      application of the money received by the
secured creditor by adopting any of the measures
specified under sub-section (4) merely regulates
distribution of money received by the secured creditor. It
does not create first charge in favour of the secured
creditor.
114. By enacting various provisos to sub-section (9) of
Section 13
, the legislature has ensured that priority given
to the claim of workers of a company in liquidation under
Section 529-A
of the Companies Act, 1956 vis-à-vis the
secured creditors like banks is duly respected. This is the
reason why first of the five unnumbered provisos to
Section 13(9)
lays down that in the case of a company in
liquidation, the amount realised from the sale of secured
assets shall be distributed in accordance with the
provisions of
Section 529-A
of the Companies Act, 1956.
This and other provisos do not create first charge in favour
of the worker of a company in liquidation for the first time
but merely recognise the existing priority of their claim
12
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

under the
Companies Act
. It is interesting to note that the
provisos to sub-section (9) of Section 13 do not deal with
the companies which fall in the category of borrower but
which are not in liquidation or are not being wound up.
115. It is thus clear that provisos
referred to above
are
only part of the distribution mechanism evolved by the
legislature and are intended to protect and preserve the
right of the workers of a company in liquidation whose
assets are subjected to the provisions of the
Securitisation
Act
and are disposed of by the secured creditor in
accordance with
Section 13
thereof.
116. The non obstante clauses contained in
Section 34(1)
of the DRT Act and
Section 35
of the Securitisation Act
give overriding effect to the provisions of those Acts only
if there is anything inconsistent contained in any other law
or instrument having effect by virtue of any other law. In
other words, if there is no provision in the other
enactments which are inconsistent with the
DRT Act
or
the
Securitisation Act
, the provisions contained in those
Acts cannot override other legislations.
Section 38-C
of
the Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the Kerala Act also
contain non obstante clauses and give statutory
recognition to the priority of the State's charge over other
debts, which was recognised by Indian High Courts even
before 1950. In other words, these sections and similar
provisions contained in other State legislations not only
create first charge on the property of the dealer or any
other person liable to pay sales tax, etc. but also give
them overriding effect over other laws.
***
126. While enacting the DRT Act and the Securitisation
Act, Parliament was aware of the law
laid down by
this
Court wherein priority of the State dues was recognised.
If Parliament intended to create first charge in favour of
banks, financial institutions or other secured creditors on
the property of the borrower, then it would have
incorporated a provision like
Section 529-A
of the
Companies Act or
Section 11(2)
of the EPF Act and
ensured that notwithstanding series of judicial
pronouncements, dues of banks, financial institutions and
13
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

other secured creditors should have priority over the
State's statutory first charge in the matter of recovery of
the dues of sales tax, etc. However, the fact of the matter
is that no such provision has been incorporated in either
of these enactments despite conferment of extraordinary
power upon the secured creditors to take possession and
dispose of the secured assets without the intervention of
the court or Tribunal. The reason for this omission
appears to be that the new legal regime envisages
transfer of secured assets to private companies.
127. The definition of 'secured creditor' includes
securitisation/reconstruction company and any other
trustee holding securities on behalf of bank/financial
institution. The definition of 'securitisation company' and
'reconstruction company' in
Sections 2(1)(za)
and (v)
shows that these companies may be private companies
registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
and having a
certificate of registration from Reserve Bank under
Section 3
of the Securitisation Act. Evidently, Parliament
did not intend to give priority to the dues of private
creditors over sovereign debt of the State.
128. If the provisions of the DRT Act and the
Securitisation Act are interpreted keeping in view the
background and context in which these legislations were
enacted and the purpose sought to be achieved by their
enactment, it becomes clear that the two legislations, are
intended to create a new dispensation for expeditious
recovery of dues of banks, financial institutions and
secured creditors and adjudication of the grievance made
by any aggrieved person qua the procedure adopted by
the banks, financial institutions and other secured
creditors, but the provisions contained therein cannot be
read as creating first charge in favour of banks, etc.
129. If Parliament intended to give priority to the dues of
banks, financial institutions and other secured creditors
over the first charge created under State legislations then
provisions similar to those contained in
Section 14-A
of
the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923,
Section 11(2)
of
the EPF Act,
Section 74(1)
of the Estate Duty Act, 1953,
Section 25(2)
of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and
Development) Act, 1957, Section 30 of the Gift Tax Act,
14
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

and
Section 529-A
of the Companies Act, 1956 would
have been incorporated in the DRT Act and the
Securitisation Act.
130. Undisputedly, the two enactments do not contain
provision similar to the
Workmen's Compensation Act
,
etc. In the absence of any specific provision to that effect,
it is not possible to read any conflict or inconsistency or
overlapping between the provisions of the DRT Act and
the Securitisation Act on the one hand and Section 38-C
of the Bombay Act and Section 26-B of the Kerala Act on
the other and the non obstante clauses contained in
Section 34(1) of the DRT Act and Section 35 of the
Securitisation Act cannot be invoked for declaring that the
first charge created under the State legislation will not
operate qua or affect the proceedings initiated by banks,
financial institutions and other secured creditors for
recovery of their dues or enforcement of security interest,
as the case may be.
131. The Court could have given effect to the non
obstante clauses contained in
Section 34(1)
of the DRT
Act and
Section 35
of the Securitisation Act vis-à-vis
Section 38-C
of the Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the
Kerala Act and similar other State legislations only if there
was a specific provision in the two enactments creating
first charge in favour of the banks, financial institutions
and other secured creditors but as Parliament has not
made any such provision in either of the enactments, the
first charge created by the State legislations on the
property of the dealer or any other person, liable to pay
sales tax, etc., cannot be destroyed by implication or
inference, notwithstanding the fact that banks, etc. fall in
the category of secured creditors.
***
155. In none of the aforementioned judgments this Court
held that by virtue of the provisions contained in the
DRT
Act
or the
Securitisation Act
, first charge has been created
in favour of banks, financial institutions, etc. Not only this,
the Court was neither called upon nor it decided
competing priorities of statutory first charge created
under Central legislation(s) on the one hand and State
15
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     legislation(s) on the other nor it ruled that statutory first
     charge created under a State legislation is subservient to
     the dues of banks, financial institutions, etc. even though
     statutory first charge has not been created in their favour.
     ***
158. On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that
     the DRT Act and the Securitisation Act do not create first
     charge in favour of banks, financial institutions and other
     secured creditors and the provisions contained in
Section
     38-C
of the Bombay Act and
Section 26-B
of the Kerala
     Act are not inconsistent with the provisions of the DRT Act
     and the Securitisation Act so as to attract non obstante
     clauses contained in
Section 34(1)
of the DRT Act or
Section 35
of the Securitisation Act.
159. Another argument of some of the learned counsel for
     the appellants is that the prior charge created in favour of
     the bank would prevail over the subsequent mortgage
     created in favour of the State.
***
175. The argument of learned counsel for the appellants
     that the State legislations creating first charge cannot be
     given retrospective effect deserves to be negatived in
     view of the judgment in
State of M.P. v. State Bank of
     Indore
, (2002) 10 SCC 441. In that case, it was held that
     the charge created in favour of the State under Section
     33-C of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958
     in respect of the sales tax dues prevail over the charge
     created in favour of the Bank in respect of the loan taken
     by the second respondent and the amendment made in
     the State operates in respect of charges that are in force
     on the date of introduction of Section 33-C."
(emphasis ours)
13. A few years after the aforesaid decision, the title of the
RDBFI Act underwent an amendment.
By Act
XXXI of 2016, the
word "Bankruptcy" replaced the words "Due to Banks and
Financial Institutions", resulting in the rechristening of the
RDBFI Act as the RDDB Act.
16
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
14. The decision in
Central Bank of India
(supra) [holding,
inter alia, that the RDBFI Act and the SARFAESI Act do not
contain provisions giving priority to the dues of banks, financial
institutions and other secured creditors over the first charge
created under State legislations because Parliament did not
intend to give priority to the dues of private creditors over
sovereign debt of the State (paragraph 126) and also that if
Parliament intended to give such priority then provisions similar
to those contained in the referred Central legislations would
have been incorporated in the RDBFI Act and the SARFAESI Act
(paragraph 129)] is presumed to have acted as a catalyst
leading to the enactment of the Enforcement of Security
Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws and Miscellaneous
Provisions (Amendment) Act, 2016, being Amendment Act No.
XLIV of 2016 (hereafter "2016
Amending Act
", for short). The
Statement of Objects and Reasons as contained in the Bill for
the 2016
Amending Act
introduced in the Lok Sabha reads as
follows:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons
     The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial
     Institutions Act, 1993 and the
Securitisation and
     Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
     Security Interest Act, 2002
, were enacted for expeditious
     recovery of loans of banks and financial institutions.
     Presently, there are approximately seventy thousand
     cases pending in Debts Recovery Tribunals. Though the
     Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions
     Act provides for a period of 180 days for disposal of
     recovery applications, the cases are pending for many
     years due to various adjournments and prolonged
     hearings. In order to facilitate expeditious disposal of
     recovery applications, it has been decided to amend the
17
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

said Acts and also to make consequential amendments in
the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
and the
Depositories Act,
1996
.
2.     The amendments in the
Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002
are proposed to suit changing
credit landscape and augment ease of doing business
which, inter alia, include (i) registration of creation,
modification and satisfaction of security interest by all
secured creditors and provision for integration of
registration systems under different laws relating to
property rights with the Central Registry so as to create
Central database of security interest on property rights;
(ii) conferment of powers upon the Reserve Bank of India
to regulate asset reconstruction companies in a changing
business environment; (iii) exemption from stamp duty
on assignment of loans by banks and financial institutions
in favour of asset reconstruction companies; (iv) enabling
non-institutional investors to invest in security receipts;
(v) debenture trustees as secured creditors; (vi) specific
timeline for taking possession of secured asset; and (vii)
priority to secured creditors in repayment of debts.
3.    The amendments proposed in the Recovery of Debts
due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993, inter
alia, include (i) expeditious adjudication of recovery
applications; (ii) electronic filing of recovery applications,
documents and written statements; (iii) priority to
secured creditors in repayment of debts; (iv) debenture
trustees as financial institutions; (v) empowering the
Central Government to provide for uniform procedural
rules for conduct of proceedings in the Debts Recovery
Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals.
4.   The Bill also seeks to amend the
Indian Stamp Act,
1899
, so as to exempt assignment of loans in favour of
asset reconstruction companies from stamp duty and the
Depositories Act, 1996
for facilitating transfer of shares
held in pledge or on conversion of debt into shares in
favour of banks and financial institutions.
18
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
5.     The Bill aims to improve ease of doing business and
     facilitate investment leading to higher economic growth
     and development.
6.    The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives."
15. Section 31B incorporated in the RDDB Act by the 2016
Amending Act
and introduced with effect from 1st September
2016, reads as follows:
"31-B.      Priority     to     secured        creditors.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
     the time being in force, the rights of secured creditors to
     realise secured debts due and payable to them by sale of
     assets over which security interest is created, shall have
     priority and shall be paid in priority over all other debts
     and Government dues including revenues, taxes, cesses
     and rates due to the Central Government, State
     Government or local authority.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, it is
     hereby clarified that on or after the commencement of the
     Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), in
     cases where insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings are
     pending in respect of secured assets of the borrower,
     priority to secured creditors in payment of debt shall be
     subject to the provisions of that Code."
16. Although a new chapter, i.e., Chapter IV-A, was sought to
be introduced in the
SARFAESI Act
by the 2016
Amending Act
,
it was not immediately given effect. Effect was given as late as
on 24th January 2020. The entirety of Chapter IV-A, titled
'Registration by Secured Creditors and Other Creditors', is
reproduced hereunder:
"26-A. Rectification by Central Government in
     matters     of    registration, modification and
     satisfaction, etc.--
(1) The Central Government, on being satisfied--
19
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(a) that the omission to file with the Registrar the
     particulars of any transaction of securitisation, asset
     reconstruction or security interest or modification or
     satisfaction or such transaction or; the omission or
     misstatement of any particular with respect to any
     such transaction or modification or with respect to
     any satisfaction or other entry made in pursuance of
     Section 23 or Section 24 or Section 25 of the
     principal Act was accidental or due to inadvertence
     or some other sufficient cause or it is not of a nature
     to prejudice the position of creditors; or
(b) that on other grounds, it is just and equitable to
     grant relief,
may, on the application of a secured creditor or asset
reconstruction company or any other person interested on
such terms and conditions as it may seem to the Central
Government just and expedient, direct that the time for
filing of the particulars of the transaction for registration
or modification or satisfaction shall be extended or, as the
case may require, the omission or misstatement shall be
rectified.
(2) Where the Central Government extends the time for
the registration of transaction of security interest or
securitisation or asset reconstruction or modification or
satisfaction thereof, the order shall not prejudice any
rights acquired in respect of the property concerned or
financial asset before the transaction is actually
registered.
26-B. Registration by secured creditors and other
creditors.--
(1) The Central Government may by notification, extend
the provisions of Chapter IV relating to Central Registry
to all creditors other than secured creditors as defined in
clause (zd) of sub-section (1) of
Section 2
, for creation,
modification or satisfaction of any security interest over
any property of the borrower for the purpose of securing
due repayment of any financial assistance granted by
such creditor to the borrower.
(2) From the date of notification under sub-section (1),
any creditor including the secured creditor may file
20
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

particulars of transactions of creation, modification or
satisfaction of any security interest with the Central
Registry in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) A creditor other than the secured creditor filing
particulars of transactions of creation, modification and
satisfaction of security interest over properties created in
its favour shall not be entitled to exercise any right of
enforcement of securities under this Act.
(4) Every authority or officer of the Central Government
or any State Government or local authority, entrusted
with the function of recovery of tax or other Government
dues and for issuing any order for attachment of any
property of any person liable to pay the tax or
Government dues, shall file with the Central Registry such
attachment order with particulars of the assessee and
details of tax or other Government dues from such date
as may be notified by the Central Government, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(5) If any person, having any claim against any borrower,
obtains orders for attachment of property from any court
or other authority empowered to issue attachment order,
such person may file particulars of such attachment
orders with Central Registry in such form and manner
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
26-C. Effect of the registration of transactions,
etc.--
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in any
other law, for the time being in force, any registration of
transactions of creation, modification or satisfaction of
security interest by a secured creditor or other creditor or
filing of attachment orders under this Chapter shall be
deemed to constitute a public notice from the date and
time of filing of particulars of such transaction with the
Central Registry for creation, modification or satisfaction
of such security interest or attachment order, as the case
may be.
(2) Where security interest or attachment order upon any
property in favour of the secured creditor or any other
creditor are filed for the purpose of registration under the
provisions of Chapter IV and this Chapter, the claim of
21
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

        such secured creditor or other creditor holding
        attachment order shall have priority over any subsequent
        security interest created upon such property and any
        transfer by way of sale, lease or assignment or licence of
        such property or attachment order subsequent to such
        registration, shall be subject to such claim:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
        apply to transactions carried on by the borrower in the
        ordinary course of business.
26-D. Right of enforcement of securities.--
        Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
        the time being in force, from the date of commencement
        of the provisions of this Chapter, no secured creditor shall
        be entitled to exercise the rights of enforcement of
        securities under Chapter III unless the security interest
        created in its favour by the borrower has been registered
        with the     Central Registry.
26-E. Priority to secured creditors.-- Notwithstanding
        anything contained in any other law for the time being in
        force, after the registration of security interest, the debts
        due to any secured creditor shall be paid in priority over
        all other debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other
        rates payable to the Central Government or State
        Government or local authority.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, it is
        hereby clarified that on or after the commencement of the
        Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), in
        cases where insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings are
        pending in respect of secured assets of the borrower,
        priority to secured creditors in payment of debt shall be
        subject to the provisions of that Code."
17. A reference was pending before the Full Bench of the
Madras High Court prior to
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
being enforced. The said Full Bench by a short order reported
in AIR 2017 Madras 67 [Asst.
Commissioner (CT) vs. Indian
Overseas Bank
] disposed of the reference holding, inter alia,
that:
22
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

"1. The writ petitions have been listed before the Full
Bench in pursuance of the reference order in W.P. No.6267
of 2006 and W.P. No.253 of 2011, in respect of the
following issues: -
'a) As to whether the Financial Institution, which is a
  secured creditor, or the department of the government
  concerned, would have the 'Priority of Charge' over the
  mortgaged property in question, with regard to the tax
  and other dues.
b)   As to the status and the rights of a third party
  purchaser of the mortgaged property in question.'
2. We are of the view that if there was at all any doubt,
the same stands resolved by view of the Enforcement of
Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws and
Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 2016, ***
3. There is thus, no doubt that the rights of a secured
creditor to realise secured debts over which security
interest is created due and payable by sale of assets over
which security interest is created would have priority over
all debts and Government dues including revenues, taxes,
cesses and rates due to the Central Government or Local
Authority. This section introduced in the Central Act is with
'notwithstanding' clause and has come into force from
01.09.2016.
4. The law having now come into force, naturally it would
govern the rights of the parties in respect of even a lis
pending.
5. The aforesaid would, thus, answer question (a) in
favour of the financial institution, which is a secured
creditor having the benefit of the mortgaged property.
6. Insofar as question (b) is concerned, the same is
stated to relate only to auction sales, which may be
carried out in pursuance to the rights exercised by the
secured creditor having a mortgage of the property. This
aspect is also covered by the introduction of section 31B,
as it includes 'secured debts due and payable to them by
sale of assets over which security interest is created'.
7. We, thus, answer the aforesaid reference accordingly."
23
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
18. Several other judgments of this Court as well as other
High Courts followed in quick succession, more or less taking
the consistent view that introduction of sections 31B and
26E
in the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act, respectively, by the
2016
Amending Act
have tilted the scales in favour of the
secured creditors and being a pre-2016
Amending Act
decision,
Central Bank of India
(supra) is no longer relevant to hold
that the secured creditors would not have first charge or priority
in the matter of recovery of their dues.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
19. Having taken note of the background features, let us now
briefly notice the broad submissions advanced on behalf of the
contesting parties.
20. It has been contended on behalf of the secured creditors
that the priority created by section 31B is not restricted to
enforcement under the RDDB Act; section 31B recognizes
priority generally. Referring to
section 26E
, it has further been
contended that priority is also recognized by the
SARFAESI Act
.
The secured creditors have, thus, contended that in view of
amendments brought about by the 2016
Amending Act
in both
the Central enactments, i.e., the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI
Act, they are entitled to assert priority over claims of the State
sales tax department under the
MVAT Act
, both or either under
section 31B of the RDDB Act and/or
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act.
21. The secured creditors have further contended that there
is no dispute that the Central Acts and the State legislations
24
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

operate in different fields and there is no apparent repugnancy;
on the contrary, the State legislations are clear to this extent
that the same would yield to Central Acts creating first charge.
We have been invited to read sections 37 and 38C of the MVAT
Act and the BST Act, respectively, in support of such contention.
22. Before proceeding further, it would be apposite to note
section 37
of the MVAT Act. It reads:
"
Section 37
: Liability under this Act to be the first
     charge:-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract to
     the contrary, but subject to any provision regarding
     creation of first charge in any Central Act for the time
     being in force, any amount of tax, penalty, interest, sum
     forfeited, fine or any other sum, payable by a dealer or
     any other person under this Act, shall be the first charge
     on the property of the dealer or, as the case may be,
     person.
(2) The first charge as mentioned in sub-section (1) shall
     be deemed to have been created on the expiry of the
     period specified in sub-section (4) of
section 32
, for the
     payment of tax, penalty, interest, sum forfeited, fine or
     any other amount.
(emphasis ours)
23. Notwithstanding that
section 37
of the MVAT Act begins
with a non-obstante clause, it is explicit that such provision is
subject to the creation of a first charge in a Central Act. It has
been submitted that the secured debt of the secured creditors
would have priority over any first charge created by the
MVAT
Act
in favour of the relevant department of the Government.
This is because the statutory priority accorded to secured
creditors is the same as creation of first charge and the very
enactment under which the department claims its right,
25
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

recognizes the primacy of provisions in Central Acts regarding
creation of priority in charge.
24. Similar argument has been advanced in respect of section
38C of the BST Act, which is similarly worded as sub-section
(1) of
section 37
of the MVAT Act. Section 38C of the BST Act
reads as follows:
"38-C. Liability under this Act to be first charge.--
     Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract to the
     contrary but subject to any provision regarding first
     charge in any Central Act for the time being in force, any
     amount of tax, penalty, interest or any other sum,
     payable by a dealer or any other person under this Act,
     shall be the first charge on the property of the dealer, or,
     as the case may be, person."
(emphasis ours)
25. Our attention has also been invited to
sections 82
and
142
of the MGST Act, providing as follows:
"82. Tax to be first charge on property
     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
     law for the time being in force, save as otherwise provided
     in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, any
     amount payable by a taxable person or any other person
     on account of tax, interest or penalty which he is liable to
     pay to the Government shall be a first charge on the
     property of such taxable person or such person."
"142. Miscellaneous Transitional Provisions
     (8)(a) where in pursuance of an assessment or
     adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, on or
     after the appointed day under the existing law, any
     amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes
     recoverable from the person, the same shall, unless
     recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an
     arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered
     shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act;
***"
26
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
26. It has also been contended that in the event this Court
holds that
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act is not applicable
without registration of the security interest, the secured
creditors are entitled to the reliefs claimed on account of
statutory priority of charge accorded to them in terms of section
31B of the RDDB Act. According to the secured creditors, bare
perusal of section 31B of the RDDB Act would evidence the fact
that even de hors registration of security interest under the
SARFAESI Act
, and even prior to
section 26E
of the SARFAESI
Act coming into force on 24th January 2020, the claims of the
secured creditors had priority with respect to payment of their
dues, over all other debts and government dues, including
revenues, taxes, cesses and rates due to the Central
Government, State Government or local authorities on and
from 1st September 2016, being the date on which the said
provision of law was brought into effect.
27. The further contention has been that section 31B of the
RDDB Act will apply even to cases where proceedings under the
RDDB Act have not been preferred by secured creditors for the
following reasons:
(i)   The said section is contained in Chapter VI titled
     'MISCELLANEOUS' and is therefore not in relation to cases
     where a recovery certificate may have been issued by the
     DRT under the provisions of, and on proceedings initiated
     under the RDDB Act, which is dealt with in the
     independent chapters preceding Chapter VI.
27
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(ii)    The explanation contained in section 31B clarifies
that for the purposes of the said section, after the
commencement of the Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code,
2016 (hereafter "I & B Code", for short), in cases where
insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings are pending in
respect of the secured assets of the borrower, priority to
secured creditors in payment of debt shall be subject to
the provisions of that Code. In other words, when the
legislature intended to restrict the application of the said
section in relation to proceedings taken under a different
piece of legislation, i.e., the I & B Code, the legislature
clarified its position explicitly by way of adding an
explanation to section 31B. In the absence of such a
clarification or explanation with respect to steps taken
under the
SARFAESI Act
, it is apparent that the legislature
intended the provisions of section 31B to be applicable
even to cases where no proceedings under the RDDB Act
or before the DRT were taken by a secured creditor.
(iii)   Section 31B and
section 26E
were introduced into
their respective parent statutes by the same amending
act, i.e., the 2016
Amending Act
. A perusal of the
statement of objects and reasons with respect to the said
Act would demonstrate that the objects and reasons of
the said amendments to the
SARFAESI Act
as well as the
RDDB Act, was the same, i.e. to give "priority to secured
creditors in repayment of debts". However, section 31B
was brought into effect on 1st September 2016, whereas
section 26E
was brought into effect on 24th January 2020.
28
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     In   the   above    stated    background     of   facts   and
     circumstances and especially in the light of the manner,
     object and purpose with which the said sections were
     introduced into the statute books, it could never have
     been the intention of the legislature that if a secured
     creditor resorted to the provisions of the RDDB Act for
     realisation of debts due to it, they would have the benefit
     of priority in repayment of debts while, if they resorted to
     the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, they would not. Such
     an interpretation would lead to arbitrariness and would
     fall foul of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
(iv) A bare perusal of the other sections contained in the
     said Chapter VI (viz.
sections 34
,
35
,
36
and
37
) make it
     clear that they do not all apply only to proceedings before
     the DRT or proceedings initiated under the RDDB Act.
28. Having recorded the contentions advanced on behalf the
secured creditors, to the extent we found them to be relevant,
we now proceed to record the submissions advanced on behalf
of the State Government and its departments.
29. First, the arguments advanced by Mr. Sonpal, learned
special counsel for the respondents 6 to 9 in W.P. No.436 of
2021 may be noticed.
30. According to Mr. Sonpal,
section 26E
was inserted on 1 st
September 2016 and made effective from 24th January 2020;
however, conspicuously,
section 26E
does not create 'first
charge' in favour of the secured creditors. It only provides for
'priority' of payment to secured creditors over other creditors.
29
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Referring to the decision in
Central Bank of India
(supra), he
contended that the Supreme Court in paragraph 95 referred to
various enactments and their provisions, viz. the BST Act, the
Kerala Sales Tax Act, 1963, the
Workmen's Compensation Act,
1923
, the
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952
, the
Estate Duty Act, 1953
, the
Mines and
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
, and the
Gift
Tax Act, 1958
, and noticed that these enactments use the
words 'first charge'. According to him, in paragraph 129 of
the
said decision
, it has been held that if Parliament intended to
give priority to the dues of banks, financial institutions, and
other secured creditors over the 'first charge' created under
State legislations, then provisions similar to those contained in
section 14-A
of the Workmen's Compensation Act,
section
11(2)
of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act,
section 74(1)
of Estate Duty Act,
section 25(2)
of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act,
section 30
of the Gift Tax Act, and
section 529-A
of the
Companies Act would have been incorporated in the RDDB Act
and the SARFAESI Act.
31. Mr. Sonpal further contended that the 2016
Amending Act
does not, either in the RDDB Act or the
SARFAESI Act
,
consciously and conspicuously provide for similar provisions or
any such provisions where the 'first charge' of the State is
displaced. This is despite the fact that the Central Government
was conscious of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Central
Bank of India
(supra). The interpretation of the amendments,
according to him, is that 'priority' as inserted by the 2016
30
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Amending Act shall not displace the 'first charge' of the State
wherever the respective enactments provide so and the
secured creditors shall be having 'priority' over Government
dues only in cases where dues arising out of an enactment did
not provide for the 'first charge'. Since
section 26E
does not
provide for 'first charge', hence the 'first charge' of the State
under
section 37
of the MVAT Act survives.
32. Mr. Sonpal continued by contending that there is no
conflict between
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and
section
37
of the MVAT Act, and the non-obstante clauses in
section 37
of MVAT Act and
section 26E
in
SARFAESI Act
operate in
altogether different fields. A non-obstante clause in a section,
according to him, only overrides a contrary provision in any
other law if it is in the same field. Since the sphere and field of
operations of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and
section 37
of the MVAT Act are different, in absence or presence of conflict,
both survive in their respective fields. Viewed from a different
angle, if the dues of the Central Government or the State
Government or a local authority are to be affected by
section
26E
, the same must arise from List I or List III and not List II
of Schedule VII of the Constitution.
The SARFAESI Act
and more
particularly
section 26E
has Item 45 of List I as its source
whereas Item 54 of List II is the source of existence of
section
37
of the MVAT Act. Hence, there cannot be operation of non-
obstante clause against one another in different fields of
legislation.
33. Next, Mr. Sonpal argued that
section 26E
having come
into force on 24th January 2020 and not on 1st September 2016,
31
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

it denotes that the Central Government did not intend to bring
the provisions of
section 26E
in force till 24th January 2020 and
hence the provisions of
section 26E
are not retrospective but
prospective in the absence of any provision in the 2016
Amending Act
to make the amendment retrospective. The
charge under the section attaches to the properties of dealer,
mortgaged or not, immediately on transaction of sale, although
payment of such tax is deferred till 21st day of the next month.
Hence, in other words, charge under
section 37
of the MVAT Act
clings to the property on the occasion of sale though due date
of payment can be on a later date. Thus, once the charge is
created on incident of sale, it cannot be destroyed by
subsequent amendment coming into force on a subsequent
date. Therefore, on that count also, he contended that
section
37
of the MVAT Act is not affected by
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act.
34. Moving further, Mr. Sonpal contended that the language
of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and
section 37
of the MVAT
Act is germane for interpretation of scope and effect of the two
sections. Whereas the language of
section 37
of the MVAT Act
speaks of creation of 'first charge', subject to creation of 'first
charge' by a Central Act,
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act
speaks of payment of proceeds (without using the word
'proceeds') in priority to secured creditors. It implies that
whenever the occasion for payment arises, it shall be first paid
to the secured creditors and not others who may have
independent right to receive first over others. Since
section 26E
does not provide for 'first charge', therefore such provision
32
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

cannot affect
section 37
of the MVAT Act which can be affected
only when a Central Act provides for 'first charge'. He further
contended that
section 26E
provides for the manner of
distribution and not right to distribution; consequently, 'first
charge' under
section 37
shall survive with all consequential
rights. No judgment of any High Court, he also contended, has
held that 'first charge' has been diluted by
section 26E
.
35. The next contention advanced by Mr. Sonpal has been that
the
MGST Act
was enacted w.e.f. 1st July, 2017. Not only does
section 82
of the MGST Act start with a non-obstante clause,
any amount payable by a taxable person on account of tax,
interest or penalty which he is liable to pay to the Government
shall be a first charge on the property of such taxable person.
Under section 142(8), dues under any existing law is
recoverable as dues under the
MGST Act
. According to him, if
the first charge is applicable to dues under the
MGST Act
and
also the existing law on the appointed day, the non-obstante
clause in the
MGST Act
shall override
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act.
36. Finally, Mr. Sonpal contended that the pre-requisite of
claiming benefit of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act is that the
secured creditor has to register the security interest as
provided in
section 26B
. In the absence of registration,
section
26E
does not come into operation or effect.
37. Ms. Jeejeebhoy, learned special counsel for the State in
W.P. No.2935 of 2018 contended as follows:
33
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(i)     The State has a statutory charge on the property of
        the dealer which the sales tax authorities are
        entitled to enforce by exercising the right to attach
        and sell the same for recovery of its outstanding
        dues notwithstanding introduction of
section 26E
in
        the
SARFAESI Act
and section 31B in the RDDB Act.
(ii)
Section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and section 31B of
        the RDDB Act do not create any charge in favour of
        the secured creditor but merely provide for 'priority'
        in payment. More importantly, such provisions do
        not negate or nullify the statutory charge created
        under the
MVAT Act
or the MLR Code.
(iii)   Provisions inserted by amendment in the RDDB Act
        are not attracted where no recourse has been taken
        to the DRT thereunder. Section 31B of the RDDB Act
        has to be read in the context of the scheme of the
        relevant enactment, which relates to recovery
        through proceedings conducted in accordance with
        the provisions of the RDDB Act by the DRTs. The
        long title of the RDDB Act would reveal the object
        and purpose thereof, which is establishment of
        DRTs, inter alia, for expeditious adjudication and
        recovery of debts due to banks and financial
        institutions.
(iv)    Chapter IV of the RDDB Act titled 'Procedure of
        Tribunals' and Chapter V titled 'Recovery of Debt
        Determined by Tribunal' contain provisions for
34
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

       determination by the DRTs of the causes brought
       before it by secured creditors and the mode of
       recovery   of    debts,      respectively.   Section     31B,
       inserted in Chapter VI titled 'MISCELLANEOUS', is an
       overarching provision which could be attracted to
       those proceedings for adjudication of a claim under
       Chapter IV or even at the appellate stage under the
       same chapter or at the time of recovery under
       Chapter V, when any amount found due and payable
       is sought to be recovered by sale of the property
       mortgaged. However, what is significant is that the
       debt must be due and payable, after which the rights
       of the secured creditor to have its debt paid in
       priority to those of the other creditors is recognized
       under the RDDB Act.
(v)    The concern that proceedings under the RDDB Act
       could take time and, therefore, the scope of section
       31B ought to be expanded to action taken under the
SARFAESI Act
is not well founded. DRTs under the
       RDDB Act have powers to pass interim protective
       orders   which       could   adequately      safeguard    the
       interests of the lenders.
(vi)
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, appearing as it
       does after Chapter IV titled 'CENTRAL REGISTRY',
       has to be given full effect.
Section 26E
cannot be
       considered in a vacuum. It has to be seen in the
       context of the other provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
and the applicable law. Notably,
section 26E
gives
35
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

            priority in payment over other debts without
            negating the effect of other charges/interest in the
            property including statutory first charges. Further, it
            has to be read harmoniously with the other
            provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, including
section
            26C
under which any sale of the property has to be
            subject   to   the   claims   of   registered   creditors
            including the Government.
(vii)     Having regard to the provision in
section 13(2)
,
            except
sections 69
and
69A
of the Transfer of
            Property Act, 1882 (hereafter "ToP Act", for short)
            all other provisions thereof would be applicable.
In
Transcore
(supra), the Supreme Court has even
            clarified that the RDBFI Act does not rule out the
            applicability of the ToP Act. Section 100 of the ToP
            Act explains when a person is said to have 'charge'
            on the property and
section 3
thereof, inter alia,
            explaining 'when a person is said to have notice'
            read with
section 89A(2)
of the Registration Act,
            1908, as applicable in Maharashtra pursuant to the
            Maharashtra Amendment Act, 2010, throws light on
            at least one way in which a diligent purchaser of
            property would acquire notice of the statutory
            charge.
(viii)    The amendments in the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI
          Act would only apply prospectively and cannot affect
          rights crystallized in favour of the State prior to such
          amendments being brought into force.
Section 26D
36
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

       expressly refers to forfeiture of right of a secured
       creditor to exercise the rights of enforcement of
       securities under Chapter III if the security interest is
       not registered. This provision in clear terms ordains
       that the bar to invoke Chapter III in the absence of a
       registration would start from the commencement of
       the provisions of Chapter IV-A. Harmoniously read
       with
section 26E
, the conclusion is inescapable that
section 26E
does not apply retrospectively.
(ix)   Registration of mortgage under the
Registration Act
cannot be deemed to be a registration with the Central
       registry by virtue of
section 20A
of the SARFAESI Act.
Such a contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner
       in W.P. 2935 of 2018 fails to take into consideration the
       fact that the deeming provision under the said section,
       i.e.,
section 20A
, comes into effect only after the
       integration of certain registration systems with the
       Central registry. This integration has to be notified by
       the Central Government. As on date, there is no
       notification in respect of integration of the
Registration
       Act
system   with   the   Central   registry.   In   the
       circumstances, registration under the
Registration Act
is not sufficient and the benefit of the deeming
       provision in
section 20A
is not available to the
       petitioner.
She prayed for disposal of the writ petitions taking into
  consideration the aforesaid contentions.
37
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
38. Mr. Samant, learned Addl. Govt. Pleader appearing for the
respondents in quite a few of the writ petitions contended that
though section 31B of the RDDB Act is a substantive provision,
it is applicable only in cases where the secured creditor takes
recourse to recover its debt by instituting proceedings before
the DRT resulting in a judicial adjudication; but section 31B
cannot be made applicable in all cases of recovery and
irrespective of the procedure through which the recovery is
sought to be made by the secured creditor.
39. Next, on the question as to whether the words 'first
charge' and 'in priority' are synonymous or one and the same,
Mr. Samant contended that the said words are not the same.
According to him, the words 'first charge' show superiority of
the charge of the concerned party whereas the words 'in
priority' only indicate hierarchy of payment without disturbing
the superiority of charge attached to any specific property.
This would further mean that even if the property is sold in
disregard of the 'first charge' applicable to it, the mortgagee of
the property may claim the entire sale price but the 'first
charge' on such property will not be wiped out. The person
dealing with such property having 'first charge' will be bound
by it.
40. It was further contended that had the Parliament intended
to give equality to mortgage dues of bankers to 'first charge'
holder of tax dues, it would have done so specifically and would
not have used the words 'in priority'. Regarding the aspect of
reading the intention of the Parliament, the observations in
38
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Central Bank of India
(supra) in paragraph ns. 131 to 136
were relied upon.
41. Mr. Samant made an endeavor to explain the working of
the
MVAT Act
. According to him, tax under the
MVAT Act
is
levied on every 'dealer' on account of sales transacted by the
dealer in the particular year. As such, the tax is on the sale
amount and is over and above the sale price. The 'dealer'
recovers the amount from the 'transferor' of goods or the
ultimate purchaser. As such, the 'dealer' recovers the amount
of tax from a third person and keeps it with him for payment to
the Government. It can, thus, be seen that the amount of tax
under the
MVAT Act
is held in custody by the 'dealer' as a
trustee for the Government. Such an amount is having very
high ranking as compared to mortgage dues, which are the
result of commercial transaction. In case of commercial
transaction with mortgage as a kind of security, the success of
the security depends upon due performance by the parties. No
third-party funds are involved. As such, the tax collected by a
MVAT 'dealer' is having a class of its own, and the State
Legislature has considered this aspect while giving 'first charge'
to dues under the
MVAT Act
.      Such, 'fist charge' is a status
which is not given to all types of taxes, for e.g., Income Tax
dues which is based on income earned and which is not having
the status of 'first charge' and is having the status of unsecured
dues.
42. On the question as to whether restrictions put under
section 100 of the ToP Act regarding charge dilute the 'first
charge' under the
MVAT Act
, Mr. Samant contended that two
39
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

alternative arguments are possible here.
First, the MVAT Act
being a special enactment and the ToP Act being a general
enactment, the 'first charge' under the
MVAT Act
should be held
to prevail over the provisions of the ToP Act. Therefore, it can
be argued that requirements of knowledge of third party or
person dealing in the property about existence of 'first charge'
becomes irrelevant. It can be further argued that the
authorities under the
MVAT Act
are not bound to give notice to
the world at large. It can also be argued that giving such notice
is practically not possible. In the alternative, even if it is
presumed that provisions of section 100 of the ToP Act
regarding restrictions on application of 'charge' are binding, the
same stands complied with as demonstrated by him.
The MVAT
Act
creates 'first charge' in respect of the property of the
'dealer' in case of default. The intending purchaser is expected
to make enquiry with the tax department before dealing in the
said property. Such intending purchaser must find out the
nature of business and the tax records of the defaulter. The
department can share all the information through the
Right to
Information Act, 2005
and such intending purchaser has every
access to the records of the department. An intending
purchaser can, thus, by following due diligence easily come to
know   the   tax   liability   of   the    defaulting   'dealer'.   The
bank/secured creditor can also come to know by using the
same method. In fact, the bank and the third-party purchaser
are deemed to have notice of such charge if they try to find out
information about the title of the property. In this behalf, the
meaning of "a person is said to have notice" is given in
section
40
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

3 of the ToP Act. The said definition shows that a person should
blame himself for his negligence for not making necessary
enquiry with the Tax Department before entering into any kind
of transaction about the property of the defaulter.
43. Ms. Jyoti Chavan, learned Addl. Govt. Pleader adopted the
submissions of Mr. Narula, Ms. Jeejeebhoy and Mr. Samant,
hereinbefore recorded.
THE QUESTIONS
44. Keeping in view the rival submissions, we have considered
it appropriate to formulate the following substantial questions
of law for answers:
a. Having regard to the statutory provisions under
        consideration, does a secured creditor (as defined in
        the SARFAESI Act and the RDDB Act) have a prior right
        over the relevant department of the Government
        [under the BST Act/
MVAT Act
/
MGST Act
] to appropriate
        the amount realized by the sale of a secured asset?
b. Whether, despite
section 26E
in the
SARFAESI Act
or
        section 31B of the RDDB Act being attracted in a given
        case,   dues   accruing   to     a   department    of   the
        Government ought to be repaid first by reason of 'first
        charge' created over any property by operation of law
        (viz. the legislation in force in Maharashtra) giving such
        dues precedence over the dues of a secured creditor?
c. Are the provisions, inter alia, according 'priority' in
        payment of dues to a secured creditor for enforcing its
41
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

   security interest under the provisions of the
SARFAESI
   Act
prospective?
d. Whether section 31B of the RDDB Act can be pressed
   into service for overcoming the disability that visits a
   secured creditor in enforcing its security interest under
   the
SARFAESI Act
upon such creditor's failure to
   register   the   security   interest   in   terms   of   the
   amendments introduced in the
SARFAESI Act
?
e. Whether the priority of interest contemplated by
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act could be claimed by a
   secured creditor without registration of the security
   interest with the Central Registry? Depending on the
   answer to this question, whether correct proposition of
   law has been laid down (extracted infra) in paragraph
   21 of the Division Bench decision reported in 2020 (2)
   Bom. C. R. 243 (OS) [ASREC (India) Limited vs.
   State of Maharashtra and Ors.] and in paragraph 35
   of the Division Bench decision, reported in 2021 (2) Mh.
LJ 721 (
State Bank of India vs. the State of
   Maharashtra and Ors.
)?
f. When, and if at all, can it be said that the statutory first
   charge under the State legislation, viz. the BST Act, the
   MVAT Act and the MGST Act, as the case may be,
   stands displaced having regard to introduction of
Chapter IV-A in the SARFAESI Act
from 24th January
   2020?
and
42
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     g. Whether an auction purchaser of a secured asset would
        be liable to pay the dues of the department in order to
        obtain a clear and marketable title to the property
        having purchased the same on "as is where is and
        whatever there is basis"?
CONSIDERATION OF DECISIONS:
45. Before we answer the questions formulated above, we
consider it appropriate to note the law
laid down in
various
decisions of the High Courts to which our attention was drawn
by the parties.
46. A learned Single Judge of the Jaipur Bench of the
Rajasthan High Court in the decision reported in 2017 SCC
OnLine Raj 4319 (G. M. G. Engineers and Contractor Pvt.
Ltd. and Anr. vs. State of Rajasthan and Ors.) was called
upon to decide a challenge made to an attachment order dated
19th April 2017 by the Sales Tax Officer, respondent no. 3. The
attached property was auctioned by ICICI Bank, respondent no.
5, though in view of
section 47
of the Rajasthan Value Added
Tax Act, 2003, the department had first charge on the property.
The learned Judge was called upon to consider as the first issue
whether the amended provisions of
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act and section 31B of the RDDB Act would apply to
the present case having regard to the fact that such provisions
were incorporated in the respective Central enactments in
2016, whereas, the attachment order was issued in the year
2014. The learned Judge recorded that the parties did not claim
retrospective operation of the amended provisions; even
43
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

otherwise, perusal of the amended provisions did not show the
same and, thus, the same were found to apply prospectively.
The learned judge was of the further view that property already
attached towards recovery of State dues cannot be nullified by
a subsequent legislation when the amending provisions had not
been given retrospective effect.
A contention was raised before
the learned Judge that the decision in
Central Bank of India
(supra)       had   been   rendered   prior   to   the   amendments
incorporated in the SARFAESI Act and the RDDB Act; hence,
the same would have no application to cases covered by the
amended provisions.
The learned Judge, upon consideration of
the decision in
Central Bank of India
(supra), held as follows:
"    *****
27. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
          petitioner-company submits that
Section 26E
of the
          amended Act gives priority to the secured creditor
          against all other debts and Government dues. In view
          of the above, effect of first charge gets nullified. I have
          considered the aforesaid argument also and find that
Section 26E
of the Act of 2002 gives priority to the
          secured creditor. It cannot be construed to nullify the
          statutory first charge. If the intention of Parliament
          would have been to nullify statutory first charge then
          language of the amended provision would have been as
          provided in Workmens' Compensation Act, Employees'
          Provident Fund Act, etc.
28. The State dues may be without a provision of first
          charge and in that situation, the secured creditors
          would have priority over the State dues and,
          accordingly, amended provision is to be given
          interpretation. It cannot, however, nullify a provision for
          first charge on the property. The first charge on the
          property creates right even as per the Act of 1882. It
          has already been observed that if intention of the
          Central Government was to nullify first charge, the
44
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

       language of amended provision would have been in the
       manner indicated by the Apex Court in the case of
Central Bank of India
(supra). It is otherwise a case
       where attachment of the property in pursuance of first
       charge of the State government is much prior to the
       amended Act of 2002 and 1993 thus those amendments
       would not apply even if subsequently auction of the
       property was made. It is nothing but auction of the
       property already attached by the Government, that too,
       after initiation of proceedings under the Act of 1956.
           *****"
47. In G. M. G. Engineers and Contractor Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), the property was attached before the 2016
Amending
Act
was enacted and the learned Judge held the provisions of
the 2016
Amending Act
as prospective in its application.
The
learned Judge also proceeded on the basis that the first charge
on the property creates right even as per the ToP Act and if
intention of the Parliament was to nullify first charge, the
amended provisions of the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act
would have been couched in language as indicated in
Central
Bank of India
(supra).
Interestingly, when G. M. G.
Engineers and Contractor Pvt. Ltd. (supra) was decided,
neither had
section 26E
been brought on the statute book nor
does it appear that any proceedings under the RDDB Act had
been initiated.
48. Having noted what was laid down in G. M. G. Engineers
and Contractor Pvt. Ltd. (supra), we move on to notice the
decision reported in 2018 (55) GSTR 2010 (M.P.)
(
Bank of
Baroda vs. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh,
Indore
). There, a learned Single Judge presiding over a bench
of the Madhya Pradesh High Court at Indore had before His
45
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Lordship a challenge by the petitioning bank to a sale
proclamation dated 17th July 2017 issued by the Commercial
Tax Officer. Such proclamation was the result of action initiated
to recover commercial tax dues from a company which was a
debtor of the petitioning bank. The learned Judge considered
the provisions contained in
section 31B
of the Madhya Pradesh
Value Added Tax Act, 2022 creating first charge on the property
to the dealer and, thereafter, opined as follows:
"*****
           In the considered opinion of this Court, the
     Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts
     and Loans and Miscellaneous Provision (Amendment) Act,
     2016 came into force w.e.f. 01.09.2016 and by virtue of
     the said amendment, the right of secured creditors to
     realise the secured dues and debts dues, which are
     payable to the secured creditors by sale of assets over
     which security has been created, is having priority over all
     other debts and government dues including revenue,
     taxes, ceases and rates due to Central Government, State
     Government and local authorities.
Not only this, it is having overriding effect over all
     other enactment including the provisions of MP VAT Act,
     Central Sales Tax Act, Entry Tax Act and any other Tax
     Act.
Though, an attempt has been made by the State
     Government to demonstrate before this Court that the
     amendment will not dis-entitle to recover the dues by
     them as the dues are outstanding since 2012.
Nothing prevented the State Government to recover
     the dues since 2012 and the State Government woke up
     from plumber only after the amendment has come into
     force and by virtue of the amendment in the Central Act,
     this Court is of the considered opinion that by no stretch
     of imagination, the State Government can be permitted
     to auction the property in question as the Bank of Baroda
46
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

       is having priority in the matter in light of the amendment
       which has been quoted above.
*****"
49. What is significant is that no argument was advanced on
behalf of the sales tax authorities that section 31B of the RDDB
Act may not have application in the facts of the case without
any proceedings having been initiated under the RDDB Act by
the petitioning bank. Since the judgment also does not refer to
any proceedings having been initiated under the RDDB Act by
the petitioning bank, we are constrained to observe that such
decision must be held to be one rendered on its own facts and
may not be of any assistance for us to decide the questions that
we have formulated.
50. A learned Judge of the Kerala High Court, in the decision
reported in (2019) SCC OnLine Ker 2890 (
State Bank of India
vs. State of Kerala
), was seized of writ petitions instituted by
various banks and financial institutions challenging the action
of the State's revenue machinery in taking possession of and
attempting to sell certain properties for alleged arrears of sales
tax and value added tax from its respective owners which the
bank/financial institutions claimed to be their secured assets
consequent to equitable mortgages having been created over
them     in   their   favour   towards   security   for   financial
facilities/assistance availed of by its owners.
51. While the petitioning banks/financial institutions claimed
primary rights as secured creditors to proceed against the
properties in question under
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act
and section 31B of the RDDB Act, the revenue claimed first
47
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

charge over such properties under
section 26B
of the Kerala
General Sales Tax Act and
section 38
of the Kerala Value Added
Tax Act. After considering various decisions, the learned Judge
recorded as follows:
"33. A close survey of the afore judgments thus renders
     it beyond contest that the words `First Charge' and
     'priority in payment of debts' are virtually synonymous
     and means the same, except for its semantic variation on
     account of differing phraseology. In both events, the
     holder obtains the privilege of recovery before anyone
     else and hence, whether it is the `First Charge' or the
     right to claim `priority' in recovery, the ultimate effect and
     consequence is the same.
34. Thus, even though the
KGST Act
/
KVAT Act
creates a
     `First Charge' in favour of the Revenue to recover the
     arrears of tax, the afore provisions of the SARFAESI Act
     and RDB Act make the secured dues entitled to be paid in
     priority over such taxes and in fact, elevates the rights of
     the secured creditor, to recover such dues, also to a
     position of priority.
36. Irrefragibly, when the secured creditors have a right
     in priority to have their debts extinguished, obviously,
     their right to proceed against the property would also rank
     high than that is claimed by the Revenue. The assertion
     of the Revenue that their `Charge' will continue over the
     property until it is sold by them, hence, is rendered
     without forensic support to stand on.
37. That so said, the next question that arises is whether
Section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and Section 31B of the
     RDB Act create an overriding and first right in favour of
     the Banks/Financial Institutions to recover their dues,
     over and above the right of the Revenue created through
     the
KGST Act
/
KVAT Act
.
In fact, this enquiry has been
     rendered relatively easy for this Court because, in
Central
     Bank of India v. State of Kerala
(2009) 4 SCC 94, the
     Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the right of the
     Banks/Financial Institutions as regards recovery of their
     dues prior to the afore two provisions being introduced in
48
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

the SARFAESI Act and in the RDB Act. The conclusions of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court are unequivocal worded that,
in the absence of these provisions in the respective
Statutes, the Banks/Financial Institutions cannot claim
any priority over the Revenue's First Charge on the
properties concerned for recovery of dues of Sales
Tax/Value Added Tax. *****.
38. When one reads the afore opinion of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, it is left without any doubt that, but for
Section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and Section 31B of the
RDB Act, such Statutes do not, in any manner, operate to
create a better right for recovery in favour of the
Banks/Financial Institutions over that of the Revenue.
However, these provisions were brought in and
incorporated in the respective Statutes after this
judgment, clearly with the intend (sic, intent) to override
this lacuna. Therefore, the resultant question is whether
these provisions would create a better right in favour of
the Banks/Financial Institutions, which is superior to that
enjoyed by the Revenue under the
KGST Act
/
KVAT Act
.
41. As has been extracted above,
Section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act provides that the debts due to any secured
creditor shall be paid in priority over all other debts and
all revenue, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the
Central Government or State Government or Local
Authority. Section 31B of the RDB Act takes this one step
forward and elevates the right of the secured creditors to
realise their debts, by sale of the secured assets, to enjoy
priority and then re-affirms that such debts will be paid in
priority over the revenue, taxes, cesses and other rates
payable to the Central Government or State Government
or Local Authority. It is thus irrefragible (sic, irrefragable)
and in fact, expressly conceded to by the learned
Additional Advocate General that the Banks/Financial
Institutions have the First Right to have their debts
extinguished; but, as has been recorded above, the
Revenue merely claims that they have right to sell the
property first. This argument again is flawed because the
'First Charge' creating no right over the property, the
Revenue cannot claim a First Right to proceed against it
49
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     either in the face of the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
or
     RDB Act with which we are dealing in this case. *****.
47. The above cited judgments certainly support my
     views as afore and it axiomatically becomes justified for
     me to hold that
Section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and
     Section 31B of the RDB Act create a `First Charge' by way
     of a priority to the Banks/Financial Institutions to recover
     and satisfy their debts, notwithstanding any statutory
     'First Charge' in favour of the Revenue under the
KGST
     Act
/
KVAT Act
. It is so declared.
49. The above conclusions of the Hon'ble Court certainly
     places a lid on this argument made on behalf of the
     Revenue and in any event of the matter, they themselves
     concede that Section 31B of the RDB Act has been
     notified. Hence, even assuming and is taken that
Section
     26E
of the SARFAESI Act cannot apply for want of
     notification, it would be of no avail to the Revenue,
     because the provisions of Section 31B of the RDB Act
     clearly place the right of the secured creditor to proceed
     against the property as well as their right to recover the
     secured debts in a position of priority over all tax arrears
     claimed by the Revenue."
52. The dicta in
State Bank of India vs. State of Kerala
(supra) is clear. It supports the contention that in view of
section 31B of the RDDB Act and
section 26E
of the SARFAESI
Act, first charge in favour of the banks/financial institutions is
created for recovery/realization of their dues in priority to the
dues of a department of the Government.
53. A Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court, in its decision
reported   in   (2019)   SCC    Online   Guj    1892   (
Kalupur
Commercial Co-operative Bank Ltd. vs. State of Gujarat
)
considered an issue with regard to the priority of the petitioning
cooperative bank over the dues vis-à-vis the sales tax dues
which the State Government intended to recover from the
50
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

assets of the defaulter. In other words, the question was
whether by virtue of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act the same
would override the charge of the State Government under
section 48
of the Gujarat Value Added Tax Act, 2003. The
Division Bench was of the view that section 48 of the relevant
VAT Act
would come into play only when the liability is finally
assessed and the amount becomes due and payable. It is only
thereafter, if there is any charge, the same would operate.
54. Giving due regard to a decision rendered previously by
the presiding Judge of the Division Bench, it was held in
Kalupur Commercial Co-operative Bank Ltd.
(supra) by the
Division Bench that it had no hesitation in arriving at the
conclusion that the first priority over the secured asset shall be
of the petitioning cooperative bank and not of the State
Government by virtue of section 48 of the relevant
VAT Act
.
This resulted in setting aside of the impugned attachment dated
22nd January 2018 and the communication dated 19th April
2018, whereby first charge over the property was claimed.
55. We have noted that the decision in
Kalupur Commercial
Co-operative Bank Ltd.
(supra) was rendered on 23rd
September 2019, i.e., prior to enforcement of
section 26E
of
the SARFAESI Act. This decision supports the contentions of the
secured creditors before us. We, however, wish to consider the
law
laid down in
paragraph 57 of the decision at a later part of
this judgment.
56.
In the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in
ASREC (India) Limited
(supra), the controversy arose as to
51
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

who between the petitioner and the Sales Tax Officer would be
entitled to the proceeds of sale of the subject property in a sum
of Rs. 8.02 crore, which was fetched upon the same being sold
in terms of the liberty granted by the Division Bench. The State
of Maharashtra and the Sales Tax Officer, respondents 1 and 2,
respectively, relied upon the statutory charge created in favour
of the sales tax department under
section 37
of the MVAT Act.
On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended that
section 37
itself records that it would be subject to any Central legislation
creating first charge and highlighted that the RDDB Act being
the Central legislation and section 31B thereof having accorded
first priority in favour of the secured creditor over and above
the Government dues, including revenues, taxes, etc. and also
because section 31B of the RDDB Act is not restricted to any
sale conducted under the provisions of such legislations only
and it would operate in respect of sale conducted under any
other mechanism, including provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, it
was immaterial whether
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act had
not been brought into force.
57. Reliance was placed by the petitioner on the decisions in
Assistant Commissioner (CT
) (supra), G. M. G. Engineers
and Contractor Pvt. Ltd. (supra),
Bank of Baroda
(supra),
and
Kalupur Commercial Cooperative Bank Ltd.
(supra).
58. On the contrary, the respondents 1 and 2 contended that
since
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act had not been brought
into force and notwithstanding section 31B of the RDDB Act
being in force, for the purposes of action taken under the
52
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

SARFAESI Act, the charge created by
section 37
of the MVAT
Act shall prevail.
59. In paragraph 12, the Court observed as follows:
"12. A perusal of
Section 37
of MVAT Act, 2002 reveals
     that though it commences with a non-obstante clause, but
     it recognises that the same shall be subject to any
     provision regarding creation of the first charge in any
     Central Act. Therefore, if, by virtue of any provision under
     a Central Act any priority or charge is created in favour of
     any party the same shall prevail."
60. Thereafter, the Division Bench referred to section 31B of
the RDDB Act, the decision in G. M. G. Engineers and
Contractor (supra),
Assistant Commissioner (CT
) (supra),
Bank of Baroda
(supra) and and
Kalupur Commercial
Cooperative      Bank   Ltd.
(supra),   while   recording   its
concurrence in paragraph 19 with the consistent view taken by
3 (three) Division Benches of 3 (three) High Courts and the
view taken by the Full Bench of the fourth High Court. Prior to
allowing the writ petition and quashing the impugned notice
dated 13th November 2016 issued by the respondent no. 2
initiating a process for auction under the MLR Code, the Division
Bench recorded in paragraphs 20 and 21 as follows:
"20. The only contention which needs to be noted which
     was made by learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and
     2 which was not made before the four learned Benches of
     the four High Courts in their opinions above noted, is that
     Chapter IVA which was inserted in SARFAESI 2002
     comprising
Sections 26B
to
26E
warrants a record to be
     made in the Central Register by the Central Registry
     creating a security interest. As per learned Counsel as
     per Sub-section (2) of
Section 26B
which is a part of
     Chapter IVA a secured creditor has to ensure that the
     security interest is recorded in the record of the Central
53
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     Registry. The argument therefore was that unless this is
     done, the priority of interest contemplated by
Section 26E
would not be applicable.
21. The argument is without any substance because the
     law declared in the four opinions above referred to is that
     if any Central Statute creates priority of a charge in favour
     of a secured creditor, the same will rank above the charge
     in favour of a State for a tax due under the Value Added
     Tax of the State. But we note the fact that the security
     interest has been entered in the record of the Central
     Registry."
61. What follows from a reading of the aforesaid paragraphs
(20 and 21) is that the contention advanced by the respondents
1 and 2 regarding mandatory registration of the security
interest with the Central registry prior to invocation of
section
26E
of the SARFAESI Act was, in the opinion of the Division
Bench, an "argument without substance".
62. Another Division Bench of this Court had the occasion to
consider a somewhat similar point in
State Bank of India vs.
the State of Maharashtra and Ors.
(supra). The petitioning
bank, the secured creditor challenged attachment of a plot
under the provisions of
section 32
of the MVAT Act and
proceedings initiated by the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax,
respondent no. 2, for recovery of Value Added Tax dues of the
respondent no. 3 under the MLR Code. The petitioning bank
was claiming priority of charge on the said plot as secured
creditor in respect of the debt owed by the respondent no. 3 to
such creditor over the sales tax dues payable by the respondent
no. 3 to the respondent no. 2. An original application under the
RDDB Act had been filed by the petitioning bank to recover dues
of Rs. 2.49 crore from the respondent no. 3. While the said
54
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

application was pending adjudication before the DRT, Pune, the
petitioning bank invoked the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
by
issuing a demand notice dated 27th November 2017 under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, whereafter, physical
possession was taken on 29th May 2019. In terms of e-auction
conducted by the petitioning bank on 17th July 2019, the said
plot being the secured asset was sold for Rs. 89.25 lakh.
On
behalf of the petitioner, strong reliance was placed on
ASREC
(India) Ltd.
(supra), while the respondents 1 and 2 contended
that the decision in
ASREC (India) Ltd.
(supra) had been
challenged before the Supreme Court and a decision thereon
was pending. A prayer was made that till such time hearing of
the case before the Supreme Court is concluded, hearing of the
writ petition may be deferred. On merits, it was contended that
the petitioning bank had not registered the security interest
with the Central registry as required under
section 26D
of the
SARFAESI Act and, as such, the debts due to the petitioning
bank cannot be paid in priority over the tax dues of the
respondent no. 2. It was further contended that
section 26E
of
the SARFAESI Act having been notified on 24th January 2020,
the same is effective prospectively. Also, it was contended that
there being an assertion of claim by the respondents 1 and 2
for recovery of tax dues and an attachment having been
initiated to protect the interest of the revenue, contentions of
the petitioning bank were liable to be rejected.
63. The Division Bench, after considering various provisions
of the
SARFAESI Act
as well as section 31B of the RDDB Act,
proceeded to observe in paragraphs 34 and 35 as follows:
55
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     "34.
In our considered view the facts in the case at hand
     being similar to the facts in the case of
ASREC (India)
     Limited
(Supra) that decision would squarely be
     applicable to the facts of this case that if any Central
     statute creates priority of a charge in favour of a secured
     creditor, the same will rank above the charge in favour of
     a State for a tax due under the value added tax of the
     State. Therefore, in our view what becomes relevant in
     the facts of this case is the issue of priority of charge on
     the said assets of secured debt over tax dues and not
     whether the charge is first or not in time.
35. In this view of the matter, though it would not be
     necessary for us to deal with the contention of the
     Respondents relating to the date of effectiveness of
Section 26-E
of the SARFAESI Act, however we are of the
     view that even if
Section 26-E
was effective only
     prospectively from 24th January, 2020 and not applicable
     to the facts at hand, that would not make any difference;
as according to us Section 31-B of the RDB Act itself would
     be sufficient to give priority to a secured creditor over the
     Respondent's charge for claiming tax dues."
(underlining in original)
64. While dealing with
Central Bank of India
(supra), the
Division Bench opined that
the said decision
would be of no
application since section 31B of the RDDB Act not being on the
statute book then, the impact of such a provision did not come
up for consideration before the Supreme Court and also that
the decision was prior to the amendments introduced in the
RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act by the 2016
Amending Act
.
Reliance was also placed by the Division Bench on paragraphs
16   and   17   of   the   decision   in
Kalupur    Commercial
Cooperative Bank Ltd.
(supra) for holding that the decision
in
Central Bank of India
(supra) was of no assistance to drive
home the point raised by the respondents 1 and 2.
56
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
65. The decision in
ASREC (INDIA) Ltd.
(supra) and
State
Bank of India vs. the State of Maharashtra
(supra) would
engage our further attention while we answer the questions
formulated above.
66. A Division Bench of this Court at its Bench at Nagpur, while
rendering its decision reported in AIR 2021 BOMBAY 135
(
Medineutrina Pvt. Ltd. (Company) vs. District Industries
Centre and Ors.
) had the occasion to consider several issues.
The first issue was as to who between the respondent no. 2
(Assistant Commissioner, Sales Tax) and the respondent no. 3
(Punjab National Bank) would have priority.
Such issue was
answered in favour of the respondent no. 3 having regard to
the provisions contained in
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act as
well as the decisions in
Assistant Commissioner (CT
)
(supra),
State Bank of India vs. State of Maharashtra
(supra) and the decision reported in 2019 SCC OnLine Bom
9527 (
Cosmos Co-operative Bank Ltd. vs. State of
Maharashtra and Ors.
). The Division Bench consequently
held that the provisions of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act
would prevail over those contained in
section 37(1)
of the MVAT
Act. While the Division Bench proceeded to add a few more
reasons why
section 26E
would prevail over
section 37(1)
of
the MVAT Act, it considered 'charge' as defined in section 100
of the ToP Act and held that for such charge to become
effective, it is necessary that the transferee ought to have had
prior notice of such charge, be it either express, implied or
constructive or the prior existence of such charge is shown to
have been within the knowledge of the transferee. Section 55
57
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

of the ToP Act was further referred to. The Division Bench held
that such provision creates an obligation upon every seller to
disclose to the buyer any material defect in the property or his
title, of which he is aware and which the buyer cannot, with
ordinary care, discover and pay all public charges and discharge
all encumbrances on the property then existing.
The Division
Bench then proceeded to consider how the Supreme Court in
its decision reported in (2009) 4 SCC 486 (
A. I. Champdany
Industries vs. Official Liquidator and Anr.
) had given
meaning to the word "encumbrances" in relation to the words
"immovable property" and quoted the following paragraph: -
"18.     *****. There cannot, thus, be any doubt or
       dispute that a provision of law must expressly provide
       for an enforcement of a charge against the property in
       the hands of the transferee for value without notice to
       the charge and not merely create a charge."
Then followed certain observations in paragraphs 28 and 30,
which we quote below: -
"28. The language of
Section 37(1)
of the MVAT Act
       2002, has to be viewed in that contextual background.
Section 37(1)
of the MVAT Act, 2002, creates a 'First
       Charge on the property of the dealer', or as the case
       may be, person, for any amount of tax, penalty,
       interest, sum forfeited, fine or any other sum payable
       under the
MVAT Act
2002. Though the dues of the Bank
       as a secured creditor, in light of the language of
Section
       26-E
of the SARFAESI Act, which has now been brought
       into force w.e.f. 1/9/2016, will have priority, that does
       not have the effect of wiping out the dues payable under
       any Central/State/Local Act, where, for the recovery of
       such dues, a first charge has been created on the
       property by such statute, which in the case of the
MVAT
       Act, 2002
, has been so created. It goes without saying
       that when a statutory charge is created on the property,
58
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

       the same would go with the property and would follow
       the property, in whosoever's hands the property goes.
30. As
Section 37(1)
of the MVAT Act, 2002, creates a
       charge on the property, a successful auction purchaser,
       thus would hold the property, upon which a statutory
       charge has been created, subject to such charge and
       the property would thus continue to be liable for any
       statutory charges created upon it, even in the hands of
       such auction purchaser, though for non disclosure of
       such charge by the secured creditor, the auction
       purchaser may sue the secured creditor and have such
       redress, as may be permissible in law. This is more so
       for the reason that the priority given in
Section 26-E
of
       the SARFAESI Act, to the Banks, which is a secured
       creditor, would only mean that it is first in que for
       recovery of its debts by sale of the property, which is a
       security interest, the other creditors being relegated to
       second place and so on, in the order of their preference
       as per law and contract, if any, as the case may be.
       Thus the dues under
Section 37(1)
of the MVAT Act,
       2002, being a statutory charge on the property, would
       also be recoverable by sale of the property, and that
       puts a liability upon the auction purchaser, who, in case
       he wants an encumbrance free title, will have to clear
       such dues."
Insofar as purchase of a property on 'as is where is and what
is there is basis' is concerned, the following observations were
made: -
"36.       Thus the purchase of the property on 'as is
       where is and what is there is' basis, would mean that
       the property was being had by the auction purchaser,
       with all its rights, obligations and liabilities, whatsoever
       they may be, which would include, all dues, impositions,
       restrictions as may have been imposed upon the same
       and consequent to acquiring title to the property,
       cannot be permitted to quibble out of it, on the alleged
       plea of not being noticed about any such
       liability/imposition. In case the auction purchaser, did
       not want to have the property, with its liabilities, he
59
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

          ought to have insisted on having the same free of all
          encumbrances, altogether, before bidding for the same.
          That apart, it is equally a duty of the auction purchaser,
          before bidding for the same, to make inquiries about
          the impositions upon the property, so that he can have
          it free of any encumbrances. After acquiring title to the
          property, the auction purchaser cannot be heard to say
          that he will have the rights associated with the property
          and not the liabilities. He takes it lock, stock and barrel,
          with everything.
37. ***** Thus the obligation to deliver the property to
          the auction purchaser free from encumbrances known
          to the secured creditor includes the responsibility to
          make reasonable enquiries about the encumbrances
          and liabilities and to include such liabilities in the notice
          inviting the bids, or if that is not done, in the reserve
          price, fixed for sale of the security interest, so that the
          encumbrances can be taken care of. This is also spelt
          out from Rule 9(7) and (8) of the Security Interest
          (Enforcement) Rules, 2002."
This was followed by directions in paragraph 41, which every
secured creditor under the
SARFAESI Act
was required to
ensure.
67. Learned advocates for the parties have placed before us
orders of the Supreme Court in appeals that have been carried
from the decision in
Medineutrina Pvt. Ltd.
(supra).
While the
directions contained in paragraph 41 have been stayed by the
Supreme Court by an order dated 9th April 2021 in an appeal
carried by Kotak Mahindra Bank, a non-party to the proceedings
before     the   Division   Bench,     the   appeal    carried   from
Medineutrina Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) by the writ petitioner has been
dismissed by an order dated 18th November 2021 on a ground
different from those assigned in the judgment and order under
challenge.
60
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

ANALYSIS OF THE RELEVANT LAW AND ANSWERS TO
THE QUESTIONS
68. Having noted the submissions of the parties and bearing
in mind the rulings in the various decisions
referred to above
,
we would now advert to the questions that have been
formulated and answer the same.
ANSWER TO QUESTIONS (a) AND (b):
69. The questions being related are answered together.
70.
Chapter IV of the SARFAESI Act
, in its original avatar,
comprised of 6 (six) sections, i.e., 20 to 26 which, inter alia,
provided for:
i.     Setting up a 'Central Registry', mainly to facilitate
            registration of transaction of securitisation and
            reconstruction of financial assets and creation of
            security interests under the
SARFAESI Act
;
ii.    Appointing a Central Registrar and appointing other
            officers for discharging the Registrar's functions
            under his superintendence and direction;
iii.   Maintenance of a 'Central Register' of transactions
            relating   to     securitization   of   financial   assets,
            reconstruction of financial assets and creation of
            security interest;
iv.    Requirement of filing of transactions relating to
            securitisation,      reconstruction     and   creation   of
            security interest;
61
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

      v.    Reporting        by    asset      reconstruction    companies
            regarding satisfaction of their security interest; and

      vi.   Right to inspect the particulars of securitisation,
            reconstruction and creation of security interest
            transactions by any person.
71.
Section 26A
was inserted in
Chapter IV of the SARFAESI
Act
by an amendment w.e.f. January 15, 2013. It provided for
rectification   by     the    Central    Government       in   matters   of
registration, modification and satisfaction, etc. of the registered
transactions.
72.
Sections 20A
and
20B
were inserted in Chapter IV by the
2016
Amending Act
w.e.f. September 1, 2016. While the former
was intended to integrate registration systems with the Central
Registry, the latter pertained to delegation of powers.
73. The 2016
Amending Act
also introduced a fresh chapter
(Chapter IV-A) in the SARFAESI Act adding four more sections
thereto, i.e.,
sections 26B
to
26E
. The object that the
Parliament had in mind while incorporating
Chapter IV-A in the
SARFAESI Act
seems to be clear as crystal. The dominant
theme of the additions in the statute were intended to
emphasize       upon    the       need   to    register   transactions   of
securitisation, reconstruction and creation of security interest
with the Central registry (hereafter "CERSAI", for brevity) and,
accordingly, provisions were made to make such registration
mandatory for a secured creditor or other creditor to avail the
benefits flowing therefrom, as we would presently proceed to
notice.
62
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
74.
Section 26B
enables creditors [apart from secured
creditors as defined in
section 2(1)(zd)
] to file the particulars
of creation, modification or satisfaction of any security interest
in their favour with the Central Registry, while making it explicit
that such creditors shall not be entitled to exercise any right of
enforcement of securities under the
SARFAESI Act
. The
provisions therein also enable any person who has obtained an
order for attachment of property, to file particulars of such
attachment orders with the CERSAI in the form and manner as
may be prescribed.
75.
Section 26C
providing for the effect of registration of
transactions for creation, modification or satisfaction of security
interest declares that such registration would constitute public
notice thereof. The said provision also declares that a secured
creditor who has registered the security interest or other
creditor who has registered the attachment order in its favour,
shall have priority of claims over subsequent security interest
created over the property in question, any transfer by way of
sale, lease, assignment or licence of such property or
attachment    order   subsequent    to   such   registration.   The
legislative intent of requirement and benefits flowing from such
a registration with the CERSAI can hardly be overlooked.
76. It is now time to consider
sections 26D
and
26E
. Public
sector banks proceeding for creation of equitable mortgage,
i.e., mortgage by deposit of title deeds, at the time of providing
financial assistance has been a common practice over the
years. However, the economy and simplicity of this process was
not without its complex problems. Since equitable mortgage
63
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

could be created without registration, the transaction between
the lender and the borrower largely remained secret. There was
no way anyone else could get an inkling thereof, until the
provisions for CERSAI registration were enacted. It was well-
nigh possible for a dishonest borrower to conceal the
transaction of mortgage and sell the mortgaged property to an
innocent third party by creating document of title leading to the
purchaser unknowingly incurring a liability despite paying the
consideration. In such a situation, the purchaser would be
chased by the lending bank and necessarily to bear the brunt
of its efforts geared towards recovery of its dues. Instances
were also not rare of more than one loan being sanctioned by
different banks on the strength of mortgage of a single property
without one bank knowing of a prior mortgage with another
bank. This brewed multiple funding in respect of one property,
making it difficult for lenders to recover debts and consequent
breeding   of   non-performing   assets.   Notwithstanding   the
concept of principal mortgagee and a puisne mortgagee, the
minimum requirement of the mortgagee having the means to
gauge and assess the worth and status of the property
mortgaged before creation of mortgage for any mortgage
transaction to be termed proper had to be achieved. We are
inclined to the view that the Parliament, to curb such problems
and other undesirable consequences, designed Chapter IV-A in
such a manner to include provisions which, on the one hand,
would disable any secured creditor to exercise the right of
enforcing security interest under
Chapter III of the SARFAESI
Act
without the CERSAI registration (
section 26D
) and, on the
64
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

other, enable the secured creditor, if it has the CERSAI
registration, to claim priority over all other debts and all
revenues, taxes, etc., in the matter of payment of the debts
due to it (
section 26E
).
77. The plain reading of
section 26D
reveals that it has the
effect of stripping a secured creditor of its right of enforcement
of security interest under Chapter III in the absence of a
CERSAI registration. Beginning with a non-obstante clause,
section 26D
has overriding effect qua any other law that is
inconsistent therewith and underscores the importance of a
CERSAI registration. Promotion of a CERSAI registration of a
security interest being at the forefront of the legislative intent,
the same has to be honoured.
78.
Section 26E
, also beginning with a non-obstante clause,
is unambiguous in terms of language, effect, scope and import.
A 'priority' in payment over all other dues is accorded to a
secured creditor in enforcement of the security interest, if it has
a CERSAI registration, except in cases where proceedings are
pending under the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016.
79. The disabling provision in
section 26D
and the enabling
provision in
section 26E
, both begin with non-obstante clauses,
as noticed above. The scheme of Parts III and IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act envisages benefits to a secured creditor who is
diligent and obtains CERSAI registration while depriving a
secured creditor of even taking recourse to Chapter III without
the requisite registration.
65
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
80. The aforesaid provisions of
Chapter IVA of the SARFAESI
Act
in mind, we would now turn our attention and take a look
at the relevant State legislations.
81. In Maharashtra, there are multiple legislation providing,
by express statutory intendment, for 'first charge' on property
of a person who defaults in payment of Government dues, by
whatever name the dues are called. Such statutory intendment,
apart from the BST Act, the MVAT Act and the MGST Act, is
traceable in at least 4 (four) other legislations in the State of
Maharashtra.
Section 212
of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act,   1888,
section   141
of     the   Maharashtra   Municipal
Corporations Act, 1949, section 109 of the Maharashtra Town
and Country Planning Act, 1966 and section 331(1)(iii)(b) of
the MLR Code, 1966, are the various sources of creation of first
charge on property/plot. It would equally be important to note
what section 169 of the MLR Code provides. For facility of
appreciation, all such provisions are quoted hereunder:
Section 212
of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
       Act, 1888:
"212. Property taxes to be a first charge on
       premises on which they are assessed
             Property taxes due under this Act in respect of any
       building or land shall, subject to the prior payment of the
       land revenue, if any, due to the State Government
       thereupon be a first charge in the case of any building or
       land held immediately from the Government upon the
       interest in such building or land of the person liable for
       such taxes and upon the goods and chattels, if any, found
       within or upon such building or land, and belonging to
       such person; and, in the case of any other building or
       land, upon the said building or land and upon the goods
66
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

and chattels, if any, found within or upon such building or
land and belonging to the person liable for such taxes."
Section 141
of          the    Maharashtra       Municipal
Corporations Act,
"141. Property taxes to be a first charge on
premises on which they are assessed.
(1) Property taxes due under this Act in respect of
any building or land shall, subject to the prior payment of
the land revenue, if any, due to the provincial Government
thereupon, be a first charge, in the case of any building
or land held immediately from the Government, upon the
interest in such building or land of the person liable for
such taxes and upon the moveable property, if any, found
within or upon such building or land and belonging to such
person; and, in the case of any other building or land,
upon the said building or land and upon the moveable
property, if any, found within or upon such building or land
and belonging to the person liable for such taxes.
Explanation.-- The term 'property tax' in this section
shall be deemed to include charges payable under section
134 for water supplied to any premises and the costs of
recovery of property taxes as specified in the rules.
(2) In any decree passed in a suit for the
enforcement of the charge created by sub-section (1), the
court may order the payment to the Corporation of
interest on the sum found to be due at such rate as the
Court deems reasonable from the date of the institution
of the suit until realisation, and such interest and the cost
of enforcing the said charge, including the costs of the suit
and the cost of bringing premises or movable property in
question to sale under the decree, shall, subject as
aforesaid, be a fresh charge on such premises and
movable property along with the amount found to be due,
and the Court may direct payment thereof to be made to
the Corporation out of the sale proceeds."
Section 109
of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
Planning Act, 1996:
67
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

"109. Recovery of arrears
       (1) Any sum due to a Planning Authority under this
Act, rule or any regulation made thereunder shall be a
first charge or the plot on which it is due, subject to the
prior payment of land revenue, if any, due to the
Government thereon.
(2) Any sum due to the Planning Authority under
this Act, rule or any regulation made thereunder which is
not paid on demand on the day on which it becomes due
or on the day fixed by the Planning Authority, shall be
recoverable by the Planning Authority from the defaulter
as if they were arrears of land revenue.
(3) If any question arises whether a sum is due to
the Planning Authority within the meaning of sub-section
(2), it shall be referred to a tribunal constituted by the
State Government consisting of one or more persons not
connected with the Planning Authority or any authority
subordinate to it or with the person by whom the sum is
alleged to be payable which the tribunal shall, after
making such inquiry as it may deem fit and after giving to
the person by whom the sum is alleged to be payable, an
opportunity of being heard, decide the question; and the
decision of the tribunal thereon shall be final and shall not
be called in question in any court or before any other
authority.
(4) The procedure to be followed by the tribunal in
deciding questions referred to it under sub-section (2)
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government."
Section 169 of the MLR Code:
"169. Claims of State Government                  to   have
precedence over all others
     (1) The arrears of land revenue due on account of
land shall be a paramount charge on the land and on
every part thereof and shall have precedence over any
other debt, demand or claim whatsoever, whether in
respect of mortgage, judgment-decree, execution or
attachment, or otherwise howsoever, against any land for
the holder thereof.
68
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

           (2) The claim of the State Government to any
     monies other than arrears of land revenue, but
     recoverable as a revenue demand under the provisions of
     this Chapter shall have priority over all unsecured claims
     against any land or holder thereof."
Section 331(1)(iii)(b) of the MLR Code:
"331. Certain provisions to apply to alienated
     villages
           (1) The provisions of section 68 and of Chapters V,
     VI, VII, VIII and IX shall be applicable to all alienated
     villages and alienated shares of villages, subject to the
     following modifications, that is to say--
(i)    *****
                    (ii)   *****
(iii) on the introduction of a settlement under
              Chapter V or VI in any such village or share, the
              holder or holders of such village or share shall, in
              proportion to his share in the rent or revenue of the
              village or share, be liable to pay--
(a)    *****
(b) the costs of the levy of a cess under
sections 144
,
151
and
152
of the Maharashtra
                    Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act,
                    1961;
***"
82. Each of the aforesaid several legislations operate in their
particular field. Pertinently, wherever the legislature of the
State intended the particular provision to be the dominant
legislation    or   subordinate     or    subservient   to   any   other
legislation, it has expressed such an intention in no uncertain
terms. Section 169(1) of the MLR Code is the dominant
legislation providing that the arrears of land revenue due on
account of land shall be a paramount charge on the land and
on every part thereof and shall have precedence over any other
69
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

debt, demand or claim whatsoever, whether in respect of
mortgage, judgment-decree, execution or attachment, or
otherwise howsoever, against any land for the holder thereof.
The municipal laws and the MRTP Act, however, despite creation
of first charge on property taxes due to the Corporations and
sums due to a planning authority, respectively, are expressly
made subordinate to the paramount charge on a land if in
respect of such land, land revenue is in arrears. Viewed from
this angle, there is no magic in the words 'first charge'. Even a
'first charge', by express statutory intendment, can be made
subordinate or subservient to a paramount charge such as
arrears of land revenue. We, therefore, are unable to accept
the argument of the State/respondents that since neither the
SARFAESI Act
nor the RDDB Act uses the words 'first charge'
but the word 'priority', such 'priority' cannot have precedence
over 'first charge' created by the State legislations.
83. However, notwithstanding that section 169(1) of the MLR
Code is the dominant legislation and does not expressly say
that it would be subordinate or subservient to any Central Act
creating 'first charge', nothing really turns on it. The express
language of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and section 31B
of the RDDB Act, wherever applicable, is sufficient to off-set the
'paramount charge' created by sub-section (1) of section 169.
Similarly, even if there were no express intendment in the
relevant provisions of the BST Act (section 38C) and the
MVAT
Act
(
section 37
) to the effect that such provisions would be
subordinate to any Central Act creating 'first charge', the same
would obviously have to be read, invoked and exercised subject
70
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

to
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act and section 31B of the
RDDB Act, wherever applicable.
84. The fact that the BST Act and the MVAT Act, which are
under   consideration,   expressly   make    it   subordinate   or
subservient to any Central legislation creating first charge
cannot be ignored. The 2016
Amending Act
being of recent
origin, the first query that arises in this regard is: did the
Parliament not know that there is a plethora of legislation in the
country, both Central and State, that speaks of creation of 'first
charge' in favour of a department of the Central/State
Government? The reply cannot but be in the affirmative. The
next query that would obviously follow is: whether the word
'priority' appearing in
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act, i.e., "...
paid in priority over all other debts and all revenues, taxes,
cesses and other rates payable to the Central Government or
State Government or local authority" (italics for emphasis by
us), was used without a purpose? This reply has to be in the
negative.
85. Priority means precedence or going before (Black's Law
Dictionary). In the present context, it would mean the right to
enforce a claim in preference to others. In view of the splurge
of 'first charge' used in multiple legislation, the Parliament
advisedly used the word 'priority over all other dues' in the
SARFAESI Act
to obviate any confusion as to inter-se
distribution of proceeds received from sale of properties of the
borrower/dealer. If a secured asset has been disposed of by
sale by taking recourse to the Security Interest (Enforcement)
Rules, 2002 it would appear to be reasonable to hold,
71
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

particularly having regard to the non-obstante clauses in
sections 31 B and
section 26E
, that the dues of the secured
creditor shall have 'priority' over all other including all
revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the Central
Government or State Government or local authority.
86. A debt that is secured or which, by reason of the
provisions of a statute, becomes a 'first charge' on the property,
in view of the plain language of
Article 372
of the Constitution,
must be held to prevail over a Crown debt, which is an
unsecured one. The law, as it stands even today, is that a Crown
debt enjoys no priority over secured debts. This principle has
been repeatedly reaffirmed including, inter alia, in the decision
of the Supreme Court reported in (2000) 5 SCC 694 (
Dena
Bank vs. Bhikhabhai Prabhudas Parekh & Co.
) where the
Court observed:
"10. However, the Crown's preferential right to recovery
     of debts over other creditors is confined to ordinary or
     unsecured creditors. The common law of England or the
     principles of equity and good conscience (as applicable to
     India) do not accord the Crown a preferential right for
     recovery of its debts over a mortgagee or pledgee of
     goods or a secured creditor. It is only in cases where the
     Crown's right and that of the subject meet at one and the
     same time that the Crown is in general preferred. Where
     the right of the subject is complete and perfect before that
     of the King commences, the rule does not apply, for there
     is no point of time at which the two rights are at conflict,
     nor can there be a question which of the two ought to
     prevail in a case where one, that of the subject, has
     prevailed already. In Giles v. Grover it has been held that
     the Crown has no precedence over a pledgee of goods.
In
Bank of Bihar v. State of Bihar
the principle has been
     recognised by this Court holding that the rights of the
     pawnee who has parted with money in favour of the
72
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     pawnor on the security of the goods cannot be
     extinguished even by lawful seizure of goods by making
     money available to other creditors of the pawnor without
     the claim of the pawnee being first fully satisfied.
Rashbehary Ghose states in Law of Mortgage (TLL, 7th
     Edn., p. 386) - 'It seems a government debt in India is
     not entitled to precedence over a prior secured debt'."
87. It would also not be inapposite to draw guidance from the
decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2006) 10 SCC 452
(
ICICI Bank Ltd. vs. SIDCO Leathers Ltd.
) where the Court
ruled as follows:
"41. While enacting a statute, Parliament cannot be
     presumed to have taken away a right in property. Right
     to property is a constitutional right. Right to recover the
     money lent by enforcing a mortgage would also be a right
     to enforce an interest in the property. The provisions of
     the
Transfer of Property Act
provide for different types of
     charges. In terms of
Section 48
of the Transfer of Property
     Act claim of the first charge-holder shall prevail over the
     claim of the second charge-holder and in a given case
     where the debts due to both, the first charge-holder and
     the second charge-holder, are to be realised from the
     property belonging to the mortgagor, the first charge-
     holder will have to be repaid first. There is no dispute as
     regards the said legal position.
42. Such a valuable right, having regard to the legal
     position as obtaining in common law as also under the
     provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act
, must be
     deemed to have been known to Parliament. Thus, while
     enacting the
Companies Act
, Parliament cannot be held to
     have intended to deprive the first charge-holder of the
     said right. Such a valuable right, therefore, must be held
     to have been kept preserved. [See Workmen v. Firestone
     Tyre and Rubber Co. of India (P) Ltd., (1973) 1 SCC 813].
43. If Parliament while amending the provisions of the
Companies Act
intended to take away such a valuable
     right of the first charge-holder, we see no reason why it
     could not have stated so explicitly. Deprivation of legal
73
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     right existing in favour of a person cannot be presumed
     in construing the statute. It is in fact the other way round
     and thus, a contrary presumption shall have to be raised.
44.
Section 529(1)(c)
of the Companies Act speaks about
     the respective rights of the secured creditors which would
     mean the respective rights of secured creditors vis-à-vis
     unsecured creditors. It does not envisage respective
     rights amongst the secured creditors. Merely because
     Section 529 does not specifically provide for the rights of
     priorities over the mortgaged assets, that, in our opinion,
     would not mean that the provisions of
Section 48
of the
     Transfer of Property Act in relation to a company, which
     has undergone liquidation, shall stand obliterated.
45. If we were to accept that inter se priority of secured
     creditors gets obliterated by merely responding to a public
     notice wherein it is specifically stated that on his failure
     to do so, he will be excluded from the benefits of the
     dividends that may be distributed by the Official
     Liquidator, the same would lead to deprivation of the
     secured creditor of his right over the security and would
     bring him on a par with an unsecured creditor. The logical
     sequitur of such an inference would be that even
     unsecured creditors would be placed on a par with the
     secured creditors. This could not have been the
     intendment of the legislation."
88. Bare perusal of the 2016
Amending Act
would show that
the dues of the Central/State Governments were in the specific
contemplation of the Parliament while it amended the RDDB Act
and the SARFAESI Act, both of which make specific reference
to debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates
payable to the Central Government or State Government or
local authority and ordains that the dues of a secured creditor
will have 'priority', i.e., take precedence. Significantly, the
statute goes quite far and it is not only revenues, taxes, cesses
and other rates payable to the State Government or any local
74
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

authority but also those payable to the Central Government
that would have to stand in the queue after the secured creditor
for payment of its dues.
89. The effect of using the word 'priority' in
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act, according to us, is this. The rights accorded to
'first charge' holders by Central as well as State legislation
having been known to the Parliament, in such a situation, what
the Parliament intended by exercising its legislative power by
introducing   amendments      in   the
SARFAESI    Act
,   more
particularly by incorporating
section 26E
therein, was to
explicitly make the valuable right of the 'first charge' holder
subordinate to the dues of a second creditor. The rights of such
of the first charge holders accorded by several legislations
enacted by the State, having regard to the language in which
section 26E
is couched, would rank subordinate to the right of
the secured creditor as defined in
section 2(1)(zd)
subject, of
course, to compliance with the other provisions of the statute.
Acceptance of the contra-arguments of learned counsel for the
State/respondents would undo what the Parliament has chosen
to do.
90. We may answer the question from a different angle. The
RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act are Central Acts. If any
provision therein is discerned to be seemingly inconsistent with
any provision in a State legislation, reconciliation of the same
ought to be attempted failing which the Central Acts will prevail
over the State legislations, in view of the principle of
repugnancy that
Article 254
of the Constitution contemplates.
Further,
section 37
of the MGST Act and section 38C of the BST
75
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Act expressly make it subject to the provisions of any Central
Act creating 'first charge'. Also,
section 26E
of the SARFAESI is
a subsequent legislation, as it was notified on 24 th January
2020. Subject to compliance of the terms of Chapter IV-A,
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act would, thus, override any
provision in the MGST Act and the BST Act in case of a conflict
with the
SARFAESI Act
.
91. The further contention of learned counsel for the
State/respondents that 'enforcement of first charge' and 'shall
be paid in priority over all other debts' are not synonymous and
that the latter is subordinate to the former, in our view, is
misconceived. If enforced, 'first charge' would ultimately lead
to priority in payment only. Where the end result is the same,
mere change in expression would not make the provisions
different. While agreeing with the opinion of the learned Judge
of the Kerala High Court in
State Bank of India vs. State of
Kerala
(supra), we reject such contention.
92. In view of the foregoing discussion, we have no hesitation
to hold that the dues of a secured creditor (subject of course to
CERSAI registration) and subject to proceedings under the I &
B Code would rank superior to the dues of the relevant
department of the State Government.
ANSWER TO QUESTION (c)
93. There are more reasons than one for which we are inclined
to answer the question in the affirmative.
76
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
94. That the intention of the Legislature, at the first instance,
has to be gathered from the language employed by it in the
statute in question, is beyond any doubt.
95.
Section 1(2)
of the 2016
Amending Act
states that the
same shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint. Insofar as the date of coming into effect and operation
of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
as inserted therein by the
2016
Amending Act
is concerned, perusal of
section 2
of the
2016
Amending Act
would reveal that different dates were
required to be appointed for different provisions of the 2016
Amending Act
to take effect and make it operational. On 26 th
December 2019, the Department of Financial Services in the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India issued a notification
appointing 24th January 2020 as the date on which
sections 17
to
19
of the 2016
Amending Act
would come into force.
Section
18
, which is relevant for the present purpose, was brought into
force from 24th January 2020 and, thus, Chapter IV-A became
operational with effect from that date. Surely, if the Parliament
had intended that the provisions of Chapter IV-A were to be
made applicable from a previous date, the notification would
have said so. Therefore, on the face of it, the 2016
Amending
Act
has not been made applicable retrospectively but has taken
effect from the date notified by the Central Government.
96. There is one other perspective from which the matter
could be viewed. The Statement of Objects and Reasons as
contained in the Bill for the 2016
Amending Act
introduced in
the Lok Sabha have been noted above. A reading thereof leads
77
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

to the inference that the amendment was proposed to bring
about a substantive change in the law, inter alia, by (i)
denuding secured creditors of their rights of enforcement of
securities under
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
if security
interest created in their favour had not been registered with the
CERSAI; and (ii) granting 'priority' to the secured creditors over
all other dues and taxes, after registration with the CERSAI
except in cases where proceedings under the provisions of the
I & B Code are pending. These changes were introduced for the
first time "to suit changing credit landscape and augment ease
of doing business", as appears from the Statement for the
amendment. These substantial changes, remedial in nature,
having been brought in force for the first time amount to
substantive law and cannot, therefore, be given retrospective
effect.
97. We may profitably refer to the decision of the Supreme
Court reported in (1969) 1 SCC 609 (
Sukhram Singh vs.
Harbheji
). There, in paragraph 12, law is
laid down in
the
following words:
"12. Now a law is undoubtedly retrospective if the law
      says so expressly but it is not always necessary to say so
      expressly to make the law retrospective. There are
      occasions when a law may be held to be retrospective in
      operation. Retrospection is not to be presumed for the
      presumption is the other way but many statutes have
      been regarded as retrospective without a declaration.
      Thus it is that remedial statutes are always regarded as
      prospective but declaratory statutes are considered
      retrospective. Similarly sometimes statutes have a
      retrospective effect when the declared intention is clearly
      and unequivocally manifest from the language employed
      in the particular law or in the context of      connected
78
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     provisions. It is always a question whether the Legislature
     has sufficiently expressed itself. To find this one must look
     at the general scope and purview of the Act and the
     remedy the Legislature intends to apply in the former
     state of the law and then determine what the Legislature
     intended to do. This line of investigation is, of course, only
     open if it is necessary. In the words of Lord Selborne in
     Main v. Stark, (1890) 15 AC 384 at 388, there might be
     something in the context of an Act or be collected from its
     language, which might give to words prima facie
     prospective a larger operation. More retrospectivity is not
     to be given than what can be gathered from expressed
     or clearly implied intention of the Legislature."
98.
In its decision reported in (2011) 2 SCC 721 (
Executive
Engineer Dhenkanal vs. N.C. Budharaj
), the Supreme Court
has clarified that 'substantive law' is that part of the law which
creates, defines and regulates rights in contrast to what is
called adjective or remedial law which provides the method of
enforcing rights.
99. Applying these tests to Chapter IV-A, coupled with the
express provision in
section 26D
regulating the exercise of
power by secured creditors by barring them to take recourse to
Chapter    III   of the   SARFAESI    Act
without     the   CERSAI
registration, there could be little hesitation to hold that
section
26E
of the SARFAESI Act would apply prospectively.
100. Pertinently, in the cases that we have in hand, the newly
incorporated provisions cast certain mandatory duty and
obligation on secured creditors. If they seek to invoke the
provisions of
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
and enforce the
security   interest,   the    same   needs   to   have    a    CERSAI
registration. Such creditors would be entitled to seek 'priority'
79
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

in terms of
section 26E
only after the security interest is
registered and other provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
are
complied with. Provisions in Chapter IV-A cannot be construed
in a manner so as to disturb, impair or divest the State of its
accrued rights.
Sections 26D
and
26E
of the SARFAESI Act no
doubt begin with non-obstante clauses. However, such non-
obstante clauses would override any law for the time being in
force evincing a result contrary to or inconsistent with
sections
26D
and
section 26E
but may not be so read so as to override
and nullify an exercise of right by the relevant department of
the State under any other law for the time being in force, and
action taken in pursuance thereof, leading to accrual of some
legal interest or benefit.
101. On the flip side, if the newly incorporated provisions
casting a mandatory obligation on a secured creditor to register
the security interest created in its favour to claim priority in
payment is read to apply with retrospective effect, it could bring
about at least one perceivable disastrous consequence. Actions
taken under
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
including
measures to take over possession of the secured asset prior to
Chapter IV-A becoming operational, i.e., without CERSAI
registration of the security interest sought to be enforced, could
be challenged as ultra vires the
SARFAESI Act
itself. If such a
challenge were to succeed, there could be sort of a cloudburst
of   complications.   A   reading   that   Chapter   IV-A   applies
prospectively would, however, save all such exercises of
enforcement of unregistered security interest, thereby not
being liable to interdiction on the ground of absence of
80
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

registration of the security interest upon a challenge being
thrown by a defaulting borrower.
102. We, thus, agree with the decisions in
Bank of Baroda
(supra) and ASREC (INDIA) Ltd. (supra) and answer the
question by holding that the provisions of
Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act
would have application prospectively from the
date the same was brought into force, i.e., January 24 2020.
ANSWER TO QUESTION (d)
103. We are left with no option but to answer this question in
the negative based on settled principles of law.
104. An enlightening passage on how statutes are to be
interpreted is found in the decision of the Supreme Court
reported in (1987) 1 SCC 424 (
Reserve Bank of India vs.
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.
). The
same reads as under:
"33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the
     context. They are the bases of interpretation. One may
     well say if the text is the texture, context is what gives
     the colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are important.
     That interpretation is best which makes the textual
     interpretation match the contextual. A statute is best
     interpreted when we know why it was enacted. With this
     knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and
     then section by section, clause by clause, phrase by
     phrase and word by word. If a statute is looked at, in the
     context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute-
     maker, provided by such context, its scheme, the
     sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour and
     appear different than when the statute is looked at
     without the glasses provided by the context. With these
     glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover
     what each section, each clause, each phrase and each
81
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the
     scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no word
     of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have
     to be construed so that every word has a place and
     everything is in its place. ***"
In the light of the above, a statute has to be construed after
ascertaining the legislative intent and in the context and
scheme of the enactment.
105. We have noticed the legislative intent behind enactment
of both the SARFAESI Act and the RDDB Act hereinbefore. We,
however, consider a recapitulation of the same.
106. First, although the end result of both the statutes, i.e., the
RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act is recovery of money, yet,
while the process of recovery under the former enactment is
entirely through the procedure laid down therein and is largely
court driven, the process of recovery under the latter is
essentially without court intervention. Nature of the two
proceedings is, therefore, completely different.
107.
In view of
Reserve Bank of India
(supra), any provision
of a statute cannot be interpreted in a manner wholly unrelated
to the scheme of the statute in which it appears.
108. Much has been argued on behalf of the secured creditors
by referring to the non-obstante clause in section 31B of the
RDDB Act. Before adverting our attention to such section, it
would not be inapposite to consider how a statutory provision
beginning with a non-obstante clause ought to be construed.
109.
In the decision reported in AIR 1984 SC 1022 (
Union of
India vs. G.M. Kokil
), a non-obstante clause has been held to
82
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

be a legislative device, which is usually employed to give
overriding effect to certain provisions over some contrary
provisions that may be found in the same enactment or in some
other enactment, that is to say, to avoid the operation and
effect of all contrary provisions.
110. The Supreme Court in its decision reported in AIR 1987
SC 117 (
Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs. Ashalata S.
Guram
), while considering the provisions in section 15A of the
Bombay Rent, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act,
1947, had the occasion to hold as follows:
"68. A clause beginning with the expression
     'notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in some
     particular provision in the Act or in some particular Act or
     in any law for the time being in force, or in any contract'
     is more often than not appended to a section in the
     beginning with a view to give the enacting part of the
     section in case of conflict an overriding effect over the
     provision of the Act or the contract mentioned in the non
     obstante clause. It is equivalent to saying that in spite of
     the provision of the Act or any other Act mentioned in the
     non obstante clause or any contract or document
     mentioned the enactment following it will have its full
     operation or that the provisions embraced in the non
     obstante clause would not be an impediment for an
     operation of the enactment. See in this connection the
     observations of this Court in
South India Corpn. (P) Ltd.
     v. Secretary, Board of Revenue, Trivandrum
, AIR 1964 SC
     207 at p.215.
69.    It   is   well    settled  that   the   expression
     'notwithstanding' is in contradistinction to the phrase
     'subject to', the latter conveying the idea of a provision
     yielding place to another provision or other provisions to
     which it is made subject. ***."
111. One finds reiteration of the same legal position in the
decision reported in (2005) 9 SCC 129 (State of Bihar & Ors.
83
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

vs. Bihar Rajya M. S. E. S. K. K. Mahasangh). The Court
held that:
"47. Normally the use of a phrase by the legislature in a
     statutory provision like 'notwithstanding anything to the
     contrary contained in this Act' is equivalent to saying that
     the Act shall be no impediment to the measure (see Law
     Lexicon words 'notwithstanding anything in this Act to the
     contrary'). Use of such expression is another way of
     saying that the provision in which the non obstante clause
     occurs usually would prevail over other provisions in the
     Act. Thus, non obstante clauses are not always to be
     regarded as repealing clauses nor as clauses which
     expressly or completely supersede any other provision of
     the law, but merely as clauses which remove all
     obstructions which might arise out of the provisions of any
     other law in the way of the operation of the principal
     enacting provision to which the non obstante clause is
     attached.***"
112. The decision in
Sidco Leathers Limited
(supra),
however, reveals a little shift in approach. The Supreme Court
held that the impact of a non-obstante clause must be kept
measured by the legislative policy and it has to be limited to
the extent it is intended by Parliament and not beyond that. In
other words, the non-obstante clause must be given effect to,
to the extent Parliament intended and not beyond the same.
113. Back home, there is this decision of the Full Bench of this
Court reported (2008) 6 Mah LJ 941 (FB) (Mohd. Riyazur
Rehman Siddiqui vs Deputy Director of Health Services),
where it has been held that the wide meaning of the non-
obstante clause and the enacting words following it may not be
curtailed when the use of wide language accords with the object
of the Act.
84
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
114. The text of section 31B of the RDDB, beginning with a
non-obstante clause, has been noticed above. Also, bearing the
principles laid down in the aforesaid authorities with regard to
the effect or impact of a non-obstante clause, the conclusion is
inescapable that section 31B cannot be pressed into service in
all cases where a secured creditor seeks enforcement of a
security interest by taking recourse to the
SARFAESI Act
. The
non-obstante clause in section 31B would kick in should there
be proceedings before the DRT and in furtherance of orders
passed therein, a process is initiated for recovery of the dues
of the secured creditor. We are inclined to be restrictive in our
view that in such cases only, where the proceedings originate
in the DRT under the RDDB Act, would the non-obstante clause
in section 31B override all other provisions whereunder interest
in respect of the same property may have been created in
favour of other persons or authorities and the rights of the
secured creditor to realize secured debts shall have priority and
be paid in priority. Thus, such provision (section 31B) cannot
be invoked or applied to a sale under the
SARFAESI Act
, which
is a sale by the secured creditor without court intervention.
The
contention of Mr. Narula, resting on
Transcore
(supra), is that
action under the RDDB Act can be abandoned and recourse
taken to the
SARFAESI Act
and, therefore, the converse is also
permissible. It is indeed permissible for a secured creditor to
abandon steps taken by it under
Chapter III of the SARFAESI
Act
because of any legal disability to carry the action forward
and to initiate original proceedings under the RDDB Act for
recovery of dues, but Mr. Narula's contention would not
85
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

commend further acceptability for us to hold that whenever a
secured creditor is faced with the disability posed by
sections
26D
and
26E
of the SARFAESI Act, it can overcome the same
by invoking section 31B of the RDDB Act.
115. Secondly, it is well settled that where a statute provides
for a thing to be done in a particular manner, then it has either
to be done in that manner or not at all. We may draw useful
guidance from the relevant passage in the decision reported in
(2014) 2 SCC 401 (
J. Jayalalithaa v. State of Karnataka
)
where the Court applied the maxim expressio unius est exclusio
alterius and held:
"34. There is yet an uncontroverted legal principle that
     when the statute provides for a particular procedure, the
     authority has to follow the same and cannot be
     permitted to act in contravention of the same. In other
     words, where a statute requires to do a certain thing in a
     certain way, the thing must be done in that way and not
     contrary to it at all. Other methods or mode of
     performance are impliedly and necessarily forbidden. The
     aforesaid settled legal proposition is based on a legal
     maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius, meaning
     thereby that if a statute provides for a thing to be done in
     a particular way, then it has to be done in that manner
     and in no other manner and following any other course is
     not permissible."
116.
Sections 26D
and
26E
of the SARFAESI Act, read together,
in effect provide a special manner in which a secured creditor
may enforce its security interest in supersession of others,
without the intervention of courts. That special manner, inter
alia, includes a prior CERSAI registration. In such view of the
matter, enforcement of security interest under the
SARFAESI
Act
by any other method is, if not expressly, impliedly barred.
86
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

The provision of section 31B of RDDB Act cannot be invoked to
undo the disability that is expressly imposed by
section 26D
of
the SARFAESI Act, more so when both these provisions have
been brought on the respective statute books by the same 2016
Amending Act
(notwithstanding that the two sections were
made operative on different dates).
117. Thirdly, we need to remember that both the enactments,
i.e., the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act, are special
enactments laying down special but separate schemes for
recovery of money from defaulting borrowers. One cannot be
permitted to take a part of a special scheme and apply it to a
separate special scheme. It could not have been the legislative
intent that a secured creditor, faced with the disability arising
out of an absence of a CERSAI registration after having illegally
taken recourse to
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
, would be
permitted to shift track and claim a priority in payment of dues
relying on section 31B of the RDDB Act. If such a course were
allowed, serious consequences arise. First, the illegal action of
taking possession of the second asset without the intervention
of the court could get legalized, which would run counter to the
schemes for recovery of debts envisaged in the
SARFAESI Act
as well as the RDDB Act. Secondly the entire object of
introduction of
Chapter IV-A in the SARFAESI Act
would get
frustrated and be rendered futile.
118. That apart, a provision similar to that of section 31B of
the RDDB Act is already there in the
SARFAESI Act, 2002
in the
form of
section 26E
can hardly escape notice. The Parliament
definitely did not intend to render the provisions of
section 26D
87
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

otiose and superfluous by inserting
section 26E
immediately
after
section 26D
in the same chapter by the same
Amending
Act
. Both were intended to be and have to be read together;
both have to be respected and given effect to, in the context of
the situation that may be obtaining at the material point of
time. In such view of the matter, relying on a similar provision
of a different statute in order to undo the effect of another
statute would amount to doing exactly that, which the other
statute does not permit.
119.
Section 26D
, or for that matter, the entirety of Chapter
IV-A, we repeat, was introduced in the
SARFAESI Act
with a
purpose. The said chapter was introduced to address the
myriad problems that arose post equitable mortgage that
tricked and troubled both general people and the bankers alike
(as exemplified hereinabove). Such purpose cannot be lost
sight of and should not be rendered insignificant. The need of
purposive interpretation has always been stressed by the
Supreme Court and all the High Courts across the country.
Placing reliance on section 31B of the RDDB Act and drawing
conclusions in favour of the secured creditors in respect of
security interest sought to be enforced under the
SARFAESI Act
would be against the very grain of
sections 26D
and
26E
and
as such, such an interpretation should be avoided.
120. The final aspect, which needs to be adverted to, is with
regard to a comparative study of the words used in sections
31B and
26E
. While
section 26E
, inter alia, ordains that "the
debts due to any secured creditor shall be paid in priority over
all other debts", the words used in section 31B though resemble
88
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
section 26E
are not a mirror image of the latter. Section 31B
ordains that "the rights of secured creditors to realise secured
debts due and payable to them by sale of assets over which
security interest is created, shall have priority and shall be paid
in priority over all other debts" (underlining ours).
Section 26E
neither refers to a right of the secured creditor nor to debts
"due and payable". This is because in an action under
Chapter
III of the SARFAESI Act
, which culminates in sale of a secured
asset, there may not be intervention by courts in all cases. A
secured creditor's statutory right to enforce a security interest
under the
SARFAESI Act
is normally not interfered till such time
possession of the secured asset ~ physical or symbolic ~ is
taken. The debt due to the secured creditor also does not
invariably become payable upon a determination by the DRT
under
section 17
of the SARFAESI Act. If a borrower chooses
not to approach the DRT, the second creditor may set the
process in motion by initiating action under rule 8 of the 2002
Rules. However, the situation is different in an action under
section 19 of the RDDB Act. The secured creditor acquires a
right to be paid in priority only after a determination by the DRT
and that is indeed a significant step in claiming and having a
priority; it is then that the secured debt becomes due and
payable. Till such time a determination is not made by the DRT,
there is neither any question of right being exercised by the
secured creditor nor any sum becoming payable to it.
121.
In
State Bank of India vs State of Maharashtra
(supra), the Division Bench held that the contention was largely
irrelevant as section 31B of the RDDB Act alone was sufficient
89
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

to accord priority to secured creditors. Learned counsel for the
secured creditors have heavily relied on the same.
122. For the foregoing reasons, we regret our inability to agree
with such decision.
123. Our attention was also drawn to the decision in
Kalupur
Commercial     Cooperative     Bank
(supra),   in   particular
paragraph 57 which reads as follows:
"57. While it is true that the Bank has taken possession of
     the assets of the defaulter under the
SARFAESI Act
and
     not under the RDB Act, Section 31B of the RDB Act, being
     a substantive provision giving priority to the 'secured
     creditor', the same will be applicable irrespective of the
     procedure through which the recovery is sought to be
     made. This is particularly because Section 2(la) of the
     RDB Act defines the phrase 'secured creditors' to have the
     same meaning as assigned to it under the
SARFAESI Act
.
     Moreover,
Section 37
of the SARFAESI Act clearly provides
     that the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
shall be in
     addition to, and not in derogation of inter-alia the RDB
     Act. As such, the
SARFAESI Act
was enacted only with the
     intention of     allowing faster recovery of debts to the
     secured credits (sic, creditors) without intervention of the
     court. This is apparent from the Statement of Objects and
     Reasons of the SARFAESI Act. Thus, an interpretation
     that, while the secured creditors will have priority in case
     they proceed under the
SARFAESI Act
, will lead to an
     absurd situation and, in fact, would frustrate the object of
     the
SARFAESI Act
which is to enable fast recovery to the
     secured creditors."
124. It is settled law, as it appears from
Reserve Bank of
India
(supra), that interpretation of any provision must
depend on its text as well as the context.
125. While interpreting provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, the
context in which such provisions were enacted must be
90
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

unfailingly noticed. While placing reliance on similar provisions
of a different statute to decipher the real legislative intent
behind a certain provision of a given statute may be
permissible in certain cases where the context of both the
statutes match, but such an exercise would surely not be
permissible if the contexts vary. Here, section 31B of the RDDB
Act has to be seen in the context of the original proceedings
instituted before the DRT and a determination having been
obtained from the DRT in such proceedings.
The SARFAESI Act
being a statute which permits lenders to take possession of
secured assets without judicial intervention, a greater degree
of protection against arbitrary action by lenders and a
corresponding higher standard of care to be taken by such
lenders has now been prescribed. This position, emerging from
section   26D
of   the        SARFAESI     Act,    underscores   the
importance of CERSAI registration of security interest and
makes     the   legislative       intent   behind     promoting   CERSAI
registration of security interest more conspicuous than the
other provisions. We have not been shown any principle of
interpretation following which the consequences of violation of
a mandatory provision of any given special statute may be
avoided by relying on a different provision of another special
statute. Placing reliance on section 31B to displace the
mandate of
section 26D
would amount to outlawing
section 26D
without holding it ultra vires.
126. One other aspect which strongly points to keenness of the
Legislature to ensure CERSAI registration is this. The disabling
provision under
section 26D
and the enabling              provision under
91
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
section 26E
, as earlier noticed, begin with non-obstante
clauses. Thus, while those secured creditors who register the
security interest can legitimately claim 'priority' whereas those
who do not, are denuded of any power to enforce the security
interest by taking recourse to
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
.
A secured creditor who fails to register the secured asset in
terms of the provisions of
section 26B
of the SARFAESI Act
with the CERSAI and faces the disability to obtain the benefit
that
section 26E
envisages, cannot be rewarded by relieving it
of the statutory obligation created on it to get such registration
by allowing it the benefit envisaged by section 31B of the RDDB
Act. If it is so done, such secured creditor would be placed in a
happy or more comfortable position than a secured creditor
who obeys the command of law and applies for registration of
the secured asset. Adherence to and obedience of the law
should be obvious and necessary in a system governed by the
rule of law.
127. These important aspects do not appear to have been
brought to the attention of the Bench deciding
Kalupur
Commercial Cooperative Bank
(supra) and, therefore, we
express our doubt with what has been
laid down in
paragraph
57 thereof.
128. In view of the foregoing discussions, we agree with
learned counsel for the State/respondents and answer the
question by holding that
(a) a secured creditor, finding that it is disabled from
           obtaining the benefit of 'priority' in terms of section
92
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

           26E of the SARFAESI Act for want of CERSAI
           registration, cannot fall back on section 31B of the
           RDDB Act to claim 'priority';
(b) the overwhelming factor of determination of a lis by
           the DRT has to be given its due worth and hence,
           the benefit of 'priority' that section 31B envisages is
           for a secured creditor who institutes proceedings
           under the RDDB Act and is successful in having an
           interim or final determination in its favour that a
           sum is due and payable (in section 31B) as
           distinguished from the debts due (in
section 26E
).
(c) section 31B of the RDDB Act being a substantive
           provision, it cannot be invoked by a secured creditor
           faced with the disability posed by section 26E of the
           SARFAESI Act; and
(d) without    recourse    having    been   taken    to   the
           procedure envisaged in the RDDB Act for recovery
           of its dues and without there being a determination
           of its claim by the DRT to the effect that any sum
           due from the borrower is payable to it, a secured
           creditor is not entitled to invoke the provisions of
           section 31B.
ANSWER TO QEUSTION (e)
129. The entire scheme of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
,
as introduced by the
Amending Act
of 2016, leaves no manner
of doubt that the object for its introduction is salutary. We have,
93
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

in fact, discussed the noble objects that introduction of
Chapter
IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
intends to achieve. The drastic power
made available to a secured creditor by provisions contained in
section 13
and the other provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
to
dispossess the borrower/guarantor from the secured asset
without intervention of Courts but necessarily upon compliance
with the procedural safeguards laid down therefor has
seemingly been arrested to a limited extent by incorporation of
section 26D
by the 2016
Amending Act
.
Section 26D
, which also
opens with a non-obstante clause, prohibits a secured creditor
from exercising the rights for enforcement of security interest
conferred by Chapter III, unless the secured interest created in
its favour by the borrower has been registered with the CERSAI.
Not only therefore registration with the CERSAI has been made
a mandatory pre-condition for invocation of the provisions
contained in
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
, the provisions
relating to debts that are due to any secured creditor being
payable to such creditor in priority over all other debts and
revenue, taxes etc. is available to be invoked only after the
registration of security interest. This being the text of
section
26E
, which is to be read in the context in which it is set, leads
to the irresistible and inevitable conclusion that unless the
security interest is registered, neither can the borrower seek
enforcement invoking the provisions of
Chapter III of the
SARFAESI Act
nor does the question of priority in payment
would arise without such registration.
130. As has been noticed above, ASREC (India) Ltd. (supra)
rejected the contention that
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act
94
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

cannot be invoked unless the security interest were registered
with the CERSAI. The Division Bench, in the process of rejecting
the said contention, referred to what according to it were
previous decisions rendered by 3 (three) Division Benches of
various High Courts and a decision of the Full Bench of the
Madras High Court, and observed that its rejection of such a
contention followed from all such decisions.
Although the
decisions in G. M. G. Engineers and Contractor Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) and
Bank of Baroda
(supra) are not opinions of
Division Benches, nothing really turns on the bench strength.
We have failed to find any discussion in any of such 4 (four)
decisions   rejecting   a    contention   like   the   one   under
consideration in ASREC (India) Ltd. (supra).
The Full Bench
of the Madras High Court in
Assistant Commissioner (CT
)
(supra) did not have the occasion to consider the point.
Even
the Division Bench decision of the Gujarat High Court in
Kalupur Commercial Cooperative Bank
(supra) did not
strictly dwell on such point.
Also, the point under consideration
did not arise in G. M. G. Engineers and Contractor Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) and in
Bank of Baroda
(supra) at all.
Interestingly,
the Division Bench itself noted in paragraph 20 of the decision
in ASREC (India) Ltd. (supra) that the said point had not been
raised before any of the other High Courts. In the setting of
such a factual position, it seems to us that rejection of the
contention, as if law had been declared in the 4 (four) opinions
of the High Courts, occasioned either through an oversight or a
misreading of the said decisions.
95
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
131. In our considered opinion, on the face of the express
provisions in
sections 26D
and
26E
of the SARFAESI Act and in
the absence of any discussion on the object of introduction of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
by the Division Bench in
ASREC (India) Ltd. (supra), we are constrained to hold that
a law has been declared which runs clearly contrary to the
statutory mandate and, therefore, paragraph 21 of such
decision does not represent the correct position of law.
132. The other Division Bench in
State Bank of India vs.
State of Maharashtra
(supra) may not have considered
sections 26D
and
26E
of the SARFAESI Act in such great depth
in the absence of proper assistance from the parties while
holding that even if the secured creditor does not register the
mortgage under
section 26D
of the SARFAESI Act, such alleged
non-registration, in view of the Division Bench's discussion on
section 31B of the RDDB Act, would not affect the legal position
on the issue of priority.
133. We have no hesitation to hold that the views expressed
by the Division Benches in ASREC (India) Ltd. (supra) and
State Bank of India
(supra), as discussed above, on the
question under consideration are not the correct exposition of
law and, to that extent, stand overruled.
Answer to question (f)
134. Much has been argued by the petitioners by referring to
the decision in
Assistant Commissioner (CT
) (supra) where
it was held that section 31B of the RDDB Act would govern
rights even in respect of a pending lis. There is not much
96
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

elaboration by assigning any reason in support of the said
observation. That apart, it bears a mention that the parties
have brought to our notice that
the said decision
has been
carried in appeal to the Supreme Court and an order directing
maintenance of status quo has been passed. Hence, with due
respect to the Full Bench of the Madras High Court, we prefer
to assign our own reasons for the conclusions.
135. A decision necessarily has to be rendered by us bearing
in mind the State legislations under consideration vis-à-vis the
RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act for the same to be applicable
in this State; hence, it would be appropriate to decide when
exercise of the right by the department of the State can be said
to be complete so as to avoid the rigours of section 31B and
section 26E, as the case may be.
136. We have noted what
section 37
of the MVAT Act is all
about.
Section 37
in sub-section (1) provides for the creation
of first charge on the property with respect to a tax or sum
payable thereunder. Sub-section (2) provides that the said first
charge shall be deemed to have been created upon the expiry
of the period specified in sub-section (4) of
section 32
.
Therefore, the charge attaches to the property of the dealer
from the time it comes into effect, i.e., from the time the tax
becomes payable under
section 32(4)
of the Act.
137. Let us now take a look at sub-section (4) of
section 32
of
the MVAT Act. It reads:
"32 ... :
(4) (a) (i) The amount of tax due where the return or
     revised return has been furnished without full payment
     thereof shall be paid forthwith.
97
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(ii) The amount of tax which it becomes necessary to pay
     on account of the reduction in set-off because of any
     contingency specified in the rules, shall be paid at the time
     prescribed for making payment of tax for the period in
     which such contingency occurs.
(b) (i) The amount of tax due as per any order passed
     under any provision of this Act, for any period, less any
     sum already paid in respect of the said period; and
(ii) the amount of interest or penalty or both, if any, levied
     under any provision of this Act; and
(iii) the sum, if any, forfeited and the amount of fine, if
     any, imposed under the Act or rules; and
(iv) the amount of tax, penalty and interest demanded
     in the context of excess availment of incentives or
     availment of incentives not due; and
(v) any other amount due under this Act,
     shall be paid by the person or dealer or the person liable
     therefor into the Government treasury within thirty days
     from the date of service of the notice issued by the
     Commissioner in respect thereof:
Provided that, the Commissioner may, in respect of any
     particular dealer or person, and for reasons to the
     recorded in writing, allow him to pay the tax, penalty,
     interest or the sum forfeited, by installments but the grant
     of installment to pay tax shall be without prejudice to the
     other provisions of this Act including levy of penalty, or
     interest, or both."
138. Thus, where a return is filed but the admitted tax has not
been paid, the charge is created on the date of such filing as
the tax is payable forthwith under
section 32(4)(a)(i)
. In other
cases, the tax, penalty or interest is payable within 30 days
from the date of notice [
section 32(4)(b)(i)
-(v)].     Therefore,
the charge would crystallize on the expiry of 30 days in respect
of such amounts.
98
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
139. However, mere creation of charge is not enough. The
expression 'charge' does not appear to have been defined in
the
MVAT Act
. Nonetheless, this concept is well known in
property law and we may draw guidance from section 100 of
the ToP Act, where 'charge' is defined as follows:
"100. Charges.- Where immovable property of one
     person is by act of parties or operation of law made
     security for the payment of money to another, and the
     transaction does not amount to a mortgage, the latter
     person is said to have a charge on the property, and all
     the provisions hereinbefore contained which apply to a
     simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such
     charge.
Nothing in this section applies to the charge of a trustee
     on the trust property for expenses properly incurred in the
     execution of his trust, and, save as otherwise
     expressly provided by any law for the time being in force,
     no charge shall be enforced against any property in the
     hands of a person to whom such property has been
     transferred for consideration and without notice of the
     charge."
(emphasis ours)
140. The section itself in unambiguous terms indicates that a
charge may not be enforced against a transferee if he did not
have any notice of the same, unless by law the requirement of
such notice has been waived. This position seems to be the
accepted position in law.
141. We have not been shown any law that exempts the
requirement of notice of the charge for its enforcement against
a transferee who had no notice of the same.
142. It would also be necessary to keep in mind what section
3 of the ToP Act, which is the interpretation clause, says as to
99
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

when a person can be said to have notice. It is provided therein
as follows:
"3. ***
     'a person is said to have notice' of a fact when he
     actually knows that fact, or when but for wilful abstention
     from an enquiry or search which he ought to have made,
     or gross negligence, he would have known it.
Explanation I.--Where any transaction relating to
     immovable property is required by law to be and has been
     effected by a registered instrument, any person acquiring
     such property or any part of, or share or       interest in,
     such property shall be deemed to have notice of such
     instrument as from the date of registration or, where the
     property is not all situated in one sub-district, or where
     the registered instrument has been registered under sub-
     section (2) of
Section 30
of the Indian Registration Act,
     1908 (XVI of 1908) from the earliest date on which any
     memorandum of such registered instrument has been
     filed by any Sub-Registrar within whose sub-district any
     part of the property which is being acquired, or of the
     property wherein a share or interest is being acquired, is
     situated:
Provided that--
(1) the instrument has been registered and its
     registration completed in the manner prescribed by the
Indian Registration Act, 1908
(XVI of 1908) and the rules
     made thereunder,
     (2) the instrument or memorandum has been duly
     entered or filed, as the case may be, in books kept under
     Section 51 of that Act, and
     (3) the particulars regarding the transaction to which the
     instrument relates have been correctly entered in the
     indexes kept under Section 55 of that Act.
Explanation    II.--Any  person    acquiring    any
     immovable property or any share or interest in any such
     property shall be deemed to have notice of the title, if
     any, of any person who is for the time being in actual
     possession thereof.
100
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

           Explanation III.--A person shall be deemed to have
     had notice of any fact if his agent acquires notice thereof
     whilst acting on his behalf in the course of business to
     which that fact is material:
Provided that, if the agent fraudulently conceals the
     fact, the principal shall not be charged with notice thereof
     as against any person who was a party to or otherwise
     cognizant of the fraud."
143. The procedure for effecting recovery of unpaid tax now
needs to be ascertained.
Section 33(6)
of the MVAT Act
provides that unpaid tax is to be recovered as arrears of land
revenue. Sub-section (6) reads thus:
"(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), any
     amount of money which a person is liable to pay to the
     Commissioner, shall, under sub-section (1) read with sub-
section (4), if it remains unpaid, be recoverable as if it is
     a sum demanded under
section 32
and accordingly any
     notice served under this section shall be deemed for the
     purposes of this Act to be a notice served under
section
     32
and the unpaid amounts shall be recoverable as
     arrears of land revenue."
Therefore, a notice under
section 32
to the person from whom
tax is due would be the first step towards recovery of unpaid
amounts as arrears of land revenue.
144. It is further noticed that
section 34
of the MVAT Act
confers powers under the MLR Code on the Sales Tax
Authorities. It reads:
"34. Special powers of Sales Tax authorities for recovery
     of tax as arrears of land revenue: -
(1) For the purpose of effecting recovery of the amount of
     tax, penalty, interest, amount forfeited or any other sum,
     due and recoverable from any dealer or other person by
     or under the provisions of this Act, as arrears of land
     revenue, -
101
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(i) the Commissioner of Sales Tax shall have and exercise
      all the powers and perform all the duties of the
      Commissioner under the Maharashtra Land Revenue
      Code, 1966 (Mah. XLI of 1966);
(ii) the Additional Commissioner of Sales Tax shall have
      and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of
      the Additional Commissioner under the said Code;
(iii) the Joint Commissioner of Sales Tax shall have and
      exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the
      Collector under the said Code;
(iv) the Senior Deputy Commissioner and the Deputy
      Commissioner of Sales Tax shall have and exercise all the
      powers (except the powers of confirmation of sale and
      arrest and confinement of a defaulter in a civil jail) and
      perform, all the duties of the Assistant or Deputy Collector
      under the said Code;
(v) the Assistant Commissioner and the Sales Tax Officer
      shall have and exercise all the powers (except the powers
      of confirmation of sale and arrest and confinement of a
      defaulter in a civil jail) and perform all the duties of the
      Tahsildar under the said Code.
(2) Every notice issued or order passed in exercise of the
      powers conferred by sub-section (1) shall, for the
      purposes of
sections 24
,
25
,
26
,
27
and 85 be deemed to
      be a notice issued or an order passed under the said Act.
The sections referred to in
section 34(2)
of the MVAT Act are
preceding provisions therein, with
section 24
providing for
rectification of mistakes,
section 25
providing for review,
section 26
providing a right of appeal to the Tribunal and
section 27
providing a right of appeal to this Court.
145. In this context, it is relevant to note that section 72 of the
MLR    Code    provides    that   land     revenue    is   to   be   a
paramount charge on land. The provisions contained in
sections 173 to 184 and 191 to 221 of the MLR Code
102
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

encapsulate the procedure for recovery of unpaid amounts as
arrears of land revenue. Section 265 of the MLR Code (which is
applicable   only   within    the   city   of   Bombay)    confers
precedence on the arrears of land revenue due on any land
under the relevant chapter.
146. The exhaustive procedure that the MLR Code conceives
relating to recovery of unpaid amounts as arrears of land
revenue need not be examined in any great detail here. We
may only refer to the decision of the Division Bench reported in
2004 SCC OnLine Bom 1247 (
Satish Arjun Surve vs. State
of Maharashtra
), where the Court has noted the same.
147. However, what appears to be clear is that if there be a
default and the defaulter does not pay what he owes to the
relevant department of the Government, power is available
under rule 17 of the Maharashtra Realization of Land Revenue
Rules, 1967 (hereafter 'MRLR Rules', for short), framed under
section 328 read with Chapter XI of the MLR Code, for the
Tehsildar, on receipt of a requisition from such department, to
proceed in accordance with the MLR Code and the 1967 Rules
and cause the defaulter's immovable property to be attached
and sold. Necessarily, prior to effecting a sale, a proclamation
has to be made in the manner ordained.
148. Sub-section (4) of
section 20B
of the SARFAESI Act, which
we have noticed above, ordains that every authority or officer
of the Central Government or any State Government or local
authority, entrusted with the function of recovery of tax or
other Government dues and for issuing any order for
attachment of any property of any person liable to pay the tax
103
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

or Government dues, shall file with the Central Registry such
attachment order with particulars of the assessee and details
of tax or other Government dues from such date as may be
notified by the Central Government, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
149. Although the said provision demands compliance by the
Central Government, any State Government and any local
authority entrusted with recovery of tax to file with the
Central Registry any attachment order issued by it, avoidance
of such compliance was attempted by referring to the fact that
the form and manner of filing attachment orders have not yet
been prescribed by rules framed under the
SARFAESI Act
and,
therefore, sub-section (4) has still not been made operative.
150. The contention that rules are yet to be framed for
making sub-section (4) of
section 20B
operational is wholly
incorrect. By a notification dated 24th January 2020 issued by
the Department of Financial Services in the Ministry of
Finance, Govt. of India, published in the Gazette of India of
even date, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Central Registry)
(Amendment)     Rules,   2020   were   duly   notified   whereby
amendments were incorporated in the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest (Central Registry) Rules, 2011 (hereafter '2011 Rules',
for short). In view of the amendments that have now been
incorporated in the 2011 Rules with effect from the date
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
was made effective and
enforceable,   the   relevant   department      of   the   State
104
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Government despite attachment orders being issued by the
competent authority can only avoid compliance of sub-section
(4) of
section 26B
at its own peril. We hold that attachment
orders issued post 24th January 2020, if not filed with the
Central Registry, any department of the Government to whom
a person owes money on account of unpaid tax has to wait till
the secured creditor by sale of the immovable property being
the secured asset mops up its secured dues.
151. However, there could be attachments orders which might
have been issued much prior to giving effect to the 2011 Rules,
as amended. In respect of such orders of attachment, we
consider it appropriate to express our views.
152. The procedure to be followed in terms
of the CPC
when an
immovable property is put up for auction sale to satisfy a
decree of the court is to be found in Order XXI Rules 54 and 66
of the CPC
. It is mandatory for the court executing the
decree, to comply with the following stages before such
property is sold in execution of a particular decree:
(a) attachment of the immovable property;
(b) proclamation of sale by public auction;
(c) sale by public auction.
At each stage of the execution of the decree, when a property
is sold, it is mandatory that notice shall be served upon the
person whose property is being sold in execution of the
decree, and any property which is sold, without notice to the
person whose property is being sold, is a nullity and all
actions pursuant thereto are liable to be struck down/quashed.
105
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

However, the proceedings before us do not concern execution
of any decree.
153. In these proceedings we are as much concerned with
proclamation itself as much with attachment. Insofar as
recovery pursuant to the MLR Code is concerned, not only the
provisions contained therein but also the provisions contained
in the 1967 Rules are to be complied with. Simply ordering an
attachment is not enough; a proclamation has to be issued in
the prescribed form and such proclamation must be made
public by beating of drum and such other mode as specified in
section 192 of the MLR Code and rule 11(2) of the 1967 Rules
before the property attached is sold.
154. We are of the considered opinion, on facts and in the
circumstances, that unless attachment of the defaulter's
immovable property is ordered in the manner ordained by the
MLR Code and as prescribed by the MRLR Rules and due
proclamation thereof is made, even the creation of charge on
such immovable property may not be of any real significance,
not to speak of demonstrating with reference to evidence that
the transferee had actual or constructive notice of such charge.
If there has been an attachment and a proclamation thereof
has been made according to law prior to 24 th January 2020 or
1st September 2016, i.e., the dates on which
Chapter IV-A of
the SARFAESI Act
and section 31B of the RDDB Act,
respectively, were enforced, the department may claim that its
dues be paid first notwithstanding the secured dues of the
secured creditors; but in the absence of an order of
attachment being made public in a manner known to law, i.e.,
106
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

by a proclamation, once
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
or
section 31B, as the case may be, has been enforced, the dues
of the secured creditor surely would have 'priority'. In other
words, if the immovable property of the defaulter is shown to
have been attached in accordance with law prior to
Chapter IV-
A of the SARFAESI Act
, or for that matter section 31B of the
RDDB Act, being enforced, and such attachment is        followed
by a proclamation according to law, the 'priority' accorded by
section 26E
of the former and section 31B of the latter would
not get attracted.
ANSWER TO QUESTION (g)
155. To answer this question, we need to take note of some
provisions of the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002
(hereafter '2002' Rules, for short). However, it must be borne
in mind that while a secured creditor is concerned only with sale
of the immovable property, being the secured asset, and no
other property of the defaulting borrower, the concern of the
department need not necessarily be confined only to the
secured asset but could well spill over and any other asset of
the defaulter in payment of State's dues could be put up for
sale to realize such dues in terms of the MLR Code and the 1967
Rules.
156. The procedure for 'sale of an immovable secured asset'
and 'time of sale, issue of sale certificate and delivery of
possession', consequent upon measures taken by a secured
creditor under sub-section (4) of
section 13
of the SARFAESI
107
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Act, have been
laid down in
rules 8 and 9, respectively, of the
2002 Rules.
157. Provisions contained in sub-rule (7) of rule 8 of the 2002
Rules read thus:
"(7) Every notice of sale shall be affixed on the
        conspicuous part of the immovable property and the
        authorized officer shall upload the detailed terms and
        conditions of the sale, on the web-site of the secured
        creditor, which shall include, -
(a)   the description of the immovable property to
                   be sold, including the details of the
                   encumbrances known to the secured creditor;
(b)   the secured debt for recovery of which the
                   property is to be sold;
(c)   reserved price of the immovable secured
                   assets below which the property may not be
                   sold;
(d)   time and place of public auction or the time
                   after which sale by any other mode shall be
                   completed;
(e)   deposit of earnest money as may be stipulated
                   by the secured creditor;
(f)   any other terms and conditions, which the
                   authorized officer considers it necessary for a
                   purchaser to know the nature and value of the
                   property.
Sub-rules (7), (8) and (9) of rule 9 of the 2002 Rules lay down
that:
"(7) Where the immovable property sold is subject to any
        encumbrances, the authorized officer may, if he thinks fit,
        allow the purchaser to deposit with him the money
        required to discharge the encumbrances and any interest
        due thereon together with such additional amount that
        may be sufficient to meet the contingencies or further
108
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

     cost, expenses and interest as may be determined by
     him:
Provided that if after meeting the cost of removing
     encumbrances and contingencies there is any surplus
     available out of the money deposited by the purchaser
     such surplus shall be paid to the purchaser within fifteen
     days from the date of finalization of the sale.
     (8) On such deposit of money for discharge of the
     encumbrances, the authorized officer shall issue or cause
     the purchaser to issue notices to the persons interested
     in or entitled to the money deposited with him and take
     steps to make the payment accordingly.
(9) The authorized officer shall deliver the property to
     the purchaser free from encumbrances known to the
     secured creditor on deposit of money as specified in sub-
rule (7) above."
158. A conjoint reading of the aforesaid rules admits of no
doubt that the authorized officer while putting up an immovable
property, i.e., the secured asset, for sale, is under a duty to
notify, inter alia, the details of the encumbrances (in respect of
such property that is proposed to be sold) which are known to
the secured creditor as well as to require the purchaser to
deposit money to discharge the encumbrances.
159. The Supreme Court in its decision in
AI Champdany
Industries Ltd.
(supra) after considering the definition of
'encumbrance' in several law dictionaries, held that an
'encumbrance' "must be capable of being found out either on
inspection of the land or the office of the Registrar or a statutory
authority. A charge, burden or any other thing which impairs
the use of the land or depreciates in its value may be a
mortgage or a deed of trust or a lien or an easement.
Encumbrance, thus must be a charge on the property. If by
109
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

reason of the statute no such burden on the title which
diminishes the value of the land is created, it shall not
constitute any encumbrance".
160. Till 24th January 2020, it may not have been possible for
a secured creditor to know precisely all encumbrances in
respect of the immovable property. With the insertion of
section
26B
in the
SARFAESI Act
read with the 2011 Rules, a secured
creditor is expected to know some of such encumbrances if at
all compliance of
section 26B
is resorted to     by the Central
Government, any State Government or a local authority, to
whom money is owed by the defaulter being an owner of the
property. Such a statutory mechanism for knowing the
encumbrances in respect of the immovable property being put
up for sale by auction not being available before 24 th January
2020, the authorized officers were found to play it safe by
inserting the "as is where is, whatever there is basis" clause in
the sale advertisement. Once such clause is inserted in the
advertisement and the prospective purchaser upon bidding in
the auction emerges as the highest bidder, normally such
purchaser cannot insist upon issuance of sale certificate without
clearing the liability of meeting other dues in relation to such
property. This is because he participates in the auction and
bids, with his eyes open, that the sale would be on "as is where
is, whatever there is basis". Having so participated, the
prospective purchaser cannot wriggle out of the consequences
and claim that the other dues are not payable by him if he
cannot disprove constructive notice of the charge created on
the property put up for auction sale. If indeed the department
110
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

of the Government fails to act in terms of
section 26B
of the
SARFAESI Act read with the 2011 Rules, consequences are
bound to follow which have to be accepted by such department.
161. We, therefore, answer this question by observing that
notwithstanding the duty of the authorized officer to indicate in
the sale advertisement inviting bids the encumbrance(s)
attached to the immovable property, i.e., the secured asset, as
known to the secured creditor, if at all any detail in regard to
such encumbrance(s) is not indicated but the sale is expressly
made on "as is where is, whatever there is basis", the
transferee shall be duty bound to deposit money for discharge
of the encumbrance(s) provided, of course, that such liability
may be overcome if he is in a position to disprove the claim of
the department that he had no constructive notice of the
charge, far less actual notice.
162. Having answered the substantial questions of law, we now
proceed to decide the individual writ petitions.
WRIT PETITION NO.436 OF 2021
                                  AND
            INTERIM APPLICATION NO.868 OF 2022
163. Petitioner, Fullerton India Credit Company Ltd., is a non-
banking finance company notified under the
SARFAESI Act
.
Petitioner had advanced a loan of Rs.9,06,85,020/- vide
sanction Letter dated 30th July, 2014 to the respondents 1 to 4,
the borrowers. The loan was secured by a mortgage of a duplex
flat, bearing no.12/C, 12th and 13th floors, Cenced Apartment,
111
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

318, Union Park, Pali Hill Road, Dr. Ambedkar Marg, Khar (W),
Mumbai - 400 052 ('the secured asset'), registered on 30th
August 2014.
164. As the borrowers committed default in repayment, the
account was declared a non-performing asset (NPA) and a
notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act came to be
issued on 22nd August, 2016. When the petitioner moved the
learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Mumbai under
section
14
of the SARFAESI Act, for possession of the secured assets,
it transpired that an Execution Application No.765 of 2015 to
execute an arbitral award dated 6th November 2014 against the
respondent no.2 was filed in this Court.
165. Petitioner moved Chamber Summons No.993 of 2017 in
Execution Application No.765 of 2015. This Court by an order
dated 12th February 2018 ordered inter alia raising of the
attachment on the secured asset and delivery of possession of
the secured asset to the petitioner by the Court Receiver, who
had been put in possession of the secured asset in the said
execution proceedings. On 15th December 2018 after recording
that the Court Receiver had delivered possession of the secured
asset to the petitioner, the Chamber Summons came to be
disposed of.
166. Petitioner published an e-auction notice dated 28th
February 2018 to sell the secured asset. On 9 th March 2018,
the respondent no.6 addressed a communication to the
respondent no.5 Society contending inter alia that M/s. Tornado
Motors Private Limited, respondent no.1, was in arrears of
Rs.5,49,68,048/- to the Sales Tax Department for the period
112
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

1st April 2011 to 31st December 2014 and thus, the respondent
no.5 shall not permit the transfer of the secured asset without
no objection certificate of the Sales Tax Department.
167. Petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction as the said
communication operates as a clog on the rights of the secured
creditor to enforce the security interest.
168. In the affidavit in reply on behalf of the respondents 6 to
9, the action is sought to be justified on the ground that the
secured asset stands in the name of the respondent no.2, the
director of the respondent no.1, and under
section 44(6)
of the
MVAT Act the directors are jointly and severally liable to pay
the tax dues. A notice was issued to the directors on 15 th
January 2019 calling upon them to show cause as to why action
under
section 44(6)
of the MVAT Act should not be initiated. As
none appeared to show cause, an order came to be passed on
30th January 2019 holding the respondents 2 and 3, the
directors of the respondent no.1, jointly and severally liable to
pay the sales tax dues of the respondent no.1.
169. It would be contextually relevant to note that the
petitioner had registered the security interest over the secured
asset with the Central Registry on 17th February 2015. A copy
of the search report evidencing registration in CERSAI portal
came to be filed along with the additional affidavit dated 23rd
November, 2021.
170. Evidently, the respondent no.1, the dealer is not the
owner of the secured asset. Respondents 6 to 9 professed to
proceed against the secured asset by resorting to the special
113
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

provision contained in
section 44(6)
of the MVAT Act.
Section
44(6)
of the MVAT Act, reads as under:
"44(6) - Subject to the provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013
, where any tax or other
        amount recoverable under this Act from a
        private company, whether existing or wound up
        or under liquidation, for any period, cannot be
        recovered, for any reason whatsoever, then
        every person who was a director of the private
        company during such period shall be jointly and
        severally liable for the payment of such tax or
        other amount unless, he proves that the non-
        recovery cannot be attributed to any gross
        neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his
        part in relation to the affairs of the said
        company."
171.   The aforesaid provision, on its plain reading, indicates
that in the event the tax or other amount recoverable under the
MVAT Act
cannot be recovered from a private company, then its
directors shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of
the dues, unless they are able to demonstrate that such non-
recovery   cannot    be     attributed    to   any   gross   neglect,
misfeasance or breach of duty on their part in the management
of the affairs of the said company. This provision enables the
Sales Tax Department to proceed against the directors of a
private company, in case of non-recovery, and casts burden on
the directors to show that the non-recovery is not attributable
to their acts or conduct.
172. In the case at hand, the material shows that the
respondent no.6 initially gave a notice on 15th January 2019
calling upon the respondents 2 and 3 to show cause and,
thereafter, by an order dated 30th January 2019 held the
114
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

respondents 2 and 3 jointly and severally liable to pay the dues.
Interestingly, even before such determination, the respondent
no.6 had addressed the impugned communication dated 9 th
March 2018 to the respondent no.5 prohibiting the transfer of
the secured asset without permission of the Sales Tax
Department.
173. If the law which we have declared in answer to question
no.(f) (supra) is applied to the aforesaid facts, it becomes
abundantly clear that consequent to the registration of the
security interest on 17th February, 2015, the right of the
petitioner as a secured creditor to be paid in priority crystalized
on 24th January 2020, the day
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI
Act
was brought into force.
174. Conversely, there is no material to show that the secured
asset was attached in accordance with law and the said
attachment was followed by proclamation, prior to
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act being enforced, thereby denuding the
secured creditor of the preferential right under
section 26E
.
175.     To sum up, the respondent no.6 as of date of the
enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
was content
with determination of the liability of the directors of the
respondent no.1 and no action to enforce the liability so as to
dislodge the superior claim of the secured creditor was taken.
176. We are thus inclined to allow the writ petition with the
following orders:
(a)    The letter dated 9th March, 2018 addressed by respondent
no.6 to the respondent no.5 stands quashed and set aside.
115
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(b)   It is further declared that the order dated 30th January
2019 passed under
section 44(6)
of MVAT Act by the
respondent no.6 against the respondents 2 and 3 does not
constitute an embargo on the right of the petitioner to enforce
the security interest in accordance with the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
and the Rules.
(c)   Interim Application No.868 of 2022 also stands disposed
of.
WRIT PETITION NO.2336 OF 2021
177. Petitioner is the purchaser of an immovable property
situated at Survey No.379/1, admeasuring 4.21 hectares at
Village Abitghar, Taluka Wada, Dist. Palghar (the secured asset)
in an auction sale held by the respondent no.7 Bank, on 11th
January 2021. Respondent No.7 had created security interest
therein over the secured asset for the financial facilities
extended to M/s. Indo Bonito Multinational Ltd. (in liquidation)
in respect whereof the Official Liquidator has been appointed.
178. After the confirmation of the sale, the respondent no.7
issued a sale certificate in favour of the petitioner on 25th
January 2021 and, thereupon, the petitioner approached the
Collector of Stamps and Joint District Registrar, Palghar and the
Sub-Registrar of Assurances, Wada, respondents 2 and 3,
respectively, to adjudicate the stamp duty on the said sale
certificate and to register the same.
179. Respondent No.2 refused to adjudicate the stamp duty on
the count that the Tax Recovery Officer (15), respondent no.1,
had attached the secured asset for non-payment of the income
tax dues. It further transpired that the purported charge of the
116
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

respondent no.1 was entered in the record of rights pertaining
to the secured asset vide mutation entry no.1211, certified on
20th March 2020. Hence, this writ petition.
180. An affidavit in reply is filed by the Tahasildar, Tal. Wada,
respondent no.4. The action of the respondents 4 and 5 was
stated to be in conformity with the order passed by the Income
Tax authority prohibiting transfer of the secured asset.
181. It would be necessary to note that the petitioner's
assertion that he had addressed a letter to the Principal
Commissioner, Income Tax (15), requesting the withdrawal of
the recovery certificate No. ITCP-1 dated 11th January 2016 for
AY 2012-13 enforced through Form No. ITCP-16 dated 24th
December 2018 and there was no response thereto, is
uncontroverted.
182. Consistent with the view which we have recorded, the
primary question would be whether the security interest has
been duly registered with CERSAI to reap the benefit of priority
in payment envisaged by
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act.
183. Petitioner has filed an additional Affidavit dated 24 th
November 2021. A copy of the search report annexed thereto
indicates that the security interest was registered with CERSAI
on 25th October 2017. The said registration would enure to the
benefit of the secured creditor the moment
Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act
was brought into force w.e.f. 24th January 2020
and the priority in payment thereunder would get cemented.
184. As noted above, the respondent no.1 professed to create
a charge on the secured asset by recording an entry in the
record of rights of the secured asset. Evidently, the said entry
117
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

No.1211 was recorded on 20th March 2022, post enforcement
of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
. Consequently, the said
exercise does not displace the superior claim of the secured
creditor with the enforcement of
section 26E
of the SARFAESI
Act, on 24th January 2020. Even otherwise, the claim of the
respondent no.1 partakes the character of a crown debt.
185. We have already noted that a crown debt enjoys no
priority over the secured debt. Since the Income Tax Act, 1961
does not contain a provision like the one in
section 37
of the
MVAT Act, in a strict sense, there does not seem to be any
scope for conflict between competing claims based on statutory
provisions.
186. A factor which, however, assumes salience in this writ
petition is the terms of sale. The communication dated 11th
January 2021 (Exhibit B to the writ petition) accepting the bid
of the petitioner, indicates that the e-auction was held on "as is
where is and as is what is basis".
187. Mutation Entry No.1121 was recorded on 20th March,
2020. It could be urged that the petitioner had, in the least, a
constructive notice of the purported charge of the respondent
no.1, which found mention in the record of right.
188. While answering question (g), we have held that where
sale is expressly made on "as is where is and whatever there is
basis", the transferee shall be duty bound to deposit money for
discharge of the encumbrance(s), provided that such liability
may be overcome if the transferee is in a position to disprove
the claim of the department that he had no actual or
constructive notice. We have also observed that if the
118
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

department of the Government fails to act in terms of sub-
section (4) of
section 26B
of the SARFAESI Act read with the
2011 Rules, the department concerned is bound to suffer the
consequences.
189. In the case at hand, we have seen that the secured
creditor had registered the security interest with CERSAI on
25th October 2017. Post enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act
, under sub-section (4) of
section 26B
of the
SARFAESI Act, the department of the Government which
professes to recover any tax or other Government dues, is
enjoined to register such claim with CERSAI.
190. It does not appear that the respondent no.1 registered its
claim or attachment over the secured asset with CERSAI, post
enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
. Sub-section
(2) of
section 26C
provides that any attachment order
subsequent to the registration of the security interest with
CERSAI, shall be subject to such prior registered claim.
191. In our view, in the instant case, with the enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, the claim of the respondent
no.7 Bank, the secured creditor, was extolled to a higher
pedestal and the subsequent act of recording a charge in the
record of right of the secured asset cannot dilute the right of
priority in payment, under
sections 26C(2)
and
26E
of the
SARFAESI Act. As a necessary corollary, the non-registration of
the claim and/or attachment order by the respondent no.1
under
section 26B(4)
of the SARFAESI Act, can only be at the
peril of the department. Mere recording of the purported charge
in the record of right of the secured asset, in the absence of the
119
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

registration with CERSAI, in our considered view, cannot be to
the detriment of the auction purchaser, though the auction sale
was on "as is where is and as is what is basis".
192. Mr. Sen, learned senior advocate appearing for the
petitioner submitted that in the event the Court is persuaded
to allow the writ petition, it is necessary to extend the time to
adjudicate the stamp duty on the sale certificate and register
the same. There are provisions in the
Maharashtra Stamp Act,
1958
(
sections 31
and
32
) and the
Registration Act, 1908
(
sections 23
and
25
) which stipulate the time for tendering the
instrument for adjudication, determination of stamp duty
thereon and registration of the instrument from the date of its
execution. Since the petitioner had instantaneously lodged the
sale certificate for adjudication, we are inclined to direct that
the time commencing from the lodging of the said sale
certificate till the decision of this writ petition, be excluded from
consideration in computing the statutory period for adjudication
of the stamp duty and registration of the instrument.
193. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are inclined to
allow the writ petition.
194. The writ petition stands allowed and it is ordered as
follows:
(a) Respondent no.2 is directed to adjudicate the stamp duty
on the sale certificate in accordance with law and, thereafter,
the respondent no.3 shall register the instrument, also in
accordance with law.
(b) The time commencing from the lodging of the sale
certificate for adjudication of the stamp duty with the
120
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

respondent no.2 till the decision of this writ petition, stands
excluded    in   computing     the   statutory   period   for   such
adjudication and registration.
(c)   Mutation Entry No.1121 dated 20th March 2020 stands
quashed. Respondents 4 and 5 shall forthwith delete the said
mutation entry and correct the record of right.
WRIT PETITION (L) NO.7999 OF 2021
195. Petitioner is an asset reconstruction company registered
under
section 3
of the SARFAESI Act. The predecessors-in-
interest of the petitioner, namely, the State Bank of India and
Indusind Bank had extended credit facilities to M/s. Classic
Diamonds (India) Ltd. (in liquidation) being the borrower, and
the Official Liquidator, High Court, Bombay, has since been
appointed to take charge of the affairs of the company in
liquidation. To secure the financial facilities, security interest
was created in the property, i.e., Flat Nos.1002, 1003 and 1004,
Prasad Chambers, Opera House, Mumbai - 400 004 (secured
assets) by way of an equitable mortgage. In the wake of default
on the part of the borrower, the State Bank of India had
instituted O.A.No.205 of 2013 and Indusind Bank had instituted
O.A.No.198 of 2012 in the DRT, Mumbai, for grant of recovery
certificates.
196. Under the Deeds of Assignment dated 19th March 2014
executed by the State Bank of India and 29 th March 2014
executed by Indusind Bank in favour of the petitioner, it
acquired all the right, title and interest in the facilities granted
and security interest created by the assignors. Armed with
121
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

those rights, the petitioner issued a notice under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, on 25th May 2017.
197. In the meanwhile, by an order dated 20th September 2017
passed in Company Petition No.317 of 2012, M/s. Classic
Diamonds Ltd. was ordered to be wound up. Eventually, the
petitioner took possession of the secured assets on 9 th
November 2017 under
section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act. At
that stage, the petitioner found the attachment order dated 19th
August 2017 pasted on the concerned premises. Upon inquiry,
it transpired that the respondent no.3, Assistant Commissioner
of Sales Tax, had proceeded to attach the assets of the
company in liquidation for the alleged sales tax dues.
Representation of the petitioner to the respondents 1 to 3 to
remove the said attachment did not yield any response from
them. The attachment dated 19th August 2017 constitutes an
unjust impediment in the petitioner's endeavour to enforce the
security interest by sale of the secured assets. Hence, this writ
petition.
198. On the touchstone of the legal position, which we have
attempted to expound hereinabove, we found that the security
interest was registered with CERSAI in respect of Flat No.1002
on 24th April, 2017, and in respect of Flat Nos.1003 and 1004
on 22nd June, 2012 and, thus, with the enforcement of
Chapter
IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, the petitioner's right to have priority
in payment stood crystalized on 24th January 2020. In
paragraph no.154, we have specifically observed that if the
immovable property of the defaulter is shown to have been
attached in accordance with law prior to Chapter IV-A of the
122
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

SARFAESI Act, or for that matter Section 31B of the RDDB Act,
being enforced, and such attachment is followed by a
proclamation according to law, the 'priority' accorded by
section
26E
of the SARFAESI Act, and section 31B of the RDDB Act,
would not get attracted.
199. The case at hand, seems to be squarely governed by the
aforesaid enunciation. We do not find any material on record
which would show that the sales tax authorities had passed an
order of attachment in conformity with the governing provisions
of the MLR Code and the MRLR Rules, followed by a
proclamation duly promulgated in the manner ordained by law.
200. We are, therefore, persuaded to hold that the restraint on
the right of the secured creditor to enforce the security interest
in exercise of the right of priority in payment under
section 26-
E
of the SARFAESI Act, sought to be imposed by simply pasting
the order of attachment, cannot be countenanced.
201. The writ Petition, thus, deserves to be allowed and we
hereby direct as follows:
(a)   It is hereby declared that the order of attachment dated
19th August 2017 will not affect the rights of the secured
creditor to realize its debt by the sale of the secured assets.
(b)   The purported order of attachment dated 19th August
2017 passed by the respondent no.3 stands quashed and set
aside.
WRIT PETITION No.3197 of 2019
202. Petitioner, a banking company, had sanctioned a home
loan of Rs.1.52 crore and mortgage insurance loan of Rs.3.88
crore to the respondent no.5. The home loan was sanctioned to
123
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

finance the acquisition of a commercial premises, i.e., Office
No.101, 1st Floor, Swastik High Point, Gloria, Devchand Housing
Compound, next to Arihant Plaza, Ghodbunder Road, Ovale,
Thane 400 615 (the secured asset).
203. To secure the repayment of the loan, the said property
was mortgaged in favour of the petitioner by depositing the title
deeds. Respondent No.5 committed default in repayment of the
installments. Consequently, the account was declared NPA on
30th April, 2017. A notice under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI
Act, was issued on 5th September 2017. The District Magistrate
passed an order directing delivery of possession to the
petitioner under
section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, on 16th March
2019.
204. On 11th April 2019, when the officers of the petitioner
visited the secured asset, a notice for purported recovery of the
sales tax dues of Rs.2,75,70,303/- was found pasted thereon.
Respondents 3 and 4, directors of M/s. Global Gallarie Agencies
Pvt. Ltd., were stated to be in arrears of the sales tax to the
tune of Rs.2,75,70,303/- and, thus, the said property was
attached. It further transpired that the secured asset was put
up for auction sale on 23rd April 2019 by the Sales Tax
Authorities by publishing the auction proclamation notice dated
8th   March,   2019   (Exhibit   H).    Petitioner   addressed    a
communication on 16th April 2019 to the respondent no.2 inter
alia claiming right of priority in payment and asserted that it
has also instituted proceedings, i.e., O.A.(L) No.396 of 2018
before the DRT for grant of recovery certificate. As the
respondent No.2 did not remove the attachment, the petitioner
124
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

was constrained to institute this writ petition seeking to quash
the attachment order dated 1st December 2018 and the auction
proclamation notice dated 16th March 2019.
205. Mr. Shah, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted
that the petitioner has registered the security interest with
CERSAI on 13th July, 2007. The account of the respondent no.5
was declared NPA much before the order of attachment. In the
circumstances, the provisions contained in
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act, are squarely attracted and the statutory right of
the petitioner cannot be defeated.
206. We are constrained to observe that the record does not
equip the court to adjudicate this writ petition in the light of the
position in law indicated above.
207. We have in terms observed that the provisions contained
in
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, are prospective in
operation. We have indicated that if there are valid attachment
orders followed by due proclamation before the enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, then the priority envisaged
by
section 26E
of the Act would not come to the aid of the
secured creditor. Whether there is such an attachment order
followed by proclamation is essentially rooted in facts.
208. Though the respondents have not filed an affidavit to
assist the Court in adjudicating this aspect, yet, from the
perusal of the auction proclamation notice dated 8th March 2019
(Exhibit H) it becomes abundantly clear that the notice was
issued under section 178 read with section 267 of the MLR Code
on 17th October 2018. The warrant of attachment was issued
on 1st December 2018 followed by an order in Form No.4 under
125
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

rule 11 of the MRLR Rules, dated 2nd January 2019. Prima facie,
auction proclamation notice seems to be preceded by the action
envisaged by the MLR Code and the MRLR Rules.
209. We are, therefore, of the view that the respondents 1 to
3 deserve an opportunity to meet the case sought to be urged
by the petitioners lest the interest of the public exchequer may
be prejudicially affected.
210. We deem it, in the fitness of things, to direct that this writ
petition be re-notified for hearing before the appropriate
Division Bench for decision in the light of determination of the
questions of law in this judgment.
211. Ordered accordingly.
WRIT PETITION NO.2720 OF 2021
212. Petitioner, a co-operative society, registered under the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002
had advanced a
loan of Rs.5 crore each to the respondents 4 and 5 in the month
of May 2016. Respondents 4 to 6 had executed registered
mortgage of immovable properties including the land situated
at Gut No.247, Tal. Baramati, Pune, admeasuring 5H (the
secured asset) and thereby created a valid security interest
therein, in favour of the petitioner.
213. As the respondents 4 and 5 as borrowers committed
default in repayment of the installments, the accounts were
declared NPA on 5th August 2016. A notice under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act was addressed to the respondents 4 and
5 on 16th September 2016. While the action for enforcing the
security interest was underway, the petitioner noticed that on
18th November 2017, a letter was addressed by the Deputy
126
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Commissioner of Sales Tax, respondent no.1, to the Talathi, Tal.
Baramati, Pune, to the effect that M/s. Hi-tech Engineering
Corporation   India   Pvt.    Ltd.   owed   a   huge   amount   of
Rs.10,12,38,061/- for the years 2010-11 to 2016-17 towards
the sales tax dues and the arrears were likely to increase and,
therefore, an encumbrance be noted on the land bearing Gut
No.247 (the secured asset), which was the property of Mr.
Sanjay J. Awate and Mr. Rajendra C. Ingawale (respondents 4
and 6), directors of M/s. Hi-tech Engineering Corporation India
Pvt. Ltd. The said communication was followed by letter dated
29th December 2017. It seems vide Mutation Entry No.35661
dated 23rd December 2017, a charge of the sales tax
department to the tune of Rs.10,12,38,061/- was entered on
the secured asset (Exhibit D to the writ petition).
214. Petitioner took exception and addressed notices to the
respondent no.1 on 18th February 2019 and 10th May 2019. In
response thereto, the respondent no.1 claimed first charge over
the secured asset under
section 37
of the MVAT Act. Aggrieved
thereby, the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this
Court to set aside the encumbrance created by the respondent
no.1 by an entry in the record of right of the secured asset.
215. An affidavit came to be filed on behalf of the petitioner on
22nd November, 2021 to affirm that the security interest has
been duly registered with CERSAI. A copy of the security
interest acknowledgment report annexed to the said affidavit,
indicates that the security interest in the secured asset, i.e.,
Gut No.247 was registered in CERSAI portal on 18th May, 2021.
127
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
216. An affidavit in reply is filed on behalf of the respondents
1 and 2. It is contended that Hi-tech Engineering Corporation
India Pvt. Ltd. owes a huge amount of Rs.65,11,68,518/- to the
respondents towards tax dues for the financial years 2010-11
to 2015-16. Under
section 44(6)
of the MVAT Act, the directors
of a private company are jointly and severally liable for the tax
dues. Thus, the respondents 1 and 2 had proceeded against the
property   of   the   respondents   4   and   5   by   addressing
communication to the revenue authorities on 18th November
2017 to enter encumbrance on the secured asset.         Since the
petitioner has assailed the said order dated 18 th November
2017 and the resultant mutation recording the sales tax
encumbrance, before the Sub-Divisional Officer, Baramati in
RTS Appeal No.118 of 2019, this Court may not entertain the
writ petition as the petitioner has an efficacious alternative
remedy.
217. Respondents 1 and 2 have further contended that the
underlying transaction of advancement of loan is fraudulent.
Personal loans were advanced despite the fact that respondents
4 and 5 and Hi-Tech Engineering Corporation India Pvt. Ltd.,
were heavily indebted. Respondents 1 and 2 alleged collusion
between the petitioner and the respondents 4 and 5 to defraud
the revenue.
218. We have perused the Assessment Order dated 26th
December 2014 for the period 1st April, 2010 to 31st March 2011
leading to the demand notice for a sum of Rs.1,70,75,972/-;
the order dated 2nd December 2015 granting installments for
payment for the tax then due for the period 1st April 2013 to
128
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

31st March 2014, and the Assessment Order dated 31st March
2018 for 1st April 2013 to 31st March 2014 levying the demand
of Rs.21,99,74084/-, which are annexed to the affidavit in
reply.
219. In the light of the view which we are persuaded to take,
we do not deem it expedient to delve deep into the aspects of
the quantum of sales tax arrears and the period for which they
were due. The materials on record, prima facie, indicate that
M/s. Hi-Tech Engineering Corporation India Pvt. Ltd., of which
the respondents 4 and 5 are the directors, was in arrears of
huge amount towards sales tax since prior to advancement of
the loan in question. A deed of simple mortgage dated 4 th May
2016 under which the security interest came to be created in
the      secured   asset,   indicates   that   Hi-Tech   Engineering
Corporation India Pvt. Ltd. was one of the guarantors to the
term loan of Rs.5 crore advanced to Mr. Sanjay Awate, its
director.    The   assets of      the dealer, Hi-Tech    Engineering
Corporation India Pvt. Ltd., enlisted in Schedule II were also
mortgaged.
220. As indicated above, under less than four months, the
accounts were declared NPA, i.e., on 5th August 2016 and action
under
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
was initiated. This time
of four months is too short for comfort. The allegation of
creation of security interest fraudulently so as to defraud the
claim of the revenue, in our view, warrants consideration.
221. Since the security interest in the secured asset came to
be registered post enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act
, we deem it appropriate to direct that this writ
129
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

petition be decided after providing further opportunity of
hearing to the parties by the appropriate Division Bench in the
light of the law laid down hereinabove.
222. Ordered accordingly.
223. We, however, clarify that we may not be understood to
have expressed any opinion on the merits of the rival claims,
especially the allegations of fraud.
WRIT PETITION NO.2935 OF 2018
224. Petitioner no.1, a Scheduled Bank, is a society registered
under the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
(hereafter "
Cooperative Societies Act
", for short). In August
2010, the petitioner had advanced a loan of Rs.6 crore to M/s.
Om Sai Auto World, a partnership firm, of which Mr. Uday K.
Shetty and Mr. Gangadhar S. Shetty were the partners. Under
a deed of mortgage registered on 24 th September 2010 and a
deed of Modification dated 13th September 2012, five flats
including Flat Nos.501 and 503 (the secured assets) owned by
Mr. Uday Shetty and Mr. Gangadhar Shetty were mortgaged in
favour of the petitioner no.1 to secure the said loan.
225. On account of default in repayment of the loan amount,
the Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies, on 1st April 2013
issued a recovery certificate under
section 101
of the
Cooperative Societies Act. On 9th July 2013, the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate passed an order under
section 14
of
the SARFAESI Act, directing taking over of the possession of
the secured assets and its delivery to the petitioner no.1.
130
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
226. In the meanwhile, the respondent no.2 passed orders
prohibiting transfer of the secured assets and other flats owned
by Mr. Uday Shetty and Mr. Gangadhar Shetty. On 26th May
2013 the respondent no.1 issued a public notice for auction of
Flat Nos.601 and 602 for purported recovery of the arrears of
the sales tax dues.
227. Petitioners instituted Writ Petition No.1878 of 2013.
However, since the auction notice dated 26th May 2013 was not
acted upon, the petitioners were allowed to withdraw the said
writ petition. Petitioners claimed to have taken possession of all
the five flats on 10th February, 2015. In response to a public
possession notice issued by the petitioner no.1, the respondent
no.1 raised objection to the action of taking over possession of
the immovable property of Om Sai Auto World claiming the
State had first charge thereon for recovery of sales tax dues
under
section 37
of the MVAT Act.
228. Amidst raging controversy over competing claims in
respect of the secured assets, the petitioner no.1 claimed to
have sold Flat Nos.601, 602 and 502, and issued auction
notices to sell the secured assets, twice.     Respondent no.1, on
its part, issued auction notice to sell Flat No.503 on 1st January
2018 and Flat No.501 on 9th January 2018. The sale
proclamation   notice   was    issued    on   17 th   January   2018
scheduling the sale on 22nd February 2018.
229. On 23rd January 2018, the respondent no.1 addressed a
communication to the Chairman/Secretary of Omkareshwar
Co-op. Housing Society Limited (in which the secured assets
are situated) directing them not to grant no objection certificate
131
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

for transfer of the secured assets. Thus, aggrieved by the
aforesaid action on the part of the respondents, the petitioners
have    approached    this    Court   seeking   directions    to   the
respondent no.2 to withdraw the impugned notices dated 1st
January 2018 and 9th January 2018 as well as to restrain the
respondents from proceeding with the auction of Flat Nos.501
and 503. It is also prayed that the petitioners be allowed to
auction the secured assets to enforce its security interest.
230. During the pendency of this writ petition, in the auction
sale held on 15th February 2018, since no bid was received, the
petitioners' officer, after complying with the provisions of
section 13(5A)
of the SARFAESI Act, and after obtaining
authorization to bid, claimed to have purchased the secured
assets for Rs.92,09,814/- being the reserve price and thereby
the    petitioners   became    the    auction   purchasers.    Share
certificates dated 17th February 2018 have been issued in
favour of the petitioners.
231. Respondents have resisted the writ petition by filing
affidavits in reply. Even before the grant of recovery certificate
under
section 101
of the Cooperative Societies Act, the
respondents contend, a demand notice was issued under
section 34
of the MVAT Act on 31st August 2012, the warrant of
attachment was issued on 27th September 2012 and the Sales
Tax authorities took over possession of Flat No.501 on 15 th
March 2013, evidenced by the Panchanama dated 15th March
2013. An order of attachment was thereafter passed on 16 th
March 2013 in respect of the said flat. Respondents claimed to
have, likewise, taken possession of Flat No.503 on 14 th June
132
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

2013 and issued an order of attachment of even date.
Petitioners' claim, if any, according to the respondents, was
subservient to the first charge of the State under
section 37
of
the MVAT Act. Since the provisions contained in
Section 26E
of
the SARFAESI Act were not brought into force earlier than 24th
January 2022, the petitioners claim for priority in payment was
also misconceived.
232. Respondents have further contended that the petitioners'
conduct disentitles them from claiming any relief. Petitioners
have suppressed material facts. As against the distress value
of Rs.97,94,400/- and Rs.1,01,20,000/- for Flat No.501 and for
Flat No.503, respectively, the petitioners have self-purchased
the subject flat for an amount of Rs.92,09,814/- which appears
to be the reserve price for one flat only.
233. We deem it superfluous to delve into the thickets of facts.
In the order dated 7th August 2019 the Division Bench recorded
that the sale of the subject assets took place during the
pendency of this writ petition, without taking prior permission
of this Court. In that context, the Court declined to accept the
prayer of the petitioners to retain the amount of Rs.92,09,814/-
subject to furnishing an undertaking that the amount would be
brought back, along with interest, in the event the writ petition
is dismissed, and instead directed the petitioners to deposit the
amount realized on the sale of the secured assets i.e.
Rs.92,09,814/- with the registry. The said amount has,
accordingly, been deposited.
234. For the determination of the controversy in this writ
petition, in the backdrop of the questions of law which we have
133
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

answered above, it would suffice to note that answers to
question nos. (e) and (f) would govern the facts of the case.
Undisputedly, the petitioners do not claim to have registered
the security interest with CERSAI. The contention of Mr. Narula
that the mortgage deed was registered under the
Registration
Act
and hence the same would amount to sufficient compliance
for the purposes of the
SARFAESI Act
has been countered by
Ms. Jeejeebhoy, as noted above. We are in agreement with her
that the deeming provision under
section 20A
comes into effect
only after integration of certain registration systems with the
Central registry and that such integration has to be notified by
the Central Government. We have not been shown that steps
have been taken in the manner dictated by the statute to
enable the petitioner derive any advantage of registration of
the mortgage deed under the
Registration Act
.
235. Further, Mr. Narula, learned counsel for the petitioners
endeavoured to impress upon the Court that the disqualification
for non-registration came into operation with effect from 24 th
January 2020 and, therefore, the petitioners cannot be visited
with the consequences of non-registration. We are unable to
accede to this submission. We have also indicated in answer to
question (e) (paragraph 129) that unless security interest is
registered, neither can borrower seek enforcement invoking the
provisions of
Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act
nor does the
question of priority in payment arise without such registration.
236. If the submission of Mr. Narula is taken to its logical end
and the rights and liabilities of the secured creditor are
considered in the context of the statutory regime before the
134
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, in our view,
the dicta of the Supreme Court in the case of
Central Bank of
India
(supra) that the RDDB Act and the SARFAESI Act do not
contain provisions giving priority to the secured creditors over
the first charge created under the State legislations, would
govern the field. It would be contextually relevant to note that
the petitioners cannot take refuge under the provisions of
section 31B of the RDDB Act, for the reasons recorded above
in answering question no.(d) in the negative.
237. In our view, even otherwise, the situation would be
governed by the determination in paragraph 154 above as there
is material to indicate that the action of sale proclamation
initiated by the respondents was preceded by notice under
section 178 of the MLR Code, warrant of attachment under
section 267(3), order of attachment in Form 4 and auction
proclamation notice in Form 7 under the MRLR Rules.
238. In the backdrop of the materials brought on record by the
respondents, especially in the form of the valuation reports
issued by Archimage Designers (Annexures A and B to the
affidavit in reply), which indicate that the distress sale value of
Flat No.501 was shown at Rs.97,94,400/- and that of Flat
No.503 at Rs.1,01,20,000/-, the sale of the secured assets for
the purported reserve price of Rs.92,09,814/-, which in a
sense, amounts to transfer by the right hand to the left, also
leaves much to be desired.
239. In our view, the petitioners do not deserve any relief.
240. Since the subject flats were purchased by the petitioners
during the pendency of this writ petition, without permission of
135
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

the Court, we annul the sale and direct that the sale certificates
in favour of the petitioners shall stand cancelled. Further, the
amount of Rs.92,09,814/- deposited by the petitioners be
returned to them along with interest accrued thereon. Also, it
is needless to observe that the rights and liabilities of the
parties shall be governed by the law which we have clarified.
241. Subject to the above, the writ petition stands dismissed.
WRIT PETITION NO.3553 OF 2021
242. Petitioner,   an   asset   reconstruction company,    is   an
assignee of the Karnataka Bank, which had extended financial
facilities to Maxwell Metallic Wires Pvt. Ltd., in the year 2010.
An equitable mortgage of land bearing Survey no.441, Hissa
No.3, situated at Village Mahim, Taluka Palghar, Dist. Thane
along with the plant and machinery thereon (the secured
asset), was created in favour of Karnataka Bank under an
Instrument dated 16th July 2010.
243. The assignor had initiated measures under
Chapter III of
the SARFAESI Act
. A notice under
section 13(2)
of the
SARFAESI Act was issued on 26th July, 2013, followed by
possession notice dated 11th October 2013. Post execution of
the deed of assignment on 15th December 2014, the possession
of the secured assets was delivered to the petitioner on 31st
March 2015.
244. Two attempts to sell the secured assets by public auction
did not materialize as there were no bidders. In the meanwhile,
on 9th October 2015, the respondent no.1 addressed a letter to
the Talathi, Mahim, Tal Palghar, to enter the encumbrance of
136
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

the Sales Tax Department for the dues owed by M/s. Maxwell
Metallic Wires Pvt. Ltd., respondent no.2, in terms of an earlier
communication dated 22nd October 2012. Another notice was
addressed to the petitioner on 28th October 2015 inviting its
attention to the arrears of the sales tax which the respondent
no.2 was allegedly liable to pay with a request to take note of
the said Government dues while carrying out auction sale of the
secured   assets.     In   another   communication    dated   30 th
September 2020, the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax
apprised the petitioner that the dealer, respondent no.2, was
liable to pay VAT to the tune of Rs.1,60,80,806/- for the period
2009-10 to 2011-12 and the petitioner was called upon to remit
the said amount.
245. It further appears that on 5th October 2020, a demand
notice was addressed to the respondent no.2 by the Assistant
Commissioner of Sales Tax under section 178 read with section
267 of the MLR Code. Simultaneously, a warrant of attachment
and an order of attachment in Form 4 under the MRLR Rules
were issued on the very day. Hence, this writ petition.
246. In an additional affidavit filed on 24th January 2021, it is
affirmed that the security interest was registered with CERSAI
on 2nd March 2012. A copy of the search report is annexed to
the said affidavit.
247. At the outset, we may note that the averments in the writ
petition remained uncontroverted. Facts seem to be rather
incontrovertible.
248. In view of the registration of the security interest with
CERSAI on the day
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
was
137
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

brought into force, the right of the secured creditor to have
priority in payment stood reinforced. The State Tax authorities,
as is evident, were content with addressing letters to the
revenue authorities and the secured creditor to take note of its
dues. It was on 5th October 2020, well past nine months of the
enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, the Assistant
Commissioner of Sales Tax issued demand notice under section
178 read with section 267 of the MLR Code, warrant of
attachment and order of attachment, in one stroke.
249. Since the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioner had
initiated steps for enforcement of security interest under
section 13
of the SARFAESI Act in the year 2013 and the right
to enforce security interest got further fortified with the
enforcement of Chapter IV-A, with effect from 24th January
2020, the subsequent action of the respondent no.1 does not
supplant the right of priority in payment. We are, thus, inclined
to allow the writ petition.
250. The writ petition stands allowed, with the following
directions:
(a)   The order of attachment of the secured assets dated 5 th
October 2020 stands quashed and set aside.
(b)   It is declared that the petitioners have a right to enforce
the security by sale of secured assets in accordance with law
unhindered by the tax claim of the respondent no.1.
WRIT PETITION NO.3120 OF 2021
251. Petitioner no.1, an asset reconstruction company, is an
assignee of Cosmos Cooperative Bank Limited (hereafter
"Cosmos", for short), a lender of M/s. Shree Ambe Metsteel Pvt.
138
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

Ltd., respondent no.5. At the request of the respondent no.5,
Cosmos had taken over financial facilities from Union Bank of
India, the prior lender of respondent no.5, and had also
sanctioned additional financial facilities. To secure the said loan,
the respondent no.5 had executed a composite deed of
hypothecation and mortgage on 20th September 2010 and
thereby created a security interest over the land bearing
Survey No.195, admeasuring 2H 40R situated at Vadavali, Tal.
Wada, Dist. Palghar (the secured asset). In the month of July
2011, further facilities were extended which were also covered
by a composite deed of mortgage and hypothecation dated 6 th
July 2011.
252. In the wake of default, the assignor issued a notice under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act on 13th December 2013. In
the meanwhile, by an order dated 10th November 2014 in
Company Petition No.593 of 2012, M/s. Shree Ambe Metsteel
Pvt. Ltd. was ordered to be wound up and the Official Liquidator
came to be appointed to take charge thereof. Pursuant to an
order passed by the District Magistrate, the petitioner took
possession of the secured asset on 29th September 2015. O.A.
No.1237 of 2016 was also instituted to recover the secured debt
before the DRT - II, Mumbai, which awaits adjudication.
253. On 19th May 2021, the petitioner published e-auction
notice. One of the prospective bidders brought to the notice of
the petitioner that the respondents 2 and 3, State Tax
authorities, have got entered encumbrance in the record of
right of the secured asset vide Mutation Entry No.1153. Hence,
this writ petition.
139
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
254. Petitioner has filed an additional               affidavit on 24th
November 2021 and affirmed that the security interest came to
be registered with CERSAI on 30th May 2014. A copy of the
security    interest   acknowledgment         registration        report   is
annexed to the said affidavit.
255. The averments in the writ petition are untraversed. The
only document which appears to constitute a clog on the rights
of the secured creditor is the extract of Mutation Entry No.1153.
It was certified on 12th December 2019 based on an order
passed by the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax, respondent
no.3, on 6th July 2018, directing the revenue authorities to
enter    the   encumbrance      of   the    State     for   the    sum     of
Rs.4,28,26,502/- towards the sales tax dues.
256. We have noted that mere creation of charge, in itself, is
not enough. It does not appear that before the rights of the
petitioner as a secured creditor, who had registered the security
interest with CERSAI, were crystalized, with the enforcement
of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, the State tax authorities
had not ordered the attachment of the secured asset in the
manner known to law and followed it up with a proclamation.
In the absence thereof, the priority created by
section 26E
of
the     SARFAESI   Act   operates     with     full   force   and     vigor.
Consequently, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
257. The writ petition stands allowed. We also direct as follows:
(a)     Mutation Entry No.1135 recording the encumbrance of
sales tax dues in the record of right of the secured asset stands
quashed and set aside.
140
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
(b)   It is hereby declared that the petitioner has a right to
enforce the security interest by sale of the secured asset in
accordance with law unhindered by the tax claim of the
respondents 1 to 4.
WRIT PETITION NO.6297 OF 2021
258. Petitioner,   an   asset   reconstruction   company,   is   an
assignee of Central Bank of India, a leading lender of the
consortium of lenders, which had extended credit facilities to
Yog Industries Limited, Mr. Narendra V. Jadhav and Mrs. Kamala
V. Jadhav (the borrowers). The loan was secured, inter alia, by
creating security interest over the immovable property bearing
Gut No.99, situated at Parola, Tal. Paithan, Dist. Aurangabad
(the secured asset), then owned by the borrowers.
259. Central Bank of India, the lead lender, initiated measures
for enforcing the security interest by issuing a notice under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, on 27 th April 2011.
Subsequently, in a petition under
section 9
of the I & B Code,
the Insolvency Resolution Professional came to be appointed on
22nd August 2017. By an order dated 12th April 2018, Yog
Industries Limited was ordered to be liquidated. In a further
order dated 10th April 2019, passed under section 52 of the I &
B Code, the petitioner was permitted to exercise its option
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 52 thereof and
realize its security interest in accordance with the provisions of
the I & B Code.
260. In deference to the said order, the Official Liquidator
delivered possession of the secured asset to the petitioner on
24th July 2019. While in the process of selling the secured asset,
141
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

the petitioner learnt that the State Tax department has marked
an encumbrance in the record of right of the secured asset vide
Mutation Entry No.1132. Assailing the aforesaid action, the
petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
261. Along with the affidavit filed on 10th March 2022, the
petitioner has annexed a copy of the CERSAI search report,
which indicates that the security interest over the secured asset
was created on 2nd May 2017.
262. Respondents have not filed an affidavit in reply to
controvert the averments in the writ petition.
263. Perusal of the record of right of the secured asset reveals
that an encumbrance to the tune of Rs.3,62,33,272/- towards
sales tax dues was entered in the other rights column at the
instance   of   the   Assistant   Commissioner   of   Sales   Tax,
Aurangabad. Evidently, the respondents 2 and 3 do not seem
to have initiated measures before the enforcement of
Chapter
IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, to enforce the first charge over the
assets of the dealer by attaching the immovable property and
putting up the same for sale in accordance with the provisions
contained in MLR Code and the MRLR Rules.
264. In such circumstances, mere marking of encumbrance in
the record of right of the secured asset does not advance the
cause of the revenue. In the absence of such steps, and
particularly with the enforcement of
section 26E
of the
SARFAESI Act the right of the petitioner to have priority in
payment deserves to be enforced in preference to the claim of
the revenue. We are, thus, inclined to allow the writ petition.
142
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
265. The writ petition stands allowed and we order as follows:
(a)   Mutation Entry No.1132 recording encumbrance of sales
tax dues in the record of right of the secured asset stands
quashed and set aside.
(b)   It is hereby declared that the petitioner has a right to
enforce the security interest by sale of the secured asset in
accordance with law unhindered by the tax claim of the
respondents 1 to 3.
WRIT PETITION NO.2248 OF 2021
266. Petitioner no.1 is a Scheduled Bank registered under the
Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002
. During the period
2007 to 2011, in three tranches, the petitioner had extended
credit facilities to M/s. Blue Star Agro and Winery (India) Pvt.
Ltd., respondent no.4. The loan was secured by creating a
mortgage by deposit of title deeds of the immovable properties
including the agricultural land, admeasuring 60H 7R out of Gut
No.50/2, situated at Biradwadi, Tal. Khed, Dist. Pune (the
secured asset).
267. As the loan account became NPA, a notice under
section
13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act was issued on 24th August 2011.
Possession of the secured asset was taken by the petitioner
under a Panchanama dated 16th July 2012. While the petitioner
was in the process of initiating measures to sell the secured
asset, on 20th September 2020, the respondent no.2 addressed
a notice to the petitioner claiming that the dealer, respondent
no.4, was in arrears of VAT and CST aggregating to
Rs.1,39,77,469/- and the State had the first charge under
143
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
section 37
of the MVAT Act. Petitioner was thus called upon to
hold the amount to the extent of the arrears of the sales tax
for the respondents. The said communication was accompanied
by an order of attachment in Form 4.
268. Upon enquiry, it transpired that the respondents 1 and 2
had also marked an encumbrance in the record of right of the
secured asset. Mutation Entry No.1455 was certified by the
respondent no.3 on the basis of a communication from the
State Tax department on 22nd September 2019 for an amount
of Rs.96,32,005/- as on 31st March 2019. It was noticed that
on the basis of the communication dated 7th January 2015
addressed by the Sales Tax Officer, vide Mutation Entry
No.1207, an encumbrance to the tune of Rs.33,76,440/-
towards the arrears of sales tax had also been recorded in the
record of right of the secured asset. As the communication to
the respondents did not yield the desired result, this writ
petition has been instituted.
269. In an additional affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner
on 22nd November 2021, it is averred that the security interest
was duly registered with CERSAI on 12th March 2007. Copies of
the general details of the security interest are annexed to the
said affidavit.
270. The sales tax authority, respondent no.2, seems to have
resorted to a two-pronged approach. First, it made an entry of
encumbrance of the sales tax dues in the record of right of the
secured asset. Next, it passed an order of attachment on 28th
September 2020, i.e., after Chapter IV-A was introduced in the
SARFAESI Act
.
144
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
271. If we were to proceed on the basis of the additional
affidavit dated 22nd November 2021, the writ petition would
probably succeed. In the light of the view which we have
recorded above, none of the measures is of any assistance to
the revenue. A mere entry in the record of rights of the secured
asset bereft of any order of attachment, followed by a
proclamation   in   the   manner   known   to   law,   is   of   no
consequence. From the perusal of Mutation Entry Nos.1207
dated 7th January, 2015 and 1455 dated 23rd July, 2019, it
becomes evident that the encumbrances were sought to be
recorded merely on the basis of the communication addressed
by the Sales Tax authorities.
272. As the order of attachment was evidently passed on 28 th
September, 2020, post
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act having
been brought into force, the right of the petitioner to have
priority in payment of the secured debt, over all other debts,
revenue and taxes, would crystalize. Subsequent action of
attachment of the secured asset purportedly in exercise of the
right under
section 37
of the MVAT Act would not dislodge the
superior claim of the secured creditor.
273. However, despite noting the above facts, we are unable to
grant relief to the petitioner. We find that the 2011 Rules were
notified on 31st March 2011. Therefore, the CERSAI registration
of the security interest could not have been possible on 12 th
March 2007 as alleged in the additional affidavit. On the
contrary, the security interest in respect of the secured asset
which was created on 12th March 2007 in favour of the
petitioner appears to have been recorded in the documents
145
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

annexed to the said additional affidavit. Thus, there is a clear
misstatement about the CERSAI registration. Having examined
the said documents, we have not been able to locate the exact
date of the CERSAI registration of the security interest.
274. Though the respondents have chosen not to contest the
factual assertions, we are of the opinion that the writ petition
ought not to be decided without the date of the CERSAI
registration being brought on record.
275. We, thus, direct that this writ petition be re-notified for
hearing before the appropriate Division Bench for decision in
the light of what has been recorded above in this judgment
while answering the questions formulated.
276. Petitioner is granted liberty, within three weeks from
date, to file a supplementary affidavit bringing on record the
date of the CERSAI registration with supporting documentary
proof. The respondents may file reply affidavit within two weeks
thereafter. Liberty is given to the parties to seek circulation of
the writ petition after six weeks.
WRIT PETITION NO.2251 OF 2021
277. Petitioner No.1 is a Scheduled Bank registered under the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002
. In the month of
March 2009, the petitioner had extended financial facilities to
M/s. Delta Automobiles Pvt. Ltd., respondent no.4. In order to
secure the credit facilities, Ms. Maya Arvind Toley, respondent
no.5, the then director of the respondent no.4, had mortgaged
an immovable property, i.e., Amit Bungalow, situated at 2019,
E-2, Ward K-37, 6th Lane, Rajarampuri, Kolhapur 416 008 (the
146
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

secured asset) by depositing the title deed under letter dated
20th April 2009.
278. In view of the default in repayment of the loan amount,
the petitioner initiated measures for enforcing the security
under
section 13
of the SARFAESI Act. Petitioner claimed to
have eventually taken possession of the secured asset by
publishing possession notice dated 17th March 2020.
279. In the intervening period, on 11th March 2020, the Deputy
Commissioner of Sales Tax, respondent no.2, addressed a
communication      to   the    petitioner   contending   that   the
respondent no.4, was in arrears of sales tax dues to the tune
of Rs.7,99,57,316/- and the department had already initiated
process of recovery in the month of August 2017. As a part
thereof, it was asserted, the secured asset was attached on 31st
January 2018 and even possession thereof was taken on 28 th
March 2018 by publishing a notice in the daily Pudhari,
Kolhapur. It was further contended that the copies evidencing
the aforesaid action were already forwarded to the petitioner
vide communication dated 16th October, 2018. Yet the
petitioner moved the District Magistrate under
section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act, suppressing the aforesaid facts and obtained an
order dated 11th December 2019. Another communication was
addressed on 18th March 2020 reiterating the aforesaid
position.
280. As the department did not cave in to the petitioner's claim
of superior right of recovery and firmly stood by its claim, the
petitioner has approached this Court to quash and set aside the
demand notice and attachment order dated 30th January 2018
147
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

and to direct the respondent no.6 to remove encumbrance
noted in the record of right of the secured asset.
281. In an additional affidavit filed on behalf of the Petitioner
on 22nd November 2021, it is affirmed that the security interest
over the secured asset was registered with CERSAI on 24th
May, 2012. The same is evidenced by the search report,
annexed thereto.
282. Though the respondents 1 to 3 have not filed an affidavit
in reply to contest the averments in the writ petition, we find
that from the very averments therein and the documents
annexed thereto, the instant case would be governed by the
later part of the observations in paragraph 154 (supra), as it
appears that the secured asset came to be attached in
accordance with law, prior to
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
being enforced.
283. On a careful perusal of the writ petition, it becomes
abundantly clear that the petitioner claimed to have learnt
about the claim staked by the Sales Tax authority in the month
of March 2020, upon receipt of the communications dated 11 th
March 2020 and 18th March 2020. However, the fact that the
petitioner has known about the said fact, much prior in point of
time, is betrayed by prayer clause (a), whereby the petitioner
seeks to quash and set aside the impugned demand notice and
attachment order dated 30th January 2018 informed to the
petitioner by the respondent no.2 along with the letter dated
16th October 2018, a copy of which is annexed to the writ
petition at Exhibit A.
148
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
284. A perusal of the aforesaid letter dated 16th October 2018
indicates that the respondent No.2 had specifically brought to
the notice of the petitioner that the respondent no.4 was in
arrears of the sales tax and was served with a demand notice
on 22nd August 2017; the attachment order in respect of
immovable properties including the secured asset was passed
on 30th January 2018 and that the possession notice was also
published in the daily Pudhari, Kolhapur on 28th March 2018.
Petitioner was further informed that a charge was noted in the
record of right of the secured asset as well. Copies of the
demand notice, order of attachment and possession notice
published in the newspaper, were also forwarded along with the
said communication dated 16th October 2018.
285. It is imperative to note that in the reply to the letter dated
11th March 2020, addressed on behalf of the petitioner, a stoic
silence was maintained about the fact that vide communication
dated 16th October 2018, the aforesaid facts were brought to
the notice of the petitioner. What accentuates the situation is
the fact that, in the said reply, an endeavour was made to
demonstrate that Mrs. Maya Arvind Toley, respondent no.5, was
not the director of the respondent no.4 and, therefore, the sales
tax authorities were not entitled in law to attach the secured
asset, which was the property of the respondent no.5.
286. We find that the said stand of the petitioner is in stark
contrast to the substratum of the petitioner's claim that the
respondent No.5 had furnished security in the capacity of a
director of the respondent no.4. This ambivalent stand of the
petitioner further erodes the veracity of its case. It also
149
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

indicates that instead of meeting the case of the department
that it had enforced the 'first charge' over the secured asset in
exercise of the right under
section 37
of the MVAT Act, the
petitioner endeavoured to deflect the issue by questioning the
action of the department in proceeding against the property of
the director of the dealer.
287. The situation which thus obtains is that before the
enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
, the
department had initiated measures to enforce its 'first charge'
under
section 37
of the MVAT Act, passed attachment order and
also published a possession notice on 13th March 2018.
288. The dealer, in particular, and the public, in general, were
forewarned not to deal with the secured asset as the
transaction would be void under
section 38(1)
of the MVAT Act.
To add to this, all these facts were duly brought to the notice
of the petitioner.
289.
In view of the aforesaid material, we are persuaded to
hold that the instant case would be governed by the legal
regime as postulated by the Supreme Court in the case of
Central Bank of India
(supra), before the enforcement of
Chapter IV-A of the SARFAESI Act
. Thus, the petitioner does
not deserve any relief.
290. Resultantly, the writ petition stands dismissed.
WRIT PETITION (L) NO.939 OF 2020
291. This writ petition happens to be a second round of
litigation between the parties before this Court, and obviously
150
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

presents a different twist of facts when compared with the other
writ petitions.
292. Aggrieved by the action of the Sales Tax authorities in
laying attachment over Flat No.903, A and B, 9th Floor, Heritage
Co-op. Housing Soc. Ltd., High Street, Hiranandani Garden,
Powai, Mumbai - 400 076 (the secured asset), the petitioner
had instituted Writ Petition (L) No.3041 of 2019.
293. The said writ petition came to be disposed of on 15th
November 2019, with the following order:
"2.      Whether the State of Maharashtra would
         have a first charge on the subject property in
         terms of
Section 37
of the Maharashtra Value
         Added Tax Act, 2002 or the Petitioner would be
         the first charge holder in terms of
Section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002 is the issue which
         needs to be decided with respect to
         disbursement of the amount received by sale of
         the secured asset. But as regards the buyer, the
         price paid would entitle the buyer to transfer of
         title in the secured asset free from any kind of
         lien either of the Bank or the State of
         Maharashtra.
3. Thus, we dispose of the Petition declaring that
         the unilateral assertion by the Sales Tax Officer
         in the letters dated 23rd June, 2016 and 7th July,
         2016 that tax dues are the first charge on the
         property is void at this stage.
4. We permit the Petitioner to sell the secured
         assets but retain the sale value in a no lien
         account with it.
5. If the sale price satisfies the claim of the
         Petitioner as well as the State of Maharashtra
         that would be the end of the dispute. But if the
         sale price realized is less than the total dues of
         the Petitioner and the Respondent the issue
         could be sorted out at that stage by the
151
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

          Petitioner seeking a declaratory relief from this
          Court by way of a Writ Petition."
294. Petitioner claimed to have auctioned the secured asset
and confirmed sale in favour of the successful bidder for a
consideration of Rs.4,86,00,000/- and the said amount,
according to the petitioner, does not cover even 50% of the
outstanding amount. Hence, this writ petition availing the
liberty granted by the Division Bench to seek a declaratory relief
that the petitioner is entitled to appropriate the entire sale
proceeds in preference to the claim of the Respondent.
295. The facts leading to the initiation of measures to enforce
the security furnished by Mr. Ganesh B. Patel, the sole
proprietor of M/s. K.K. Steel, whom the petitioner had extended
the financial facilities are, by and large, not in dispute. A notice
under
section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act was addressed on 8th
February 2013. The authorized officer of the petitioner took
physical possession of the secured asset on 10th October 2014.
When resistance was put forth by the Sales Tax authorities to
the auction of the secured asset, the petitioner invoked the writ
jurisdiction. As noted above, the petitioner was permitted to
sell the secured asset keeping open the issue of determination
of priority.
296. Petitioner has filed an additional affidavit dated 9 th July
2021 affirming that the security interest was registered with
CERSAI on 9th July, 2020. Consistent with the view which we
have recorded above, until the security interest was registered
with the CERSAI, the petitioner could not claim priority in
152
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

payment under
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act, i.e., till 9th
July 2020.
297. A question that comes to the fore is whether the petitioner
would be deprived of the right of priority in payment on account
of the measures initiated by the respondents before the
registration of the security interest with the CERSAI?
298. Two affidavits in reply are filed on behalf of the
respondents. In the first affidavit filed by Mr. Pradeep G. Kadu,
Joint Commissioner of State Tax, the claim of the petitioner is
resisted on the ground that the department had lodged its claim
with the petitioner bank before the 2016
Amending Act
. In the
affidavit in reply filed by Mr. Prasad Joshi, Joint Commissioner
of State Tax, it is contended that a demand notice was issued
to K.K. Steel on 29th February 2016, levying a demand of
Rs.1,08,91746/- for the period 1st April 2010 to 31st March
2011. When it was noticed that the auction sale notice was
published by the petitioner on 6th June, 2016, the department
apprised the petitioner by a letter dated 7th July 2016 that K.K.
Steel owed sales tax dues to the tune of Rs.1,62,58,945/- plus
interest thereon. Petitioner was directed to take note of the
'first charge' and make a full disclosure to the prospective
purchasers. It was further affirmed that on 30th June 2016, the
department had informed the Chairman of the Heritage Co-op.
Housing Society Ltd. as well to take note of the first charge and
to not permit transfer of the secured asset, without NOC from
the department.
299. The     aforesaid   correspondence   emanating   from   the
department, at best, shows that the department had levied a
153
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD

demand of the sales tax dues on the proprietor of K.K. Steel,
the borrower, and asserted that under
section 37
of the MVAT
Act, the State had first charge on the asset of the assessee. In
the two affidavits filed on behalf of the respondents, what is
conspicuous      by   its   absence   is    the   assertion   that   the
respondents had ordered attachment of the secured asset in
conformity with the provisions of MLR Code and the MRLR
Rules. No endeavour was made by the respondents to show
that the warrant of attachment and order of attachment were
issued and there was a proclamation of the attachment order.
300. Likewise, the Sales Tax Commissioners did not claim that
they registered the claim with the CERSAI to adhere to the
mandate contained in
section 26B(4)
of the SARFAESI Act.
Non-registration of the claim and/or order of attachment entails
the consequences envisaged by sub-section (2) of
section 26C
of the SARFAESI Act. Thus, dual disability sets in. First, in the
absence of material to show that the first charge under
section
37
of MVAT Act was enforced by a valid attachment order before
the registration of security interest by the petitioner with the
CERSAI, the petitioner cannot be deprived of the right of
priority under
section 26E
of the SARFAESI Act. Secondly, with
the registration of the security interest with the CERSAI on 9th
July 2020, coupled with the absence of registration of the
department's demand and/or order of attachment, the claim of
the respondents becomes subservient to the right of the
secured creditor.
301. For the foregoing reasons, we are impelled to allow the
writ petition.
154
1-WP-2935-2018 & Connected-FD
302. The writ petition, thus, stands allowed in terms of prayer
                       clauses (a) and (b).
303. Pending application(s), if any, in the writ petitions would
                       also stand disposed of accordingly.
304. Parties to the writ petitions shall, however, bear their own
                       costs.
305. Before parting, we record our sincere appreciation for the
                       able assistance rendered by the learned senior advocates,
                       learned counsels for the petitioners, the learned Special
                       Counsel and learned Government Pleaders appearing for the
                       State in determining the questions of law which arose for
                       consideration and also in disposing of majority of the writ
                       petitions that were under consideration.
(N. J. JAMADAR, J.) (M. S. KARNIK, J.)        (CHIEF JUSTICE)

                       Later:
Mr. Shakeeb Shaikh, learned advocate appearing for the
                       petitioners in Writ Petition No. 2935 of 2018 prays for
                       continuation of interim relief granted earlier. The prayer is
                       considered and refused.
(N. J. JAMADAR, J.)    (M. S. KARNIK, J.)     (CHIEF JUSTICE)




          Digitally
          signed by
          PRAVIN
PRAVIN    DASHARATH
DASHARATH PANDIT
PANDIT    Date:
          2022.09.01
          11:04:38
          +0530
155
