Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 1
AIR 1971
Citation: AIR 1971 SC 2233.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/144127287/

[Cites
37
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi District Court
State vs Inder Kumar on 13 March, 2024
IN THE COURT OF ANKITA LAL
        ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE, (FTC) NORTH EAST
        DISTRICT, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI

CNR No. DLNE01-000170-2011                           FIR No. 302/11
SC No. 44669/15                                      PS Seema Puri
                                                     U/S: 302/308/323/34
IPC
State

                                 Versus

1. Inder Kumar @ Titu
s/o Babu Ram
r/o H.No. 205, DDA Quaters,
New Seema Puri, Delhi

2. Vijay Panday
s/o Jai Prakash
r/o H.No. 236, DDA Flats,
New Seema Puri, Delhi.

3. Raju Singh
s/o Jagdish Singh
r/o Village Nangla, PS Katra,
Dist. Shahjahan Pur, UP

4. Narender Kumar @ Bittu
s/o Babu Ram
r/o H.No. 205, DDA Quaters,
New Seema Puri, Delhi.


                 Date of institution   :                   01.11.2011
                 Judgment reserved on :                    09.02.2024
                 Judgment delivered on :                   13.03.2024


                                     JUDGMENT
1. Briefly stated the prosecution case is that on 03.08.2011 at
   about 11:30 pm, on 64 foota road, near Gurudwara, DDA
   Quarters, New Seemapuri, all accused persons, namely Inder

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 1 of 68
Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday, Raju Singh and Narender Kumar
   @ Bittoo, in furtherance of their common intention with each
   other, gave beatings to complainant Raj Kumar, injured
   Sanjeev Kumar Pappan and Anil Kumar (deceased) by danda
   due to which they suffered injuries. It is further the case of
   prosecution that all accused persons caused injuries on the
   head of Anil Kumar, due to which Anil Kumar had expired.
2. The FIR No. 302/11, u/s 302/308/323/34
IPC
was registered
   vide D.D. entry no. 51A dated 03.08.2011 and the matter was
   entrusted to SI Lala Ram for investigation. Accused Inder
   Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday and Raju Singh were arrested in
   the present FIR on 04.08.2011. Thereafter, on 28.08.2011,
   accused Narender Kumar @ Bittu was arrested in the present
   case.
3. On completion of investigation, the charge-sheet was filed
   against the accused persons for the offences punishable under
section 302
/
308
/
323
/
34
IPC and the case was sent for trial.
CHARGE
4. On the basis of material available on record as well as the
   evidence collected by the IO during the course of the
   investigation, Ld. Predecessor of this Court vide orders dated
   03.01.2012 framed charges against accused persons, namely
   Inder Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday, Raju Singh and Narender
   Kumar           @      Bitto,     for      the    offences        punishable           u/s
   302/308/323/34
IPC
, to which all the accused persons pleaded
   not guilty and claimed trial.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 2 of 68
5. To establish its case, the prosecution had tendered a list of 28
   prosecution witnesses in the main chargesheet.
6. To prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has
   examined 26 witnesses.
PROSECUTION EVIDENCE:
a) The complainant /public witnesses:
7. PW-1 Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu was one of the injured. He
   deposed that on 03.08.2011 at about 11:20 / 11:30 pm, he was
   present at DDA Quarter near Gurudwara, New Seema Puri and
   was waiting for a rickshaw to go GTB Hospital. It is further
   deposed that one rickshaw came there and he requested the
   rickshaw-puller to take him to GTB Hospital, but he denied.
   He further deposed that he requested several times, but he
   refused and while he was requesting the rickshaw-puller, 4-5
   persons from the garage came there and they all gave beatings
   to him. He further deposed that he called his elder brother Raj
   Kumar and told him about the incident that 4-5 persons had
   given beatings to him and he asked his brother to reach at the
   spot. He further deposed that after about 05 minutes, his
   brother, alongwith his neighbour Anil, came to the spot. He
   further deposed that the said 4-5 persons again returned to the
   spot, armed with dandas and gave beatings to all of them with
   the said dandas. He further deposed that they (4-5 persons)
   also threatened them that 'apne himaytion ko lekar aaya hai,
   aaj hum tujhe aur tere himaytion ka kaam tamam kar dete
   hain'.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 3 of 68
8. PW-1 further deposed that accused persons gave beatings to
   them with dandas, and he alongwith Raj Kumar attempted to
   run away from the spot, but Anil Kumar had suffered serious
   injuries and he was unable to run from the spot. He further
   deposed that said Anil Kumar fell down at the spot and the
   accused persons continued to give beatings to him. He further
   deposed that his brother Raj Kumar took him to GTB Hospital
   in a TSR as he was bleeding from his head. PW-1 further
   deposed that he became unconscious after reaching the
   hospital, and later on, he came to know that Anil Kumar had
   expired.         He       further     deposed      that     he    had     regained
   consciousness at about 3:00 am -04:00 am on the next day i.e.
   04.08.2011. PW-1 further deposed that on 04.08.2011, the
   police officials met him at his residence and took him to the
   police station for investigation and they also recorded his
   statement in the police station.
9. PW-1 was cross examined by the Defence Counsel for all
   accused persons. PW-1 deposed in his cross examination that
   he was running a tent house and having a godown at Kodi
   Colony, near Gurudwara, Seemapuri and his brother Raj
   Kumar was running a TSR. He further deposed that deceased
   Anil was residing near his house and used to drive a 'Vikram'.
   He further deposed that house of accused persons is situated at
   a distance of about 100-150 steps away from his house. He
   further deposed that he was standing on the left side of the gate
   of the Gurudwara, while waiting for a rickshaw and a Mother
   Dairy booth was also situated at a distance of about 50-60

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 4 of 68
steps away from the Gurudwara. He had not consumed any
   liquor on the day of the incident, but he had consumed a bottle
   of beer at about 09:30 pm, at the house of his friend Gulshan.
   He further deposed that after consuming beer, he visited his
   site at DLF, Seemapur and then returned to his godown at
   about 10:00 pm. He further deposed that his vehicle was not
   having fuel, and therefore, he had parked it near GTB
   Hospital, and that GTB hospital was situated at about 2-3 km
   away from his godown.
10.      PW-1 further deposed that his friend Parveen had called
   him near the gate of GTB hospital, towards the Mental
   Hospital. He voluntarily deposed that when he reached at the
   spot as disclosed by his friend Parveen, he could not find him
   there as his friend had left the spot, due to a quarrel with some
   other person. He deposed that thereafter, he returned to his
   godown by foot, after leaving his vehicle near GTB Hospital.
11.      PW-1 further deposed that he was not acquainted with
   accused Raju, Narender and Vijay prior to the incident, but he
   knew accused Inder prior to the incident by face, as he was
   running a milk dairy in the area. He also deposed that he was
   not knowing his name at the time of incident. He further
   deposed that about 20-30 persons had gathered on the spot at
   the time of incident. He denied that any quarrel had taken
   place between him, his brother Raj Kumar and deceased Anil
   and during the quarrel, accused Vijay reached at the spot and
   on hearing the noises, he along with Raj Kumar gave severe
   beatings to Vijay, due to which he suffered injuries.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 5 of 68
12.      PW-1 further deposed that he knew one Payal Jain, who
   lived near Gurudwara. He denied that he had eve-teased her on
   08.01.2008, and some heated words were exchanged with her.
   He deposed that said Payal Jain is the neighbour of accused
   Inder, but denied that on 08.01.2008, accused Inder had
   intervened and further denied that due to the said intervention
   by accused Inder, he bore animosity with the family of accused
   Inder, or for this reason, he had falsely implicated the accused
   in the present case.
13.      PW-1 further denied that he had a property dispute with
   deceased Anil and further denied that on the day of the
   incident, he had given beatings to deceased Anil due to which
   he expired. PW-1 further deposed that he had not seen the
   accused persons in the PS after the incident and the accused
   persons were not present in the PS, when his statement was
   recorded by the police.
14.      PW-1 was recalled for further cross examination upon an
   application
u/s 311
Cr.P.C. During the said cross-examination,
   he admitted that he made a call to his advocate Sh. V.K. Gaur
   on 03.08.2011 at 11:34 pm, from his mobile number and had
   informed him about the incident and also sought his advice,
   and that his advocate told him to call police at 100 number.
   PW-1 admitted that he had not made a call at 100 number. PW-
   1 further deposed that accused Vijay, Narender, Inder and Raju
   were not known to him by their names at the time of the
   incident, but he came to know about their names at the time of

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 6 of 68
incident itself, as they were addressing each other by their
   respective names while committing the incident in question.
   PW-1 further stated that he had not told in his statement given
   to the police that accused Vijay, Narender, Inder and Raju were
   known to him by their names at the time of the incident, but he
   came to know about their names at the time of incident itself.
   PW-1 denied all the incriminating suggestions put to him.
15.      PW-2 Raj Kumar was also one of the injured and the
   complainant in the present case. He deposed that on
   03.08.2011 at about 11:30 pm, while he was present in his
   house, he received a phone call from his brother Sanjeev, who
   told him that some persons had given beatings to him at
   Rickshaw parking near DDA flats, Gurudwara. He further
   deposed that he came out of his house and raised alarm that his
   brother was being given beatings by some persons, and after
   hearing his noise, his neighbour Anil came outside. He further
   deposed that he along with his neighbour Anil went near
   Gurudwara, where his brother Sanjeev was standing on the
   patri and Sanjeev told them that the dairywalas from the dairy
   had given beatings to him. He further deposed that after
   hearing the voice of his brother, accused Vijay Panday, Inder,
   Raju Singh and Narender came outside the dairy, armed with
   dandas. He further deposed that after coming outside the dairy,
   they rebuked them and told them 'aap log Sanjeev @ Pappu
   ka himayati ban ke aaye ho, aaj tumhara bhi kaam, tamam kar
   denge' and they all gave beatings to them by dandas. He
   further deposed that his neighbour Anil had received grievous
   injuries and he fell on the ground. He further deposed that he

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 7 of 68
himself received injuries over his body. He further deposed
   that he along with his brother Sanjeev ran away from the spot
   and while running, he turned back and saw that all four
   accused persons were giving beatings to deceased Anil by
   dandas.
16.      PW-2 further deposed that blood was oozing out of the
   head of his brother, and thus, he stopped one auto rickshaw
   and shifted his brother Sanjeev to GTB Hospital. He further
   deposed that after reaching the hospital, he also saw injured
   Anil in the hospital, who was brought there by PCR vehicle
   and he found that injured Anil was already dead. He further
   deposed that he told the police in the hospital regarding the
   incident and handed over his complaint Ex. PW2/A to them.
17.         PW-2 further deposed that SI Lala Ram took his
   complaint and handed over the same to Ct. Prem for
   registration of FIR. He further deposed that after some time
   Insp. Jaipal Singh came to the hospital and made inquiries
   from him. He further deposed that he accompanied Insp. Jaipal
   Singh to the spot i.e. near rickshaw stand, DDA Flats,
   Gurudwara, where he found other police officials present
   there. He further deposed that photographs of the spot were
   taken by those officials and he narrated the incident to the IO.
   He further deposed that IO prepared the site plan Ex. PW2/B
   at the spot at his instance. He further deposed that IO collected
   the blood samples, sample concrete pieces, sample earth and
   one pair of plastic chappal wherein 'Briko' was written and
   seized the same in different pullandas. He further deposed that

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 8 of 68
he accompanied IO to GTB Hospital, where father of deceased
   Anil and one his relative met them and dead body of Anil was
   identified by father of the deceased. He further deposed that he
   accompanied the IO and other police persons in search of
   accused persons. He further deposed that on his pointing out,
   IO arrested accused Inder Kumar, Raju Singh and Vijay
   Panday were arrested vide memos Ex. PW2/C, Ex. PW2/D and
   Ex. PW2/E respectively from near DLF mor, and accused
   persons were personally searched by the IO vide memos Ex.
   PW2/F, Ex. PW2/G and Ex. PW2/H respectively. He further
   deposed that IO recorded disclosure statements of accused
   persons vide memos Ex. PW2/J, Ex. PW2/K and Ex. PW2/L
   respectively. He further deposed that accused persons had
   taken the police team to the spot and IO prepared the pointing
   out memo Ex. PW2/M.
18.      PW-2 further deposed that at the instance of accused Raju
   Singh, IO recovered a blood-stained stone from the corner of
   the rickshaw stand and seized the same in a pullanda vide
   seizure memo Ex. PW2/N. He further deposed that at the
   instance of accused Vijay Panday, IO recovered a blood
   stained danda with two knots (ganth), from beneath the bed
   and seized the same vide seizure memo Ex. PW2/O. He further
   deposed that at the instance of accused Inder Kumar, police
   recovered and seized one bamboo danda, stained with cow
   dung vide seizure memo Ex. PW2/P. PW-2 correctly identified
   the case properties Ex. PW2/P-1, Ex. PW2/P2, Ex. PW2/P3
   and Ex. PW2/P4.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 9 of 68
19.      PW-2 was cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for all
   the accused persons, wherein inter-alia, he deposed that he had
   given the complaint in his own hand writing in Hindi at the
   police room in GTB Hospital. He further deposed that when he
   reached the emergency room of the hospital, he found that
   PCR had already brought deceased Anil to the emergency
   room. He further deposed that accused Vijay was not present
   in the emergency room. He further deposed that no public
   persons were present when he reached at the spot. He further
   deposed that on receiving the call of his brother, he did not
   immediately call the PCR. He further deposed that he took the
   TSR from the spot at about 12:30 am (midnight) and after
   taking the TSR, they went to the hospital. He further deposed
   that he left the hospital at about 03:00 am.
20.      PW-2 further deposed that he had no knowledge whether
   his brother Sanjeev had taken liquor on the date of incident or
   not. He further deposed that he had not taken liquor on that
   day. He further deposed that he did not know any lady with the
   name Payal. He also deposed that he was not acquainted with
   accused Inder by his name, prior to the incident. However, he
   voluntarily deposed that he knew accused Inder by face as he
   was running a dairy. He further deposed that he was not
   acquainted the accused Inder, Raju Singh and Vijay Panday
   before the incident, but stated that he knew them by face and
   that he came to know their names for the first time after they
   were apprehended by the police. PW-2 deposed that he was not
   beaten up severally on the day of incident. He further deposed
   that he had not refused for his medical examination on

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 10 of 68
04.08.2011. He further deposed that his brother Sanjeev had
   not told him that 4-5 persons from rickshaw garage had given
   beatings to him. He further deposed that some bricks and
   stones were also lying at the spot. He further deposed that he
   had not seen the accused persons coming out from any house,
   but all the accused persons were seen coming from one
   direction. He further deposed that when he reached at the spot,
   his brother Sanjeev was standing alone there.
21.      PW-2 further deposed that residential houses were situated
   at a distance of about 15-20 steps away from the spot, where
   he was standing. He further deposed that he had no knowledge
   whether accused Vijay had also sustained injuries in the
   quarrel with them, but deposed that he had seen a bandage on
   his hand later on, in the evening on the day of incident. He
   further deposed that Gurudwara is situated at a distance of 25-
   30 steps away from Mother Dairy Booth. He further deposed
   that he had not stated to the IO that the accused persons also
   used bricks to cause injuries to the deceased and to him. He
   further deposed that he had seen the blood stains only on one
   danda. He further deposed that some public persons had
   gathered near the house of the accused persons. He further
   deposed that police officials had not called any of those
   persons to join the investigation. He further deposed that he
   had shouted for help when accused persons were giving
   beatings to them. He further deposed that only accused
   Narender had chased them and he pointed towards point Y in
   the site plan Ex. PW2/B, which the place till the point accused
   Narender had chased them. He also deposed that the entire

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 11 of 68
street was having street light on that night. He also stated that
   he did not remember the exact role of particular accused in
   giving beatings to him.
22.      PW-2 who was again recalled for cross-examination
u/s
   311
Cr.P.C, wherein he deposed that accused Vijay, Narender
   and Raju were not known to him by their names at the time of
   incident, but he came to know about their names at the time of
   incident itself as they were addressing each other with their
   respective name while committing the incident in question. He
   further stated that apart from the said fact, the names of
   accused Vijay and Raju were also further clarified at the time
   of their arrest. He further deposed that he knew accused Inder
   by his name even prior to the incident in question as the said
   accused used to visit his dairy for purchasing milk, but stated
   that he may not have stated the said facts to the police in his
   statement Ex. PW2/A and another statement Mark PW2/DA.
   PW-2 further deposed that he had not met the wife of deceased
   on 04.08.2011, but he knew her name. PW-2 denied all other
   suggestions regarding incriminating facts.
23.      PW-3 Ravinder Jata Shankar was the caller of the incident.
   He deposed that on 03.08.2011 at about 11:00 -11:30 pm, he
   was roaming outside his house after taking dinner. He deposed
   that he heard noises of his neighbours that "ladai ho gayee,
   ladai ho gayee" near Mother Dairy. He deposed that he made a
   call at 100 number from his mobile number.
24.      PW-3 was cross examined by Ld. APP for the State as he

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 12 of 68
resiled from his statement given to the police, and he inter-alia
   deposed that police had neither interrogated him nor recorded
   his statement in this case, and he denied his statement Mark
   Ex. PW3/A. He was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel
   for the accused persons, wherein he stated that he did not
   know any Payal Jain.
25.      PW-5 Furti Lal was the father of deceased Anil. He
   identified the dead body of his deceased son Anil at GTB
   Hospital mortuary vide identification memo Ex. PW5/A. He
   was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for the accused
   persons, wherein, he deposed that in the intervening night of
   03-04.08.2011, Raj Kumar had raised the alarm in the gali that
   'koi mere bhai ko maar raha hai'. He deposed that at about
   10:30 pm, he had gone to sleep after taking dinner and till that
   time, deceased Anil was present in the house. He changed his
   statement and against stated that he had not heard the alarm of
   Raj Kumar as deposed by him. He also stated that Raj Kumar
   knew his son / deceased Anil since childhood.
26.      PW-7 Shiv Shankar was the cousin of deceased Anil and
   he had also identified the dead body of deceased Anil at GTB
   Hospital mortuary vide identification memo Ex. PW7/A. He
   was not cross-examined despite opportunity given to the
   defence.
b) Police Witnesses and Formal Witnesses:
27.      PW-4 was the Duty Officer. He deposed that on 03-
   04.08.2011, he registered FIR no. 302/11 upon receiving rukka

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 13 of 68
from SI Lala Ram through Ct. Prem Singh. He further deposed
   that after registration of FIR, the case was marked to Insp.
   Jaipal Singh, SHO Seemapuri for investigation and he proved
   the copy of FIR Ex. PW4/A. He was cross-examined by Ld.
   Defence Counsel upon being recalled
u/s 311
Cr.P.C, but there
   are no material contradictions.
28.      PW-6 HC Rishi Pal was In-charge, PCR. He deposed that
   on night of 03/04.08.2011 at about 11:55 pm, on receipt of
   wireless message regarding quarrel near Gurudwara, New
   Seemapuri, DDA flats, he along with his staff reached there
   and found a person in injured condition and without sense, on
   the patri. He further deposed that the injured was bleeding
   profusely and was shifted to GTB Hospital and admitted in the
   casualty. He further deposed that the doctor declared the
   injured 'brought dead' and upon enquiry, he came to know that
   injured was Anil s/o Furti Lal. He further deposed that he
   informed the Control Room regarding the death of that person
   and his statement was recorded by IO on 04.08.2011.
29.      PW-6 was cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel
   wherein he inter-alia deposed that 2-4 public persons were
   present near the injured. He further deposed that only one
   injured person was found by him, lying on the patri. He denied
   that another injured i.e. accused Vijay Kumar Panday, was also
   found lying there and further denied that he took accused Vijay
   Kumar in PCR to GTB Hospital. He denied all the formal
   suggestions.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 14 of 68
30.      PW-8 SI E.S. Yadav was I/C Crime Team. He deposed that
   on 04.08.2011 as per request of Insp. Jaipal Singh, he had
   visited the spot i.e. DDA Quarter, Main Road, Seemapuri,
   Near Gurudwara along with his staff and inspected the spot
   from 05:15 am to 05:45 am. He further deposed that Ct.
   Shyam Lal took photographs as per his directions and he
   prepared report Ex. PW8/A. He was cross-examined by Ld.
   Defence Counsel for all the accused persons
u/s 311
Cr.P.C,
   wherein upon seeing the photo Ex. PW9/P-14, he deposed that
   no forensic light has been used on the object of the photo and
   the same is looking dark and also due to the distance from
   which the photo has been taken, i.e. across the road. He denied
   all other formal suggestions.
31.        PW-9 Ct. Shyam Lal was photographer of the Crime
   Team. He deposed that on 04.08.2011, he accompanied I/C
   Crime Team SI E.S. Yadav to the spot i.e. DDA Quarter, Main
   Road, Seemapuri, Near Gurudwara at about 05:15 am and took
   seven photographs as per directions of SI E.S. Yadav and later
   on handed over the positive photographs to the IO Insp. Jaipal
   Singh. He proved the negatives Ex. PW9/P1 to Ex. PW9/P7
   and positive photographs Ex. PW9/P8 to Ex. PW9/P14. PW-9
   was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for all the
   accused persons upon being recalled
u/s 311
Cr.P.C, but there
   are no material contradictions.
32.        PW-10 SI Mukesh Jain was Draughtsman. He deposed
   that on 18.10.2011, he was called by IO Insp. Jaipal Singh at
   the spot i.e. Road no. 64, Near DDA Quarter, Gurudwara, New

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 15 of 68
Seemapuri, Delhi. He further deposed that he went to the spot
   and found IO and one PW Sanjeev @ Pappu present there. He
   further deposed that he took measurements, prepared rough
   notes and rough site plan at the spot as per the pointing out of
   PW Sanjeev @ Pappu and Insp. Jaipal Singh. He further
   deposed that on the basis of rough notes and measurement, he
   prepared scaled site plan Ex. PW10/A and handed over to the
   IO.
33.      PW-10 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsels for
   the accused persons upon being recalled
u/s 311
Cr.P.C, but
   there are no material contradictions.
34.        PW-11 HC Dinesh was MHCM who deposed regarding
   the depositing of sealed pullandas and case properties in the
   malkhana. He proved the relevant entries of register no. 19 as
   Ex. PW11/A (colly). He further proved the relevant entry of
   RC register as Ex. PW11/B and copy of acknowledgement as
   Ex. PW11/C. He was not cross examined by Ld. Defence
   Counsel despite opportunity given.
35.      PW-12 Ct. Jaswant Singh was special messenger /
   motorcycle rider who proved the handing over of copies of the
   FIR to the area Ld. MM, Joint CP, NDR, DCP, North-East and
   DCP I & II of North-East District. He was not cross examined
   by Ld. Defence Counsel despite opportunity given.
36.      PW-13 Ct. Dhanender was a formal witness. He deposed
   that on 28.08.2011, he along with SI Hukam Singh were on

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 16 of 68
patrolling duty and they were inquiring about accused
   Narender @ Bittoo as SI Hukam Singh received a secret
   information that accused Narender @ Bittoo would be coming
   from toll tax gate side and will go to his house at DDA
   Quarters. He further deposed that after some time, accused
   Narender @ Bittoo came from toll tax side and they
   apprehended him. He further deposed that SI Hukam Singh
   arrested accused Narender @ Bitto and accused Narender took
   them to his house and a danda stained with cow-dung was
   recovered from his house. He further deposed that after taking
   danda into possession, they returned to PS.
37.      PW-13 was cross examined by Ld. APP for the State as he
   was resiling from his previous statement. He admitted that his
   statement was recorded by IO Insp. Jaipal Singh on
   28.08.2011. He further deposed that he alongwith SI Hukam
   Singh and SHO Jaipal Singh went to 70 foota Road in search
   of accused Narender @ Bittoo. He admitted that as per the
   pointing out of the secret informer, accused Narender @ Bittoo
   was apprehended by them and accused Narender @ Bittoo was
   arrested vide arrest memo Ex. PW13/B and was personally
   searched vide memo Ex. PW13/C. He also admitted that
   accused Narender @ Bittoo was interrogated by IO and his
   disclosure statement was recorded vide memo Ex. PW13/D.
   He also admitted that the danda was sealed with the seal of
   'JPS' and was seized vide seizure memo Ex. PW13/E. He also
   admitted that accused Narender Kumar @ Bittoo had also
   pointed out the spot to the IO i.e. DDA Quarters, Near
   Gurudwara 64 foota road, New Seemapuri, Delhi and IO

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 17 of 68
prepared pointing out memo Ex. PW13/F. He correctly
   identified the case property i.e. bambo danda Ex. P1. PW-13
   was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for the accused
   persons, but there are no material contradictions.
38.      PW-14 W/Ct. Deepu Yadav was a formal witness. She
   proved the PCR form Ex. PW14/A (two pages). She was not
   cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel despite opportunity
   given.
39.      PW-15 Ct. Prem Singh was a formal witness. He deposed
   that on 03.08.2011, he accompanied SI Lala Ram and Ct.
   Ramesh to the spot i.e. near Gurudwara, DDA Quarters, New
   Seemapuri, Delhi where they got the information that the
   injured had been shifted to GTB Hospital. He further deposed
   that he along with SI Lala Ram went to GTB Hospital and Ct.
   Ramesh remained at the spot. He further deposed that IO
   collected the MLC of Anil Kumar, where the doctor declared
   the Anil Kumar 'brought dead'. He further deposed that IO
   also collected the MLC of other injured Sanjeev Kumar, where
   the doctor declared injured as 'unfit for statement'. He further
   deposed that complainant Raj Kumar met the IO and gave a
   written complaint to him and IO gave his endorsement,
   prepared the rukka and handed over the same to PW-15, who
   took the same to PS and after registration of FIR, investigation
   was marked to Insp. Jaipal Singh and he handed over original
   rukka and copy of FIR to IO Insp. Jaipal Singh.
40.      PW-15 further deposed that he along with Insp. Jaipal

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 18 of 68
Singh and complainant Raj Kumar reached at the spot and I/C
   Crime Team SI E.S. Yadav and photographer Ct. Shyam Lal
   met them there. He further deposed that photographer took the
   photographs of the spot and I/C Crime Team handed over his
   inspection report to IO. He further deposed that IO prepared
   the site plan as per the pointing out of complainant Ex. PW2/B
   and seized a pair of sandals, which was lying at the spot, blood
   stained and sample earth vide memo Ex. PW15/A. He further
   deposed that he accompanied the IO to GTB Hospital where
   postmortem of the dead body was conducted on 04.08.2011
   and the dead body was handed over to the relative of deceased.
   He further deposed that after postmortem, doctor handed over
   to him one sealed pullanda, one envelope sealed pullanda and
   one sample seal, which he handed over to the IO and IO seized
   the same vide memo Ex. PW15/B.
41.      PW-15 further deposed that he alongwith IO and
   complainant went DLF mor, New Seemapuri, Delhi for search
   of accused and as per pointing out of complainant, accused
   Inder Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday and Raju Singh were
   arrested and personally searched by IO. He further deposed
   that IO recorded disclosure statements of accused Inder Kumar
   @ Titu, Vijay Panday and Raju Singh and they took the police
   party to the spot and as per their pointing out, IO prepared
   pointing out memo. He further deposed that as per disclosure
   statements of accused persons, accused Raju Singh got a
   blood-stained stone piece recovered from the corner of the
   rickshaw garage, accused Vijay Panday got one beth ka char
   (danda) recovered from underneath the bed and accused Inder

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 19 of 68
Kumar @ Titu got a bamboo danda recovered from the tand of
   his house. He further deposed that IO seized the case
   properties vide Ex. PW2/N, Ex. PW2/O, and Ex. PW2/P
   respectively. He correctly identified the case properties.
42.      PW-15 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for
   the accused persons wherein he stated that they reached at
   GTB Hospital at 12:45 am, but injured Vijay Panday was not
   present in the hospital at that time. He stated that injured Vijay
   Panday met him at about 03:30 am. He further deposed that
   the stone recovered at the instance of accused Raju was hidden
   in the grass and was not visible. There are no other material
   contradictions in his cross-examination.
43.      PW-20 W/Ct. Rukshana was a formal witness. She
   deposed on the similar lines as deposed by PW-14. She proved
   the attested copy of PCR form as Ex. PW20/A. She was not
   cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for accused persons
   despite opportunity give.
44.      PW-23 Ct. Ramesh Kumar was a formal witness who had
   accompanied 1st IO / SI Lala Ram. He deposed on the similar
   lines as deposed by PW-15. He corroborated the arrest memos,
   personal search memos and disclosure statements of the
   accused persons as proved by PW-2. He also corroborated the
   seizure memos of the case properties and correctly identified
   the case properties produced in the court during his evidence.
   PW-23 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for the
   accused persons, wherein he stated that at the spot, many

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 20 of 68
stones were lying, which suggested that a fight had taken place
   at the spot. He stated that they had not made any inquiry from
   the other family members of the accused persons, who had
   reached at the spot. He admitted that he had not seen any
   visible injury on the body of complainant Raj Kumar. He
   admitted that the concrete / stone found at the spot were all
   blood stain. He stated that IO had not examined any family
   members of complainant Raj Kumar and his brother Sanjeev
   Kumar, to verify their version. He denied all other formal
   suggestions put to him.
45.      PW-24 SI Hukam Singh had accompanied IO Insp. Jaipal
   Singh in the investigation. He deposed on the same lines as
   PW-13 Ct. Dhanander. PW-24 correctly identified the case
   property i.e. danda during his evidence in the Court. He was
   cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for all the accused
   persons, but there are no material contradictions.
46.      PW-25 Insp. Jaipal Singh was the 2nd IO. He deposed that
   on 03-04.08.2011, he received an information regarding the
   alleged incident vide DD no. 51A, Ex. PW25/A at around
   11:58 pm (midnight). He further deposed that upon receiving
   the information, SI Lala Ram along with Ct. Prem Singh and
   Ct. Ramesh Kumar went to the spot. He further deposed that
   he came to know that injured Anil Kumar had expired and then
   he along with other staff went to the GTB Hospital where SI
   Lala Ram met them and handed over the MLC of deceased
   Anil to him. He further deposed that he took up the
   investigation of this case and complainant Raj Kumar had also

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 21 of 68
met him in the Hospital.
47.      PW-25 further deposed that he along with SI Lala Ram, Ct.
   Prem Singh and complainant reached at the spot i.e. DDA
   Quarters, New Seemapuri, Delhi. He further deposed that
   Crime Team headed by SI E.S. Yadav also reached at the spot
   and inspected the spot and gave their report Ex. PW8/A. He
   further deposed that he prepared site plan Ex. PW25/B at the
   instance of complainant. He further deposed that a pair of
   sandals of deceased Anil Kumar and blood was found lying at
   the spot. He further deposed that he took the sandals belonging
   to the deceased and kept them in a plastic container. He further
   deposed that he also seized blood-stained earth control and
   normal earth control and kept them in separate plastic
   containers.
48.      PW-25 further deposed that he along with complainant and
   other staff left the spot in search of accused persons, but they
   could not be traced. He further deposed that he along with staff
   went to the GTB Hospital mortuary, where father of deceased,
   namely Furti Lal, met him and identified the dead body of
   deceased Anil Kumar. He further deposed that he prepared the
   inquest papers Ex. PW25/C, containing a request for
   postmortem, copy of MLC, brief facts, death summary, copy
   of DD no. 51A and 7A and identification statement, etc. He
   deposed that after the postmortem, the dead body of deceased
   was handed over to the family member of the deceased vide
   Ex. PW25/D. He further deposed on the same lines as PW-2
   (injured/complainant) and proved the arrest and other

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 22 of 68
proceedings qua accused Inder Kumar @ Titu, accused Vijay
   Panday and accused Raju Singh. He corroborated the arrest
   memo, personal search memos and disclosure statements of
   the said accused persons. He also corroborated the pointing out
   memo of the place of incident, prepared at the instance of the
   accused persons. He also corroborated the seizure memos of
   the case properties, recovered at the instance of the accused
   persons.
49.      PW-25 further proved the arrest of accused Narender
   Kumar @ Bitto and deposed on the same lines as PW13. He
   corroborated the arrest memo, personal search memo,
   disclosure statement of accused Narender Kumar @ Bitto and
   pointing out memo prepared at his instance. PW-25 also
   corroborated the seizure memo of a danda recovered at the
   instance of the said accused. He also corroborated the road
   certificate of the exhibits sent to the FSL, as proved in the
   testimony of PW-11. PW-25 correctly identified all the case
   properties produced during his evidence, as proved in the
   testimony of PW-2. Further, he also correctly identified one
   blood cloth piece, blood earth control containing blood and
   another earth control, which are Ex.
Article 1
, Ex.
Article 2
,
   and Ex.
Article 3.
50.      PW-25 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for
   the accused persons, wherein he admitted that Ex. PW2/A was
   written in his presence, but he could not say in whose writing
   is the complaint Ex. PW2/A. He further deposed that he came
   to know that accused Inder Panday and Vijay Panday had

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 23 of 68
received injuries in the night of 03/04.08.2011. He further
   deposed that he was informed about the said injuries of the
   accused persons by IO SI Lala Ram. He further deposed that
   he did not find any independent witness to the incident and,
   therefore, could not examine any other person. He further
   deposed that on 28.10.2011, he had sent a request to the In-
   charge PCR to provide the PCR form i.e. Ex. PW 14/A and on
   perusing the PCR form, he came to know that deceased Anil
   had received brick injuries on his mouth and nose, and two
   other injured persons/ accused Vijay and Titu were found at the
   spot, who informed the police that they had received beatings
   by a badmash, namely Pappu, when they asked him not to
   consume alcohol. He deposed that he did not investigate
   regarding the facts disclosed in the PCR form, as in his view,
   the said injuries were received during quarrel, and this fact was
   already stated in the PCR form. He also deposed to a specific
   question, that the medical documents of the accused persons
   were not attached with the charge-sheet, however, the MLCs
   of the accused persons were deposited in the hospital for final
   opinion. He deposed that he had not sought any opinion from
   the doctors regarding the possibility of injuries, being caused
   by the weapon of offence i.e. bricks and danda. He deposed
   that he had not verified from the family of inured Sanjeev and
   Raj Kumar about leaving their house and returning to the
   house on the night of incident. PW-25 denied all the formal
   suggestions put to him regarding the investigation conducted
   by him.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 24 of 68
c) Formal independent witnesses:
51.      PW-16 Sh. Rajeev Ranjan, Nodal Officer, Tata Tele
   Services Ltd. He brought the customer application form (CAF)
   of mobile phone no. 9250618900 which was alloted to Sanjeev
   Kumar and proved the same as Ex. PW 16/A and the copy of
   voter ID Card of Sanjeev Kumar as Ex. PW16/B. He also
   proved the CDR of said mobile no. 9250618900 from
   03.08.2011 and 04.08.2011 as Ex. PW16/C. He also brought
   call ID chart showing the location of mobile no. 9250618900
   and the tower dated 03.08.2011 and 04.08.2011 as Ex.
   PW16/D. He also proved the certificate regarding call details
   as Ex. PW16/E.
52.      PW-16 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for
   the accused persons wherein he was confronted with two calls
   made by Sanjeev Kumar from his mobile number on
   03.08.2011 at around 11:36 pm and 11:34 pm. However, there
   are no material contradictions.
53.      PW-17 Shishir Malhotra was Nodal Officer of Aircel Ltd.
   He brought the customer application form (CAF) of mobile no.
   8802284127 which was alloted to Sanjeev Kumar s/o Ram
   Dulare and proved the same as Ex. PW17/A and also proved
   photocopy of voter ID card of Sanjeev Kumar as Ex. PW17/B.
   PW-7 also proved computer generated call details of the said
   mobile phone from 03.08.2011 to 04.08.2011 as Ex. PW17/C
   and cell ID charge showing location of mobile phone and the
   tower dt. 03.08.2011 and 04.08.11 as Ex. PW17/D. He also
   proved the certificate regarding call details as Ex. PW17/E. He

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 25 of 68
was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for the accused
   persons, wherein he admitted one incoming call on the said
   mobile number at 23:28:09 hours on 03.08.2011. However,
   there are no material contradictions.
d) Doctors/Experts as witnesses:
54.      PW-18 Dr. Neha Gupta was the Doctor from Department
   of Forensic Medicines, GTB Hospital who deposed that on
   04.08.2011, she conducted postmortem examination on the
   body of deceased Anil s/o Furti Lal, aged 35 years. She proved
   the PM report bearing no. 1042/11 dt. 04.08.2011 as Ex.
   PW18/A and proved her observations recorded in the same.
   She also deposed regarding the external and internal injuries
   found on the dead body, during her examination, and there
   were around 16 external injuries found on the body of the
   deceased. She deposed that the cause of death as per the
   postmortem was "shock as a result of antemortem injury to
   head produced by blunt force impact" and time since death
   was about 12 hours. She specifically deposed that injuries no.
   11,12,13 & 14 was sufficient to cause death individually, as
   well as collectively, to cause death in the ordinary course of
   nature.
55.      PW-18 was cross-examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for all
   the accused persons, wherein she deposed that abrasions,
   bruises, contusions and grazes can be caused on the body of a
   human being, if the stones and bricks are hurled at him. She
   further deposed that laceration can be caused if a stone of
   sufficient size is hurled with sufficient force. She also deposed

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 26 of 68
that simple abrasion cannot cause death of its own. Upon
   specific question asked to PW-18, she deposed that injury no.
   12 is present over the forehead, which is causing underlying
   injury of the brain, which is the cause of the death. She also
   specifically deposed that injury no. 14 is present over the
   forehead, which is causing underlying injury of the brain,
   which is the cause of the death.
56.      PW-19 Dr. P. Ram was the CMO of GTB Hospital. He
   deposed that on 4.08.2011 at about 12:30 am (midnight),
   injured Anil s/o Khushi Lal was brought to casualty of GTB
   Hospital by HC Rishi Pal with alleged history of physical
   assault. He proved the MLC no. A-4489/11 of deceased Anil as
   Ex. PW19/A. He also proved the MLC no. 4470/11 of injured
   Sanjeev Kumar as Ex. PW19/B.
57.      PW-19 was cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel for all
   the accused persons wherein MLC no. B-4495/11 Ex. PW
   19/DA of injured Vijay was shown to him. He was also shown
   one emergency card of injured Vijay as Ex. PW19/DB, and
   emergency card of accused Titu has Ex. PW19/DC. He stated
   that as per MLC, injured Vijay was referred to Neuro Trauma
   ward for further management and treatment. He further stated
   that as per the MLC of Sanjeev, the smell of alcohol was not
   found positive. There are no other material contradictions in
   his cross-examination.
58.      PW-21 Dr. Neha Jain was doctor from Department of ENT,
   GTB Hospital, who proved the opinion given by Dr. Pankaj

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 27 of 68
Verma on MLC Ex. PW19/B, wherein he had opined the
   nature of injuries as 'simple'. She was not cross examined by
   Ld. Defence Counsel despite opportunity given.
59.      PW-22 Dr. Nagender was doctor from Department of
   Neuro Surgery, who also proved the injuries of injured Sanjeev
   Kumar on his MLC no. C-4470/11, Ex. PW19/B, as 'simple' in
   nature. He was not cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel
   despite opportunity given.
60.      PW-26 Ms. Manisha Upadhyaya was Assistant Director
   (Biology), FSL, Rohini, who proved her detailed biological
   report as Ex. PW26/A and serological report as Ex. PW26/B.
   She also proved the forwarding letter as Ex. PW26/C. She was
   not cross examined by Ld. Defence Counsel despite
   opportunity given.
STATEMENT OF ACCUSED U/S 313 CR.P.C:
61.        At the time of recording of statement of the accused
   persons
u/s 313
Cr.P.C., all the incriminating evidence against
   all the accused persons brought on record by the prosecution
   were put to the accused persons separately and all the accused
   persons denied the same and have stated that they have been
   falsely implicated.
62.      Accused Inder Kumar @ Titu and accused Vijay also
   stated that the incident took place in the front of their house
   and some persons, who appeared to be drunk, were beating a
   third person with bricks and hockey sticks, and the said person

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 28 of 68
was lying on the road in a semi-conscious state. They further
   stated that accused Vijay went at the spot to save the third
   person, who was lying on the road. But, on this, those persons
   started beating accused Vijay and upon hearing the voice for
   help of accused Vijay, accused Inder Kumar @ Titu went at the
   spot to save accused Vijay and those persons also gave
   beatings to him. They further stated that PCR came at the spot
   and took them along with deceased Anil to the hospital for
   medical aid. They further stated that they told the truth to the
   police, but police concealed the same with ulterior motives and
   registered false case against them to save the culprits i.e. PW-1
   and PW-2, who did not know them by name, but implicated
   them at the instance of, and in collusion with the police, in
   order to save themselves from being prosecuted for the murder
   of deceased Anil in this case.
63.      Accused Raju also stated in his statement that police had
   falsely implicated him to protect PW-1 and PW-2, who
   appeared to have committed the said crime. He further stated
   that he was sleeping at his house at the time of incident and he
   was domestic servant of accused Inder Kumar @ Titu. He also
   stated that his name is Jagesh Kumar and his name is not
   appearing in the FIR and police falsely arrested him in the
   name of Raju in this case.
64.      Accused Narender Kumar @ Bittu also stated that he was
   falsely implicated in the present case to protect PW-1 and PW-
   2, and that he was sleeping at his home at the time of incident.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 29 of 68
65.      The accused persons also examined four persons, namely
   Smt. Kanchan as DW1, Mohd. Daud as DW-2, Smt. Sushma
   Panday as DW-3 and Ms. Payal Jain as DW-4, in their defence.
DEFENCE EVIDENCE
66.      DW-1 Smt. Kanchan was one of the neighbours of the
   accused persons and she resided near the place of incident. She
   deposed that on 03.08.2011 at about 11:00 pm, some persons
   were beating another person near the Gurudwara, Seemapuri
   Road. She further deposed that the house of the accused
   persons was at a distance of about 20 feet from the place of
   occurrence. She further deposed that she did not recognize the
   assailants or the persons being beaten. She further deposed that
   at that time, she was walking with her baby and many public
   persons were also present at the spot. She further deposed that
   on hearing the abusive shouting, accused Vijay came out of the
   house and told those persons not to fight in front of his house
   and, upon this, the assailants started hitting Vijay with sticks
   and accused Vijay received injuries on his head. She further
   deposed that accused Vijay called his uncle i.e. accused Inder
   @ Titu for help and accused Inder @ Titu came out of his
   house and the assailants started hitting Inder Kumar @ Titu.
   She further deposed that the person who was being hit by the
   assailants had already fallen on the ground when accused Vijay
   arrived and many persons were already present there. She
   further deposed that the assailants ran away from the spot
   leaving the victim at the spot when the police arrived. She
   further deposed that the police made inquiries from the public
   persons and herself and she told the aforesaid facts to the

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 30 of 68
police. There is no cross-examination of DW-1 found on the
   record.
67.      DW-2 Mohd. Daud Ali was another neighbour of the
   accused persons. He deposed that in August, 2011, in the late
   hours of night, he was taking a stroll on the road in front of
   Gurudwara, and he heard abusive shouting and he saw some
   persons were beating another person near the peepal tree on
   the road, where the cattle were tied. He further deposed that
   after about 5-7 minutes of hearing the abusive shouts, accused
   Vijay came to the spot from his house and told them not to
   create shouting in front of his house. He further deposed that
   the said persons also started beating Vijay and told him, 'Ye
   kya tere baap ki road hai'. He further deposed that the
   assailants appeared to be drunk from their mannerism. He
   further deposed that accused Vijay shouted for help and
   accused Narender Kumar @ Bittu came to the spot to help him
   and the assailants also attacked him. He further deposed that
   then there was commotion and many public persons started
   collecting and the assailants ran in the direction of Gurudwara,
   towards Mother Dairy booth. He further deposed that he did
   not try and help as he was scared of being attacked himself. He
   further deposed that 100 number call was made and some PCR
   police personnel reached at the spot and made inquiries from
   them. He further deposed that he told the police whatever he
   knew and police noted his name. DW-2 was cross examined by
   Ld. APP for State, wherein he deposed that after taking the
   stroll, he taking house at about 09:45-10:00 pm. He deposed
   that he could not tell the clothes which was injured wearing at

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 31 of 68
that time. He also deposed that he could not tell the names of
   those public persons who had gathered at the spot. He deposed
   that he came to know about the present case after two weeks of
   the incident.
68.      DW-3 Sushma Panday was wife of accused Narender
   Kumar Panday. She deposed that on 03.08.2011, at about
   12:00 midnight, she heard about some quarrel and at about
   12:00-12:15 am, the son of Titu, namely Ritik, aged about 09
   years, had come to his house and told her that his mother,
   namely Sita, was calling her. She further deposed that she
   woke up her husband and she along with her husband went to
   house of Sita, which was 15-20 steps away from her house and
   after crossing the gali. She further deposed that Sita told them
   that Inder and Vijay had some quarrel outside and some police
   officials had come and took them to GTB Hospital.
69.      DW-3 further deposed that they went to the GTB hospital
   and in the hospital, they found that MLC of Vijay had been
   prepared and he was having injuries on his head. She further
   deposed that they also saw Inder Kumar @ Titu, who was also
   having injuries on his person. She further deposed that when
   they were coming down with Vijay and Inder, some police
   officials came to the hospital and took both of them away. She
   further deposed that her husband came back to the house with
   her and they went to meet accused Vijay at Tihar Jail. She
   further deposed that after 4-5 days, she had gone to PS
   Seemapuri to lodge FIR, however, police did not record her
   complaint and rather, the SHO threatened her that if she tries

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 32 of 68
to lodge FIR, they would implicate her husband and other
   family members as well. She further deposed that after about
   25 days, she took her husband to police station Seemapuri as
   police officials were threatening to take away her daughters, if
   her husband would not go to the PS, and at the PS, her
   husband was falsely arrested in this case and sent to jail.
70.      DW-3 was cross examined by Ld. APP for State, where she
   deposed that she had reached the house of accused Inder
   Kumar @ Titu at about 12:00-12:15 midnight and the spot of
   incident was not on the way, and deposed that the spot of
   incident was about 25-30 ft. away from the house of accused
   Inder. She further deposed that when she reached at the house
   of accused Inder, nobody was present at the spot and even no
   PCR van was there. She further deposed that she came to
   know about the incident from the wife of her dewar. She
   admitted that she could not specify who had caused injuries to
   whom or whether they were actually involved or not. She
   further deposed that she had not made any complaint in
   writing to senior police officials regarding false implication of
   her husband. She denied all other formal suggestions.
71.      DW-4 Payal Jain was the neighbour of accused Inder
   Kumar @ Titu. She deposed that prior to 03.08.2011, on one
   day, she was at one shop where one Sanjeev @ Pappu was
   harassing her and abusing her. She further deposed that her
   neighbour Inder Kumar @ Titu had helped her in lodging the
   complaint and she along with her mother and accused Inder
   Kumar @ Titu had gone to PS for lodging the complaint. She

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 33 of 68
further deposed that the said case was later on compounded by
   her and was disposed of. During her cross-examination by Ld.
   APP for the State, she admitted that she was not aware of the
   facts of the present.
ARGUMENTS:
72.        Ld. APP for the State has submitted that the material
   witnesses i.e. PW-1 and PW-2, who are also the injured in the
   present case, have supported the case of the prosecution
   against all the four accused persons beyond all reasonable
   doubts and there is sufficient incriminating evidence against
   all the four accused persons. It is submitted that the presence
   of the accused persons at the spot has not been disputed, and in
   fact, the defence witnesses have also supported the fact that the
   accused persons were present in the quarrel / scuffle which
   took place at the spot. It is submitted that the accused persons
   were armed with lathis and dandas and they gave merciless
   beatings to the deceased, who succumbed to the said injuries
   and was declared as 'brought dead' by the doctors. It is
   submitted that serious injuries were also inflicted on the head
   of injured Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu, which could have been
   fatal. It is submitted that simple injuries were also given to
   injured / complainant Raj Kumar in the incident. It is
   submitted that the injuries have been corroborated from the
   testimonies of the prosecution witnesses. It is further submitted
   that no contrary evidence has been led by the accused persons
   to rebut the charges against them.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 34 of 68
73.        Thus, on the basis of these submissions, Ld. APP for the
   State has submitted that all the accused persons be convicted
   for the offences
u/s 302
/
308
/
323
/
34
IPC.
74.      On the other hand, respective Ld. Defence Counsels for all
   the accused persons have submitted that the prosecution has
   not been able to prove its case against any of the accused
   beyond all reasonable doubts. It is submitted that in fact,
   injured Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and injured Raj Kumar were
   the assailants, who had given beatings to the accused persons
   on the day of incident. It is submitted that injured Sanjeev
   Kumar @ Pappu was under the influence of alcohol on that
   day and he was quarreling with a TSR driver, and upon
   hearing the quarrel, accused Vijay Panday went to the spot and
   intervened in the quarrel and told them not to fight at the spot
   and disturb the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood. It is
   submitted that upon this, injured Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu
   starting abusing him and gave beatings to accused Vijay
   Panday. It is submitted that upon hearing the cries of accused
   Vijay Panday, accused Inder Kumar @ Titu also reached the
   spot and tried to save him.
75.      It is submitted that the first call to the PCR was made by
   accused Vijay Panday, and this fact is also mentioned in the
   PCR form Ex. PW14/A. It is submitted that accused Vijay
   Panday had also suffered injuries on the day of the incident,
   which fact has not been denied by the prosecution witnesses. It
   is submitted that later, accused Vijay Panday, Inder Kumar @
   Titu, and other two co-accused i.e. accused Raju Singh and

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 35 of 68
Narender Kumar @ Bittu, were falsely implicated in the
   present case. It is submitted that the wife of accused Narender
   Kumar @ Bittu also tried to lodge police complaint, but police
   did not take any action.
76.      It is submitted that there are also several ambiguities and
   discrepancies in the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses
   and both PW-1 and PW-2 had admitted that at the time of
   offence, they only knew the name of accused Inder Kumar @
   Titu. It is argued that they have falsely implicated the other
   accused persons out of personal vengeance. It is submitted
   that no motive has been proved by the prosecution during the
   entire trial. It is submitted that in view of several ambiguities
   in the depositions of material witnesses and several loopholes
   in the prosecution case, the accused persons are entitled to the
   benefit of doubt.
77.      Hence, in view of the said submissions, Ld. Defence
   Counsels have prayed that all the four accused persons be
   acquitted for the charges
u/s 302
/
308
/
323
/
34
IPC.
PERUSAL OF THE RECORD:
78.      The submissions of Ld. Counsels for all the three accused
   persons as well as Ld. APP for the State have been heard at
   length. The charge-sheet as well as all the material documents
   available on the record and all the evidence recorded by the
   prosecution to prove their case, has been thoroughly perused.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 36 of 68
SETTLED PROPOSITIONS OF LAW:
79.      It is settled law that in a case where the testimony of a
    witness is found to be reliable, the conviction can be based
    even on the sole testimonies of such truthful and trustworthy
    witnesses. The Hon'ble Apex Court has time and again
    determined the parameters on the basis of which the
    credibility/ truthfulness of a witness can be ascertained.
80.
In the case of
Bankey Lal v. State of UP1
, it was observed
    by Hon'ble Apex Court that in a case where prosecution
    witnesses are proved to have not deposed truly in all respects,
    then their evidence is required to be scrutinized with care. It
    is, therefore, evident that eye witnesses' account would require
    a careful independent assessment and evaluation for their
    credibility, which should not be adversely prejudged taking
    any other evidence, including medical evidence, as the sole
    touchstone for the test of such credibility.
81.      The law regarding reliability of a witness has been dealt by
    Hon'ble Supreme Court in judgment titled as Mahendra
    Singh and ors. v. State of M.P.2, wherein Hon'ble Supreme
    Court reiterated the observations of a three judge-bench
    decision in
Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras3
which
    observed as under:-
"On a consideration of the relevant authorities and the provisions of
       the
Indian Evidence Act
, the following propositions may be safely
       stated as firmly established:
1
AIR 1971 SC 2233.
2
Criminal Appeal NO.764 & 765 of 2021 (decided on 3rd June, 2022).
3
AIR 1957 SC 614.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 37 of 68
(1) As a general rule, a court can and may act on the testimony of a
       single witness though uncorroborated. One credible witness out-
weighs the testimony of a number of other witnesses of indifferent
       character.
(2) Unless corroboration is insisted upon by statute, courts should not
       insist on corroboration except in cases where the nature of the testi-
       mony of the single witness itself requires as a rule of prudence, that
       corroboration should be insisted upon, for example in the case of a
       child witness, or of a witness whose evidence is that of an accomplice
       or of an analogous character.
(3) Whether corroboration of the testimony of a single witness is or is
       not necessary, must depend upon facts and circumstances of each case
       and no general rule can be laid down in a matter like this and much
       depends upon the judicial discretion of the Judge before whom the
       case comes.
xxxxxxx

       ...Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law
       that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity
       of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally
       speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three
       categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in
          coming to its conclusion either way -- it may convict or may acquit
          on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above
          reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or
          subornation. In the second category, the court equally has no
          difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
          cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for
          corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or
          circumstantial."
FINDINGS OF THE COURT:
82.      Having heard the submissions made by Ld. APP for the
   State as well as Ld. Counsel for all the four accused persons
   and after going through the entire evidence as brought forth
   before this Court, following findings are recorded:
Ocular evidence:
83.      Ocular evidence/ eye witness count is the best evidence in

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 38 of 68
any case, but it is settled law that the testimonies of the eye
   witnesses are required to be carefully analyzed to test the
   reliability, credibility and truthfulness of the witness. Though
   minor infirmities and discrepancies are bound to occur in the
   normal course, yet in a case where the various eye witnesses
   corroborate each other on material aspects connected with the
   offence, there is no reason to reject their testimonies.
84.      Since, the prosecution is placing its heavy reliance on the
   testimony of PW1 Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and PW2 Raj
   Kumar, it is, therefore, necessary for this Court to first
   determine whether their testimonies are reliable and truthful.
   Both the said witnesses PW1 Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and
   PW2 Raj Kumar, were also the injured/victims in the present
   case, and they both had also seen the accused persons giving
   merciless beatings to deceased Anil Kumar, which caused his
   death. Both the said witnesses have duly corroborated the
   entire incident and have supported the case of the prosecution.
   Both the said injured victims/witnesses i.e. PW1 Sanjeev
   Kumar @ Pappu and PW2 Raj Kumar have also identified the
   accused persons in the Court and also specified their roles in
   the commission of offence and the entire sequence of events
   which followed on the day of the incident.
85.      PW-1 / Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu had deposed that on the
   day of incident i.e. 03.08.2011 at about 11:20-11:30 pm, when
   he was requesting to a rickshaw puller to take him to GTB
   Hospital, 4-5 persons from the garage came at the spot and
   gave beatings to him. He called his elder brother i.e. PW-2 /

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 39 of 68
Raj Kumar and informed him about the incident that 4-5
   persons are giving beatings to him and asked him to reach at
   the spot. PW-2 / Raj Kumar reached at the spot with his
   neighbour Anil Kumar (deceased), and met PW-1/Sanjeev
   Kumar @ Pappu, who informed them about the happening of
   the incident with him. While PW-1 / Sanjeev Kumar was
   narrating facts to his brother (PW-2) and Anil Kumar
   (deceased), 4-5 persons came at the spot again armed with
   danda and they rebuked them and all of them gave beatings to
   PW-1, PW-2 and Anil Kumar (deceased) with dandas. PW-1
   further deposed that while beating them, the accused persons
   threatened him that since he had called his well-wishers at the
   spot, they would kill all of them. PW-1 further deposed that
   while the accused persons were giving them merciless beatings
   with dandas, he along with his brother (PW-2), escaped from
   the spot, while Anil Kumar could not escape as he had suffered
   serious injuries and was unable to run from the spot.
86.      Both PW-1 and PW-2 narrated the entire incident while
   deposing before the Court. They also deposed that the accused
   persons continued giving beatings to said Anil Kumar, when
   PW-1 and PW-2 looked back while escaping from the spot. It
   is pertinent from the testimony of the said witnesses i.e. PW1
   Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and PW2/ Raj Kumar, who are also
   the injured eye witnesses, that they have stood by their
   version. Their testimonies have their own efficacy and
   relevancy and the fact that they had sustained injuries on their
   body would show that they were present at the place of


State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 40 of 68
occurrence and had seen the occurrence by themselves 4.
      Evidence of injured eye-witness cannot be discarded in toto on
      grounds       of     criminal      disposition       towards       accused          or
      improbability of narrating the details of actual incident.
87.        Further, PW-1 and PW-2 had correctly identified all the
      accused persons while deposing before the Court as the
      persons who were present at the spot and who had committed
      the offence in question. They also remained consistent during
      their cross-examination, and could not be rebutted by the
      defence despite a lengthy and sustained cross-examination.
      The defence raised an argument that PW-1 and PW-2 had
      admitted that they did not know any other accused persons,
      except accused Inder Kumar, prior to the day of incident. It is
      argued that the said witnesses i.e. PW-1 and PW-2 had been
      tutored during the investigation by the police, who mentioned
      the names of the accused persons to the said witnesses, and for
      this reason, the said accused persons have been named by PW-
      1 and PW-2 during their depositions.
88.        However, the said argument of the defence is fallacious as
      PW-2 / Raj Kumar, who is also the complainant in the present
      case had also mentioned the names of accused persons in the
      rukka, which is Ex. PW2/A, and which was prepared on the
      day of incident itself. Moreover, both PW-1 and PW-2 have
      also identified the accused persons before the Court, and there
      is no contrary evidence on the record to dispute the identity of
      the accused persons. Even otherwise, the presence of the
4
Reference:
Mohar v. State of UP
, 2002 AIR (SC) 3279: 2002 Cri.L.J. 4310.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 41 of 68
accused persons at the spot have not been disputed.
89.      The defence had taken a plea that, in fact, PW-1 and PW-2
   had given beatings to the accused persons on the day of
   incident and accused Vijay Panday had suffered injuries on his
   head as result of the said beatings. However, there is no
   explanation by the defence why no criminal action was taken
   by the accused persons for the said incident. Ergo, by the said
   very plea, the defence has itself admitted that the alleged
   incident had taken place and the accused persons were present
   at the spot at the time of the incident. The said fact has also
   been substantiated by the testimonies of the defence witnesses
   examined by the accused persons, who have also corroborated
   the fact that the alleged incident had taken place and the
   accused persons were present at the spot at the time of the
   incident.
90.      It is also pertinent to mention that the testimony of defence
   witnesses is also contradictory on several counts. While DW1
   deposed about the presence of accused Vijay Panday and Inder
   Kumar at the spot, DW2 deposed about the presence of
   accused Vijay Panday and Narender Kumar @ Bittu. On the
   contrary, DW3, who is also the wife of accused Narender
   Kumar @ Bittu, deposed that accused Narender was sleeping
   at home. It is clearly evident that none of the defence
   witnesses have been consistent in their depositions. In any
   case, the presence of the accused persons at the spot and the
   happening of the incident is undisputed by the defence.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 42 of 68
91.         Hence, on perusal of the evidence tested in the light of
     broad probabilities, it can be concluded that the said eye-
     witnesses (PW-1 and PW-2) are natural witnesses and they
     could not have concocted a baseless case against the accused
     persons. Further, in the case of
State of Madhya Pradesh v.
     Mansingh & Ors.5
, the Supreme Court of India held that
     evidence of injured witnesses has greater evidentiary value,
     unless compelling reasons exist.
92.       A plain reading of the testimonies of injured PW1 Sanjeev
     Kumar @ Pappu and PW2 Raj Kumar confirms the presence
     of all the accused persons Inder Kumar, Vijay Panday, Raju
     Singh and Narender Kumar at the spot and also confirms the
     role attributed to them. There is no reason to disbelieve the
     testimonies of PW1 Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and PW2 Raj
     Kumar and, thus, both the witnesses are credible, reliable and
     trustworthy.
Medical Evidence:
93.       The case of the prosecution is that in the incident PW1
     Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu and PW2 Raj Kumar had received
     injuries and were rushed to the hospital, where they were
     medically examined. In this regard, the prosecution has placed
     its reliance upon the testimonies of Dr. P. Ram (PW-19), Dr.
     Neha Jain (PW21) and Dr. Nagender (PW22).
94.       PW-19 was the CMO of GTB Hospital, who proved the
     MLC prepared by the concerned doctor, who was in the
5
2003 (10) SCC 414.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 43 of 68
casualty ward of the hospital, when the deceased Anil Kumar
   was brought to the hospital with a history of physical assault.
   PW-19 proved the MLC and stated that the patient was
   declared as 'brought dead' and his dead body was sent to the
   mortuary for postmortem to detect the cause of death. PW-19
   also deposed that injured Sanjeev Kumar (PW-1) was also
   brought to the casualty of GTB Hospital by his brother Raj
   Kumar (PW-2), with a history of physical assault. He proved
   the MLC of injured Sanjeev Kumar (PW-1) and stated that the
   patient was referred to Neuro Trauma and ENT for further
   management and treatment.
95.      Further, PW-21 and PW-22 have proved the opinion on the
   injuries sustained by injured Sanjeev Kumar (PW-1), which
   were opined to be 'simple' in nature.
96.      The prosecution has also examined Dr. Neha Gupta (PW-
18), who had conducted the postmortem of deceased Anil
   Kumar, and she proved the external as well as internal injuries
   found on the dead body of deceased Anil Kumar. She proved
   the postmortem report of deceased Anil Kumar as Ex.
   PW18/A, in which the cause of death is mentioned as a result
   of antemortem injury to head produced by blunt force
   impact. On specific Court question put to the said witness, she
   categorically stated that injuries at no. 11,12, 13 & 14 as
   mentioned in the report, are sufficient to cause death
   individually, as well as collectively, to cause the death in the
   ordinary cause of nature. In fact, PW-18, specifically
   mentioned in her cross-examination that the cause of death

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 44 of 68
was injury no. 12 and injury no. 14, which were present over
   the forehead, and which had caused underlying injury of the
   brain, which was the cause of death of deceased Anil Kumar.
97.      This Court has gone through the testimonies of the
   aforesaid medical witnesses and the medical records proved by
   the said witnesses. The MLC of the injured Sanjeev Kumar @
   Pappu, which is Ex.PW19/B has been duly proved by PW 19,
   PW21 and PW 22. The postmortem report of deceased Anil
   Kumar has been proved by PW-18. All the said medical
   witnesses have remained unrebutted even during the cross-
   examination.
98.      In view of the testimonies of aforesaid witnesses, it is
   observed that the medical evidence on record in the form of
   MLC of injured Sanjeev Kumar Ex.PW19/B and the
   postmortem report of deceased Anil Kumar, which proved the
   fact that the injuries were inflicted upon the said two persons
   with dandas and lathies, corroborate the ocular evidence and
   confirms the version given by the injured persons i.e. by PW1
   and PW2. It has also come in the deposition of PW-1 that he
   had received injuries on his head, as he was bleeding from his
   head when he was taken to the hospital. Even though, the
   nature of injuries of injured Sanjeev Kumar have been opined
   as 'simple' in nature, the fact that he was hit by dandas and
   lathies on his head on the day of incident, and the head being a
   vital part of the body, the said injuries could have been fatal
   and resulted in the death of injured Sanjeev Kumar. Thus, the
   said injuries were inflicted by the accused persons with

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 45 of 68
complete intention or knowledge that the said fact could have
   caused the death of injured Sanjeev Kumar. It was by sheer
   luck that injured Sanjeev Kumar managed to escape from the
   spot with his brother Raj Kumar, but Anil Kumar, could not
   escape from the spot due to the serious injuries inflicted upon
   him with dandas and lathies, and he succumbed to the said
   injuries and died at the spot.
99.         There is nothing on record to disbelieve the ocular
   evidence as well as the medical evidence on record. The said
   fact corroborated by the fact that the presence of the accused
   persons at the spot is also not disputed, and also, the fact that
   the accused persons with a common intention had inflicted
   injuries of such nature to both injured Sanjeev Kumar and
   deceased Anil Kumar, which resulted in the death of deceased
   Anil Kumar, categorically prove the fact that the said bodily
   injuries were inflicted with an intention or with knowledge of
   causing death or with an intention or with knowledge of
   causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death of the
   person upon whom the said act is committed.
FSL Reports:
100.       The prosecution has relied upon the FSL reports from
   Biology Department prepared by PW-26 and the said reports
   have been exhibited as Ex. PW-26/A (biological report) and
   Ex. PW-26/B (serological report). However, perusal of the said
   reports reveal that said reports are not incriminating to any of
   the accused persons as only the blood was detected on certain
   exhibits and no DNA profiling was done on the said exhibits to

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 46 of 68
establish if the DNA profiling of any of the accused persons
   matched with any of the exhibits pertaining to accused
   persons. Thus, the reports Ex.PW-26/A and Ex.PW-26/B are
   not helpful to the case of the prosecution in any manner.
Apprehension / Arrest of the accused and Recovery - Proved:
101. The case of the prosecution is that on 04.08.2011, that is in
   the morning of the next day after the incident took place in the
   night of 03.08.2011, PW-2/ complainant accompanied the IO
   and other police officials to DLF more, New Seemapuri, Delhi
   and upon the pointing out of the complainant, accused Inder
   Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday and Raju Singh were arrested by
   the police.
102. The police had recovered one piece of stone stained with
   blood, at the instance of accused Raju Singh, from the corner
   of the rickshaw garage. The police also recovered one beth ka
   char (danda) at the instance of accused Vijay Panday. The
   police also recovered one bamboo danda stained with blood
   and cow-dung, at the instance of accused Inder Kumar @ Titu.
103. Further, it is the case of the prosecution that on
   28.08.2011, SI Hukam Singh along with PW-13 were doing
   patrolling duty and were making inquiries about accused
   Narender @ Bittu. Upon a secret information, the said police
   officials arrested accused Narender @ Bittu. The police also
   recovered one danda stained with cow-dung from the house of
   accused Narender @ Bittu at his instance.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 47 of 68
104. The police witnesses i.e. PW-13, PW-15, PW-23, PW-24
   and PW-25/IO have corroborated the arrest of the accused
   persons and the consequent recoveries at the instance of the
   accused persons and have proved the documents pertaining to
   their arrest, personal search, disclosure and seizure memos
   prepared by them.
105. Ld. Defence Counsels for the accused persons have
   vehemently argued that the prosecution has miserably failed to
   prove the recovery of the alleged weapons of offence i.e.
   dandas, at the instance of accused persons, as no independent
   public person has been joined and the testimony of PW2 /
   complainant Raj Kumar cannot be relied upon as he is an
   interested witness, being one of the injured and also the
   brother of injured Sanjeev Kumar. Ld. Defence Counsels also
   argued that the said proceedings regarding recoveries were
   neither photographed nor video-graphed. It is argued that the
   story so put forth by the prosecution is not plausible.
106. I have considered the rival contentions and before coming
   to the merits of the argument, it is necessary to first discuss the
   relevant provisions of law briefly. As per the provisions of
Section 27
of Indian Evidence Act, which is in the nature of a
   proviso to
Section 26
of the Act, to the extent it is relevant,
   when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
   information received from a person accused of any offence, in
   the custody of a police officer, so much of such information,
   whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly
   to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. Thus, the

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 48 of 68
requirement of law is that before the fact discovered in
     consequence of an information received from an accused is
     allowed to be proved, he (accused) needs to be in the custody
     of a police officer.
107.
Section 3
of Indian Evidence Act explains the meaning of
     the word 'Fact'. It provides that a 'fact' means and includes:
a) Anything, state of things, or relation of things, or capable of
          being perceived by the senses,
b) Any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
108. A conjoint reading of
Section 3
and
Section 27
of Indian
     Evidence Act would apply as much to a statement as would
     relate to the discovery of fact connected with the accused,
     which would be admissible in evidence. The discovery of the
     fact is not only the discovery of the articles, but also the
     discovery of the fact that the articles were kept by a particular
     accused at a particular place because in principle there is no
     difference between the statement made by the accused to the
     effect that "I will show you the person to whom I have given
     the articles" and the statement that "I will show you the place
     where I have kept the articles".
109. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
K.
     Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P.6
had exhaustively
     discussed the scope and ambit of
Section 27
of the Evidence
     Act had considered the question as to whether the statement of
     the accused to the effect that "he had hidden them (the
     ornaments)" and "would point out the place", where they
6
AIR 1962 SC 1788.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 49 of 68
were, is wholly admissible in evidence under
S. 27
or only that
     part of it is admissible where he stated that he would point out
     the place but not that part where he stated that he had hidden
     the ornaments. After considering the settled principles, Hon'ble
     Apex Court observed as under:
"......There are in our opinion two answers to this argument.
               In the first place
S. 27
itself says that where the
               statement distinctly relates to the discovery it will be
               admissible whether it amounts to a confession or not. In
               the second place, these words by themselves though they
               may show possession of the appellant would not prove
               the offence, for after the articles have been recovered the
               prosecution has still to show that the articles recovered
               are connected with the crime, i.e., in this case, the
               prosecution will have to show that they are stolen
               property. We are, therefore, of opinion that the entire
               statement of the appellant (as well as of the other
               accused who stated that he had given the ornament to
               Bada Sab and would have it recovered from him) would
               be admissible in evidence and the Sessions Judge was
               wrong in ruling out part of it......" (emphasis supplied)
110. Later in the year 1969, the three-Judges Bench of Hon'ble
     Supreme Court has in the case of Zaffar Hussain Dastagir v.
     State of Maharastra7 while dealing with the applicability of
     the provisions of Section 27 of the Indian Evident Act relied
     upon the case of
K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P.8
observed as under:
"....in order that the Section may apply the prosecution must
                establish the information given by the accused led to the
                discovery of some fact deposed to by him and the
                discovery must be of some fact which the police had not
                previously learnt from other sources and that the
                knowledge of the fact was first derived from information
                given by the accused.
The essential ingredient of the Section is that the
               information given by the accused must led to the discovery
               of the fact which is the direct outcome of such information;
7
1969 (2) SCC 872.
8
Supra.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 50 of 68
secondly only such portion of the information given as is
               distinctly connected with the said discovery is admissible
               against the accused and thirdly the discovery of the fact
               must relate to the commission of some offence..."
111. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has in the case of
State (NCT
    of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu9
reinforced the above view when it
    observed that "discovery of fact" should be read with the
    definition of "fact" as contained in
Section 3
of the Indian
    Evidence Act which defines the "fact" as meaning and
    including anything, state of things or relation of things,
    capable of being perceived by the senses and also includes any
    mental condition of which any person is conscious.
112. Applying the settled principles of law to the facts of the
    present case, it is observed that the recovery of the weapons of
    offence i.e. dandas, at the instance of the accused persons,
    would be an admissible fact under law. The defence has not
    been able to rebut the said recoveries from the house of the
    accused persons. The accused persons are stated to be running
    a dairy, and the possession of the alleged dandas with them is
    also highly probable, normally kept to tame the cattle.
113. In so far as the non-joining of independent witnesses at the
    time of recovery of said dandas, it is observed that this will not
    be fatal to the case of the prosecution. In fact, the recoveries
    were affected by the Investigating Officer from accused Inder
9
(2005) 11 SCC 600 (famously known as the Parliamentary attack case). It was held that
the provisions of
Section 27
would apply whenever there is discovery which discovery
amounts to be confirmatory in character guaranteeing the truth of the information given to
which facts the police officer had no access earlier which also includes recovery of
material object. The Hon'ble Court further observed that so much of the information as
relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered is admissible.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 51 of 68
Kumar, Vijay Panday and Raju Singh
, in the presence of PW2/
     complainant Raj Kumar, who himself is an injured eye witness
     as well as the brother of another injured i.e. PW1 Sanjeev
     Kumar. The law is well settled to the effect that the testimony
     of interested witness cannot be discarded completely. There is
     no reason as to why PW2 would depose falsely against the
     accused persons.
114. In so far as public witnesses are concerned, it is common
     experience that public persons are generally reluctant to join
     police proceedings and there is general apathy and indifference
     on the part of public to join such proceedings. This position of
     law was reiterated in
Aslam and Ors. (Mohd.) v. State10
. It was
     observed by Hon'ble High Court that reluctance of the citizens
     to join police proceedings is well known and needs to be
     recognized. It cannot be disputed that public does not want to
     get dragged in police and criminal cases and wants to avoid
     them, because of long drawn trials and unnecessary
     harassment.
115. Moreover, there is no reason to disbelieve the testimony of
     police witnesses regarding the recovery of said dandas at the
     instance of accused persons. Their testimonies cannot be
     rejected merely because they happen to be police officers. As
     observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Tahir v. State11
, no
10
2010 III AD (Delhi) 133.
Similar view was taken in
Manish v. State
, 2000 VIII AD
(Scheduled Caste/
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
) 29 and in A.
Bhai v. State, AIR 1989 SC 696, wherein it was held that we cannot be oblivious to the
reluctance of the common man to join such raiding parties organized by the police, lest they
are compelled to attend police station and Courts umpteen times at the cost of considerable
inconvenience to them, without any commensurate benefit.
11
(1996) 3 SCC 338.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 52 of 68
infirmity attaches to the testimony of police officials merely
     because they belong to the police force.
It was observed in the
     case of
Aner Raja Khima v. The State of Saurashtra12
that the
     presumption that a person acts honestly and legally applies as
     much in favour of police officers as of others. It is not proper
     and permissible to doubt the evidence of police officers.
     Judicial approach must not be to distrust and suspect their
     evidence on oath without good and sufficient ground thereof.13
116. This being the background, it can be easily inferred that
     the disclosure statements of the accused persons, to the extent
     it relates to the recovery of weapons of offence Ex. P-1, Ex.
     P2, Ex. P3 and Ex. P4 are admissible in evidence under
Section 27
of Indian Evidence Act.
Charge under
Section 308
Indian Penal Code:
117. In so far as the charge under
Section 308
Indian Penal
     Code is concerned, it is observed that to constitute an offence
     under
Section 308
IPC, it is sufficient if there is an intent
     coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not
     essential that bodily injury capable of causing death should
     have been inflicted. Although the nature of injury actually
     caused may often give considerable assistance in coming to a
     finding as to the intention of the accused, such intention may
     also be deduced from other circumstances, and may even, in
     some cases, be ascertained without any reference at all to actual
     wounds. The section makes a distinction between the act of the
12
AIR 1956 SC 217.
13
These two authorities were also relied upon by Hon'ble High Court in
Aslam & Ors.
(Mohd.) v. State
, 2010 (III) AD (Delhi) 133.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 53 of 68
accused and its result, if any. The Court has to see whether the
     act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or
     knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the Section.
     An attempt in order to be criminal need not be the penultimate
     act. It is sufficient in law, if there is present an intent coupled
     with some overt act in execution thereof. For holding this view,
     the reliance is placed upon the following rulings:-
1.
Vipin Bihari v. State of MP14
.
2.Bappa @ Bapu v. State of Maharashtra & Anr.15
.
3.
State of Maharashtra v. Kashi Rao & Ors.16
.
4.
Hari Mohan Mandal v. State of Jharkhand17
.
5.
Surender Kumar Sharma v. State18
.
118. This being the legal position, the intention can be deduced
     not only from nature of injuries caused, but also from other
     circumstances. In the instant case, the intention of the accused
     persons is manifest from the fact that they had inflicted injuries
     with dandas over the heads and other parts of body of PW1 and
     deceased Anil Kumar, and the nature of injuries have been
     opined as 'simple' in respect of injured PW1 Sanjeev Kumar.
     Perusal of the MLC of injured PW1 Sanjeev Kumar reveals
     that he suffered lacerated wounds over the forehead and
     swelling. He was referred to Neuro Trauma Center for further
     treatment.
119. In view of the abovesaid facts and circumstances and the
14
(2006) 8 SCC 799.
15
(2004) 6 SCC 485.
16
(2003) 10 SCC 434.
17
(2004) 12 SCC 220.
18
2010 III AD (Delhi) 198.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 54 of 68
legal position, it is observed that the prosecution has been able
     to prove and establish that the accused persons had caused
     injuries on the vital parts of body of PW1 Sanjeev Kumar
     which have been opined to be 'simple', with such intention or
     knowledge and under such circumstances that, if they by that
     act caused the death of the injured persons i.e. PW1 Sanjeev
     Kumar, they would be guilty of culpable homicide not
     amounting to murder.
Charge for offence
u/s 302
IPC:
120. The only question now remains to be decided by this Court
     is whether the act of the accused persons was accompanied
     with sufficient mens rea so as to conclude whether the said act
     would fall under the definition of "murder" u/s 300
IPC
, or
     whether the said act of the accused persons was coupled only
     with a knowledge that the injuries inflicted by them were likely
     to cause the death of the person upon whom they were
     inflicted, so as to fall under any of the exceptions
u/s 300
IPC.
121. In order to decide the said question, a recent judgment of
     Hon'ble Supreme Court of India titled as Anbazhagan v. The
     State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police 19, wherein after
     exhaustively analyzing the law on the difference between
     "intent" and "knowledge" under
Section 300
IPC, the Court
     observed as under:
"20. The word "intent" is derived from the word archery or aim.
           The "act" attempted to must be with "intention" of killing a man.
19
Criminal Appeal No. 2043 OF 2023 (decided on 20.07.2023).
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 55 of 68
21. Intention, which is a state of mind, can never be precisely
            proved by direct evidence as a fact; it can only be deduced or in-
            ferred from other facts which are proved. The intention may be
            proved by res gestae, by acts or events previous or subsequent to
            the incident or occurrence, on admission. Intention of a person
            cannot be proved by direct evidence but is to be deduced from the
            facts and circumstances of a case. There are various relevant cir-
            cumstances from which the intention can be gathered. Some rele-
            vant considerations are the following:-
1. The nature of the weapon used.
2. The place where the injuries were inflicted.
3. The nature of the injuries caused.
4. The opportunity available which the accused gets."
122. The Apex Court in para 26 of its judgment, also referred to
      the observations of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of
      In re Kudumula Mahanandi Reddi20, wherein the distinction
      between 'knowledge' and 'intention' is aptly explained. It is as
      under:-
"Knowledge and intention must not be confused.
17. ... Every person is presumed to intend the natural and probable
            consequences of his act until the contrary is proved. It is therefore
            necessary in order to arrive at a decision, as to an offender's inten-
            tion to inquire what the - natural and probable consequences of his
            acts would be. Once there is evidence that a deceased person, sus-
            tained injuries which were sufficient in the ordinary course of na-
            ture to cause death, the person who inflicted them could be pre-
            sumed to have intended those natural and probable consequences.
            His offence would fall under the third head of
sec. 300
, I.P.C.
18. ... A man's intention has to be inferred from what he does. But
            there are cases in which death is caused and the intention which
            can safely be imputed to the offender is less grave. The degree of
            guilt depends upon intention and the intention to be inferred must
            be gathered from the facts proved. Sometimes an act is committed
            which would not in an ordinary case inflict injury sufficient in the
            ordinary course of nature to cause death, but which the - offender
            knows is likely to cause the death. Proof of such knowledge throws
            light upon his intention.
19. ...Under Sec. 299 there need be no proof of knowledge, that the
            bodily injury intended was likely to cause death. Before deciding
            that a case of culpable homicide amounts to murder, there must be
20
AIR 1960 AP 141.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 56 of 68
proof of intention sufficient to bring it under Sec.300. Where the
           injury deliberately inflicted is more than merely 'likely to cause
           death' but sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
           death, the higher degree of guilt is presumed."
123. It has been further observed therein as under:
"26. ...Where the evidence does not disclose that there was any
           intention, to cause death of the deceased but it was clear that the
           accused had the knowledge that their acts were likely to cause
           death the accused can be held guilty under the second part of
sec.
           304
, I.P.C. The contention that in order to bring the case under the
           second part of
sec. 304
, I.P.C. it must be brought within one of the
           exceptions to sec 300,
I.P.C
. is not acceptable.
xxxxx
30. The phraseology of Sections 299 and 300 respectively of
           the
IPC
leaves no manner of doubt that under these Sections when
           it is said that a particular act in order to be punishable be done
           with such intention, the requisite intention must be proved by the
           prosecution. It must be proved that the accused aimed or desired
           that his act should lead to such and such consequences.
27. Thus, while defining the offence of culpable homicide and mur-
           der, the framers of the
IPC
laid down that the requisite intention or
           knowledge must be imputed to the accused when he committed the
           act which caused the death in order to hold him guilty for the of-
           fence of culpable homicide or murder as the case may be. The
           framers of the
IPC
designedly used the two words 'intention' and
           'knowledge', and it must be taken that the framers intended to
           draw a distinction between these two expressions. The knowledge
           of the consequences which may result in the doing of an act is not
           the same thing as the intention that such consequences should en-
           sue. Except in cases where mens rea is not required in order to
           prove that a person had certain knowledge, he "must have been
           aware that certain specified harmful consequences would or could
           follow." (Russell on Crime, Twelfth Edition, Volume 1 at page 40).
28. This awareness is termed as knowledge. But the knowledge
           that specified consequences would result or could result by doing
           an act is not the same thing as the intention that such conse-
           quences should ensue. If an act is done by a man with the knowl-
           edge that certain consequences may follow or will follow, it does
           not necessarily mean that he intended such consequences and
           acted with such intention. Intention requires something more
           than a mere foresight of the consequences. It requires a purpose-
           ful doing of a thing to achieve a particular end." (emphasis sup-
           plied)
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 57 of 68
124. Thus, in the abovesaid judgments, in order that the require-
ments of law with regard to 'intention' may be satisfied for
      holding an offence of culpable homicide proved, it is necessary
      that any of the two specific intentions must be proved. But,
      even when such intention is not proved, the offence will be
      culpable homicide if the doer of the act causes the death with
      the knowledge that he is likely by his such act to cause death,
      that is, with the knowledge that the result of his doing his act
      may be such as may result in death.
125. The Apex Court in abovesaid exceptionally delivered judg-
ment in Anbazhagan case21, discussed several precedents on
      the subject extensively, and described the difference between
Sec. 299
IPC and 300
IPC
as under22:
"SECTIONS 299 AND 300 OF THE
IPC
: -
33.
Sections 299
and
300
of the IPC deal with the definition of
             'culpable homicide' and 'murder', respectively. In terms of Section
             299, 'culpable homicide' is described as an act of causing death (i)
             with the intention of causing death or (ii) with the intention of
             causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or (iii) with
             the knowledge that such an act is likely to cause death. As is clear
             from a reading of this provision, the former part of it emphasizes
             on the expression 'intention' while the latter upon 'knowledge'.
Both these are positive mental attitudes, however, of different de-
             grees. The mental element in 'culpable homicide', that is, the men-
             tal attitude towards the consequences of conduct is one of intention
             and knowledge. Once an offence is caused in any of the three
             stated manners noted-above, it would be 'culpable homicide'. Sec-
             tion 300 of the
IPC
, however, deals with 'murder', although there
             is no clear definition of 'murder' in
Section 300
of the IPC. As has
             been repeatedly held by this Court, 'culpable homicide' is the
             genus and 'murder' is its species and all 'murders' are 'culpable
             homicides' but all 'culpable homicides' are not 'murders'. (see
Rampal Singh v. State of U.P.
, (2012) 8 SCC 289).
Xxxxx
21
Supra.
22
Ibid., in para 33 of the judgment.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.        FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 58 of 68
36. The principles stated in the case of
Virsa Singh v. State of
           Punjab
, AIR 1958 SC 465, are the broad guidelines for the courts
           to exercise their judicial discretion while considering the cases to
           determine as to which particular clause of
Section 300
of the IPC
           they fall in. This Court has time and again deliberated upon the
           crucial question of distinction between
Sections 299
and
300
of the
           IPC, i.e. 'culpable homicide' and 'murder' respectively.
In
Phulia
           Tudu v. State of Bihar
, (2007) 14 SCC 588, this Court noticed that
           confusion may arise if the courts would lose sight of the true scope
           and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these sections.
           This Court observed that the safest way of approach to the inter-
           pretation and application of these provisions seems to be to keep in
           focus the keywords used in the various clauses of these sections.
37. This Court in
Phulia Tudu
(supra) has observed that the aca-
           demic distinction between 'murder' and 'culpable homicide not
           amounting to murder' has always vexed the courts. The confusion
           is caused if courts losing sight of the true scope and meaning of the
           terms used by the legislature in these sections, allow themselves to
           be drawn into minute abstractions. The safest way of approach to
           the interpretation and application of these provisions seems to be
           to keep in focus the keywords used in the various clauses of Sec-
           tions 299 and 300 of the
IPC
."
126.       The Apex Court summed up the law in
the said judgment
as
   under23:
"60. Few important principles of law discernible from the aforesaid
         discussion may be summed up thus: --
(1) When the court is confronted with the question, what offence the
             accused could be said to have committed, the true test is to find
             out the intention or knowledge of the accused in doing the act. If
             the intention or knowledge was such as is described in Clauses
             (1) to (4) of
Section 300
of the IPC, the act will be murder even
             though only a single injury was caused.
(2) Even when the intention or knowledge of the accused may fall
             within Clauses (1) to (4) of
Section 300
of the IPC, the act of the
             accused which would otherwise be murder, will be taken out of
             the purview of murder, if the accused's case attracts any one of
             the five exceptions enumerated in that section. In the event of the
             case falling within any of those exceptions, the offence would be
             culpable homicide not amounting to murder, falling within Part
             1 of
Section 304
of the IPC, if the case of the accused is such as
             to fall within Clauses (1) to (3) of
Section 300
of the IPC. It
             would be offence under Part II of Section 304 if the case is such
             as to fall within Clause (4) of
Section 300
of the IPC. Again, the
23
Para 60 of Anbazhagan judgment (supra). The said judgment was referred again by
   another two-judges' bench of the Supreme Court of India in Shaji v. State of Kerala,
   Criminal Appeal No. 2293 Of 2023.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 59 of 68
intention or knowledge of the accused may be such that only 2nd
              or 3rd part of
Section 299
of the IPC, may be attracted but not
              any of the clauses of
Section 300
of the IPC. In that situation
              also, the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to
              murder under
Section 304
of the IPC. It would be an offence
              under Part I of that section, if the case fall within 2nd part of
              Section 299, while it would be an offence under Part II of
              Section 304 if the case fall within 3rd part of
Section 299
of the
              IPC.
(3) To put it in other words, if the act of an accused person falls
             within the first two clauses of cases of culpable homicide as
             described in
Section 299
of the IPC it is punishable under the
             first part of Section 304. If, however, it falls within the third
             clause, it is punishable under the second part of Section 304. In
             effect, therefore, the first part of this section would apply when
             there is 'guilty intention,' whereas the second part would apply
             when there is no such intention, but there is 'guilty knowledge'.
(4) Even if single injury is inflicted, if that particular injury was
             intended, and objectively that injury was sufficient in the
             ordinary course of nature to cause death, the requirements of
             Clause 3rdly to
Section 300
of the IPC, are fulfilled and the
             offence would be murder.
(5)
Section 304
of the IPC will apply to the following classes of
             cases : (i) when the case falls under one or the other of the
             clauses of Section 300, but it is covered by one of the exceptions
             to that Section, (ii) when the injury caused is not of the higher
             degree of likelihood which is covered by the expression
             'sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death' but is
             of a lower degree of likelihood which is generally spoken of as
             an injury 'likely to cause death' and the case does not fall under
             Clause (2) of
Section 300
of the IPC, (iii) when the act is done
             with the knowledge that death is likely to ensue but without
             intention to cause death or an injury likely to cause death. To put
             it more succinctly, the difference between the two parts of
Section 304
of the IPC is that under the first part, the crime of
             murder is first established and the accused is then given the
             benefit of one of the exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC, while
             under the second part, the crime of murder is never established
             at all. Therefore, for the purpose of holding an accused guilty of
             the offence punishable under the second part of
Section 304
of
             the IPC, the accused need not bring his case within one of the
             exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC.
(6) The word 'likely' means probably and it is distinguished from
             more 'possibly'. When chances of happening are even or greater
             than its not happening, we may say that the thing will 'probably
             happen'. In reaching the conclusion, the court has to place itself

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 60 of 68
in the situation of the accused and then judge whether the
              accused had the knowledge that by the act he was likely to cause
              death.
(7) The distinction between culpable homicide (
Section 299
of the
             IPC) and murder (
Section 300
of the IPC) has always to be
             carefully borne in mind while dealing with a charge under
Section 302
of the IPC. Under the category of unlawful
             homicides, both, the cases of culpable homicide amounting to
             murder and those not amounting to murder would fall. Culpable
             homicide is not murder when the case is brought within the five
             exceptions to
Section 300
of the IPC. But, even though none of
             the said five exceptions are pleaded or prima facie established
             on the evidence on record, the prosecution must still be required
             under the law to bring the case under any of the four clauses of
Section 300
of the IPC to sustain the charge of murder. If the
             prosecution fails to discharge this onus in establishing any one
             of the four clauses of
Section 300
of the IPC, namely, 1stly to
             4thly, the charge of murder would not be made out and the case
             may be one of culpable homicide not amounting to murder as
             described under
Section 299
of the IPC.
(8) The court must address itself to the question of mens rea. If
             Clause thirdly of Section 300 is to be applied, the assailant must
             intend the particular injury inflicted on the deceased. This
             ingredient could rarely be proved by direct evidence. Inevitably,
             it is a matter of inference to be drawn from the proved
             circumstances of the case. The court must necessarily have
             regard to the nature of the weapon used, part of the body
             injured, extent of the injury, degree of force used in causing the
             injury, the manner of attack, the circumstances preceding and
             attendant on the attack.
(9) Intention to kill is not the only intention that makes a culpable
             homicide a murder. The intention to cause injury or injuries
             sufficient in the ordinary cause of nature to cause death also
             makes a culpable homicide a murder if death has actually been
             caused and intention to cause such injury or injuries is to be
             inferred from the act or acts resulting in the injury or injuries.
(10) When single injury inflicted by the accused results in the
             death of the victim, no inference, as a general principle, can be
             drawn that the accused did not have the intention to cause the
             death or that particular injury which resulted in the death of the
             victim. Whether an accused had the required guilty intention or
             not, is a question of fact which has to be determined on the facts
             of each case.
(11) Where the prosecution proves that the accused had the
             intention to cause death of any person or to cause bodily injury

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 61 of 68
to him and the intended injury is sufficient in the ordinary course
              of nature to cause death, then, even if he inflicts a single injury
              which results in the death of the victim, the offence squarely falls
              under Clause thirdly of
Section 300
of the IPC unless one of the
              exceptions applies.
(12) In determining the question, whether an accused had guilty
             intention or guilty knowledge in a case where only a single
             injury is inflicted by him and that injury is sufficient in the
             ordinary course of nature to cause death, the fact that the act is
             done without premeditation in a sudden fight or quarrel, or that
             the circumstances justify that the injury was accidental or
             unintentional, or that he only intended a simple injury, would
             lead to the inference of guilty knowledge, and the offence would
             be one under Section 304 Part II of the
IPC
."
127. In the backdrop of the said judgment and the principles
   emphasized in the same, coming to the facts and circumstances
   of the present case, it is evident from the record that on the day
   of the incident, the accused persons had started a quarrel and
   confrontation initially with injured Sanjeev Kumar @ Pappu.
   After the initial confrontation, injured Sanjeev Kumar called
   his brother, namely injured Raj Kumar for his help. Injured Raj
   Kumar raised an alarm and his neighbour Anil Kumar joined
   him and together they reached at the spot to rescue Sanjeev
   Kumar. The accused persons, in the meantime, came armed
   with lathis and dandas, which fact clearly shows that they had
   the intention to cause grievous bodily injuries to the victims
   Sanjeev Kumar, his brother Raj Kumar, and Anil Kumar. All
   the accused persons attacked the victims with the said lathis
   and dandas while uttering intimidating words that since
   injured Sanjeev Kumar had called his well-wishers for help,
   they would kill them all. While attacking the victims, namely
   Sanjeev Kumar, Raj Kumar and Anil Kumar, they started
   giving them continuous blows with lathis and dandas, due to


State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 62 of 68
which victim/injured Sanjeev Kumar received injuries on his
   forehead and other parts of his body, though he managed to
   run away from the spot with the help of his brother Raj Kumar,
   who also received minor injuries (as per his deposition before
   the Court).
128. However, in the entire incident, victim Anil Kumar could
   not escape and due to the injuries inflicted upon the his body,
   he fell on the ground and succumbed to the said injuries. He
   was later declared as "brought dead" by the doctors.
129. It is clearly evident from the entire episode which took
   place on the day of the incident that the fact that the accused
   persons came armed with lathis and dandas, they had a clear
   intention to cause bodily injury to the victims. When they
   attacked the victims with said lathis and dandas, they probably
   had an intention to kill victim Sanjeev Kumar, with whom the
   quarrel was initiated. However, as regards victim Anil Kumar,
   he came at the spot only to save victim Sanjeev Kumar. It is
   another thing, that he became a victim of the circumstances to
   such an extent that he lost his life in the incident.
130. From the given facts and circumstances and on the basis of
   the evidence brought forth by the prosecution, this Court is of
   the firm belief that the accused persons did not have a "clear
   intention" or the essential "mens rea" to cause such bodily
   injury which is likely to cause the death of the accused
   persons. However, the act of the accused persons (the actus
   reus) in causing bodily injury to the three victims with lathis

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 63 of 68
and dandas, shows that they had an absolute knowledge of the
   fact that such bodily injury could result in the death of the
   victims.
131. There is neither any prior animosity nor any pre-
   meditation nor any motive proved by the prosecution in the
   entire record to show that the intention of the accused persons
   was nothing else, but to "murder" the victims. A frivolous
   defence was raised that the injured/victim Sanjeev Kumar had
   eve-teased a girl in the neighbourhood, namely Payal Jain
   (examined as DW4), however, the said witness is also not
   reliable as she has not been able to cite any specific incident of
   any such eve-teasing committed upon her. Thus, no personal
   animosity or vengeance could be gathered from the entire
   record or any other specific motive to show that the accused
   persons were reeling under an opportunity to kill injured
   Sanjeev Kumar. In fact, what can be deduced from the record
   is that the incident took place due to certain quarrel which
   occurred suddenly at the spot, probably due to the rickshaw
   not agreeing to take injured Sanjeev Kumar to GTB hospital
   upon his request, or probably because Sanjeev Kumar started
   quarreling with the rickshaw-puller for this reason, which
   disturbed the peace and tranquility of the neighbourhood, and
   which prompted accused Vijay Panday to oppose to the said
   behaviour of injured Sanjeev Kumar, which further erupted
   into a confrontation between the two and resulted into the
   commission of the offences as alleged.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 64 of 68
132. Thus, the incident started as a sudden quarrel and
   confrontation and resulted into the death of deceased Anil
   Kumar. Deceased Anil Kumar had no prior relation or concern
   with the accused persons, and thus, it cannot be inferred that
   the accused persons intended to murder deceased Anil Kumar.
   The alleged acts of the accused persons in causing bodily
   injury to deceased Anil Kumar with dandas and lathis, which
   resulted into 16 external bodily injuries on his person
   (postmortem report Ex. PW18/A), and serious injuries on his
   head (injury no. 12 and 14 as per the postmortem report), was
   with the knowledge that their act is likely to cause the death of
   the victim. The cause of death of deceased Anil Kumar as per
   the postmortem report was "shock as a result of antemortem
   injury to head produced by blunt force impact", which is
   possible in case the injuries are inflicted with the lathis and
   dandas.
133. Thus, in view of the said discussion, further strengthened
   by the settled law on the issue, the act of the accused persons
   does not fall under any of the clauses of
section 300
IPC, as no
   "guilty intention" to murder victim Anil Kumar has been
   proved, but rather the act falls under Exception 4 of
section
   300
IPC, as there has been categoric "guilty knowledge" at the
   time of commission of the offence.
FINAL CONCLUSIONS:
134. In view of the abovesaid discussion, it is observed that the
   evidence collected during the investigation, including the
   documents prepared in the present case have been proved by

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 65 of 68
the police witnesses and the injured witnesses and the identity
   of the accused persons and their presence at the spot has been
   duly established.
135. From the testimonies of victims PW1 Sanjeev Kumar @
   Pappu and PW2 Raj Kumar, coupled with the testimonies of
   other witnesses including the medical evidence on record and
   other material available on record, the prosecution has been
   able to establish its case against accused persons, namely Inder
   Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday, Raju Singh and Narender Kumar
   @ Bittu.
136. The medical evidence on record in the form of MLCs of
   the injured and the postmortem report of deceased Anil Kumar,
   and the testimonies of eye-witnesses/injured witnesses
   corroborate the ocular evidence and confirms the version of
   the prosecution and also establishes the intention and
   knowledge so attributed to the accused persons.
137. The prosecution has proved the identity of the accused
   persons, the manner in which the offence has been committed,
   the place of commission of the offence, the investigation
   including the documents prepared, and the medical evidence
   explaining the cause of death of the deceased. There is nothing
   which could shatter the veracity of the prosecution witnesses
   or falsify the claim of the prosecution. The prosecution
   witnesses have materially supported the prosecution case and
   the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses do not suffer from
   any infirmity, inconsistency or contradiction and are consistent

State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 66 of 68
and corroborative. The evidence of the prosecution witnesses
   is natural and trustworthy and corroborated by medical
   evidence and the witnesses of the prosecution have been able
   to build-up a continuous link.
138. In these circumstances, I hereby hold that the prosecution
   has been able to prove and establish that the accused persons,
   namely Inder Kumar @ Titu, Vijay Panday, Raju Singh and
   Narender Kumar @ Bittu, caused injuries to PW1 Sanjeev
   Kumar, with such intention or knowledge and under such
   circumstances, that if by that act they had caused the death of
   injured Sanjeev Kumar, they would be guilty of culpable
   homicide not amounting to murder. Further, the accused
   persons also caused such bodily injury to deceased Anil Kumar
   with knowledge that the said injuries were likely to cause the
   death of the person, and killed deceased Anil Kumar, which act
   of the accused persons would fall under exception 4 to the
   offence of murder, as an offence of culpable homicide not
   amounting to murder. Furthermore, PW2/complainant had also
   deposed that he suffered simple injuries in the incident, while
   he was trying to save his brother, i.e. injured Sanjeev Kumar,
   which testimony of the complainant is also unrebutted, hence,
   the accused persons are also guilty for causing simple hurt to
   injured Raj Kumar. Undisputedly, the entire incident had taken
   place with the common intention of the accused persons, who
   were present at the spot and were armed with lathis and
   dandas.
State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11   PS Seema Puri
Page No. 67 of 68
139. Therefore, in view of the reasoning given by this Court
   in the foregoing paragraphs, accused persons Inder Kumar
   @ Titu, Vijay Panday, Raju Singh and Narender Kumar @
   Bittu are hereby held guilty for the offence under
Section
   323
/
304(II)
/
308
/
34
of Indian Penal Code and they are,
   accordingly, convicted for the said offences.
140. To be heard now on the point of sentence.
Announced in the                                        (Ankita Lal)
   open Court on this                                   Addl. Sessions Judge
   13th day of March 2024                            (FTC),North East District
                                                       Karkardooma Courts
                                                              Delhi
                                                           13.03.2024




State v. Inder Kumar @ Titu & Ors.   FIR No.302/11    PS Seema Puri
Page No. 68 of 68
