Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 2 of 1974
Citation: AIR 1977 SC 265 holding that the latter
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/148617531/

[Cites
68
, Cited by
60
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Pramod Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 April, 2021
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Mohammad Rafiq
,
Sanjay Dwivedi
,
Chief Justice
[1]

                                                          Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



    THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR MADHYA
              PRADESH AT JABALPUR
                                (Division Bench)
                        Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020

                                  Pramod Yadav

                                        Versus

                 The State of Madhya Pradesh and others


Present:
       Hon'ble Shri Justice Mohammad Rafiq, Chief Justice
       Hon'ble Shri Justice Sanjay Dwivedi, Judge

Appearance

       Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma, Senior Advocate appears as amicus curiae.
       Shri Arpan Shrivastava, Advocate for the appellant.
     Shri Harpreet Singh Ruprah, Advocate for the High Court Advocates'
Bar Association.
      Shri Pushpendra Yadav, Additional Advocate General for the
respondent/State.

Law laid down:

        In view of the conflicting views expressed by two Single Benches of this Court in
Mohd. Juned vs. State of M.P. reported in 2016(1) MPJR 108 and in Smt. Sunita
Gandharva vs. State of M.P. and another in MCRC No.22615/2020, the matter has been
referred to Larger Bench, in this case the Division Bench for answering the following
questions:-
        "(i)   Which court shall conduct the trial of a case, instituted under penal
        provision of two Special Acts i.e. the Atrocities Act as well as the
POCSO
        Act
, either the Special Court constituted under Atrocities Act or the
        Special Court constituted under the
POCSO Act
.

       (ii)    Whether an Appeal against an order of rejection of bail of an
       accused by the Special Court, in a case instituted for committing offences
       under the
POCSO Act & the Atrocities Act
, shall lie under the provisions
       of Section 14-A of the Atrocities Act or application under
Section 438
/
439
of Code of Criminal Procedure, as the case may be."

       Question No.1:        Held-The trial of a case instituted under the
                             provisions of two special Acts viz. the Scheduled
                             Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
                                       [2]

                                                     Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


                        Atrocities) Act, 1989 and
Protection of Children
                        from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
, shall be conducted
                        by the Special Courts constituted under the
POCSO
                        Act
.

      Question No.2:    Held - In a case involving the offences under both
                        the
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
, since the trial of
                        the accused involving offences of both the special
                        enactments namely
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
shall be conducted by the Special Court constituted
                        under
Section 28
of the POCSO Act, the remedy of
                        the accused against the order of rejection of bail
                        under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. by the Court of
                        Special Judge would be by filing the bail
                        applications under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. before the
                        High Court.
Significant paragraph Nos. 13 to 30


Whether approved for reporting- Yes.


Heard on: 05/04/2021

                                ORDER
(Pronounced on 22/04/2021)

Per: Mohammad Rafiq, C.J.
1.    This matter has been referred to the Division Bench in view of

difference of opinion expressed by two Single Benches of this Court in
Mohd.

Juned vs. State of M.P.
reported in 2016(1) MPJR 108 and in
Smt. Sunita

Gandharva vs. State of M.P. and another
in MCRC No.22615/2020.
2.    The present matter in which the order of reference has been made, has

been filed as a Criminal Appeal under
Section 14-A(1)
of the Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for short

"the Atrocities Act") against the order dated 23.07.2020 passed by Special

Judge, Atrocities Act, Seoni in SC ATR No.08/2020. In fact, earlier appeal

filed by appellant viz. Criminal Appeal No.10267/2019, was dismissed as
[3]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



withdrawn vide order dated 10.12.2019 with liberty to him to file afresh

appeal after recording of the statement of the prosecutrix.
3.    The facts of the case in brief are that the police station Keolari, District

Seoni registered Crime No.314/2019 against the accused/appellant for offence

punishable under
Sections 363
,
366
,
376(2)(n)
,
376(3)
of IPC,
Section 5(L)
and
6
of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short

"the
POCSO Act
") and Section 3(1)(w)(i), 3(2)(va) and 3(2)(v) of Atrocities

Act on the allegation that he abducted the minor prosecutrix and took her to

Nagpur where he sexually exploited her on the pretext of marriage. During the

course of investigation, the accused/appellant was arrested on 22.10.2019. He

filed an application under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. for grant of bail which was

rejected by the Special Judge, Atrocities Act, Seoni vide order dated

23.07.2020. Aggrieved thereby, he filed the earlier appeal viz. CRA

No.10267/2019, which was dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated

10.12.2019 with liberty to file afresh after recording of the statement of

prosecutrix. Thereafter the trial Court recorded the statement of prosecutrix

wherein she did not support the prosecution story and deposed that appellant

did not commit rape with her. This paved the way for the accused/appellant to

file second appeal on the same subject matter.
4.    In the course of argument of appeal before the Single Bench, an

objection was raised by the learned Public Prosecutor that since the accused is

also being tried for offences punishable under
Sections 5
and
6
of the POCSO

Act, therefore, he should have filed an application under
Section 439
of

Cr.P.C. before this Court rather than filing appeal. It was argued that when the
[4]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



accused is being tried for offences of
POCSO Act
as well as for offences

under the Atrocities Act, such trial should be conducted by the Special Judge

notified for trial of the cases registered under
POCSO Act
, whereas, in the

present case, the trial is being conducted by the Special Judge notified for trial

of the cases registered under the Atrocities Act. It was therefore argued that

the trial against the accused stood vitiated and a direction be issued to transfer

this case to the court of Special Judge notified for trial of the cases under the
POCSO Act
. Reliance was placed on the Single Bench judgment of this Court

in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra).
5.    Learned counsel for the accused/appellant contested the aforesaid

objection and submitted that there was nothing objectionable even if the trial

of the case involving offences of both POSCO Act as well as Atrocities Act

was being conducted by the Special Court notified for trial of the offences

under the latter Act. Since the application filed by the accused under
Section

439
of Cr.P.C. was dismissed by the Special Judge notified under the

Atrocities Act, an appeal against such order would lie to this Court under

Section 14 of the Atrocities Act. Reliance in support of this argument was

placed on the judgment of Single Bench of this Court in
Mohd. Juned
(supra).
6.    The learned Single Judge in view of the conflicting views expressed by

two Single Benches of this Court, referred the matter to Larger Bench, in this

case the Division Bench, on the following questions:-
"(i)    Which court shall conduct the trial of a case, instituted
             under penal provision of two Special Acts i.e. the Atrocities Act as
             well as the
POCSO Act
, either the Special Court constituted under
[5]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


             Atrocities Act or the Special Court constituted under the
POCSO
             Act
.
(ii)    Whether an Appeal against an order of rejection of bail of
             an accused by the Special Court, in a case instituted for committing
             offences under the
POCSO Act & the Atrocities Act
, shall lie
             under the provisions of Section 14-A of the Atrocities Act or
             application under
Section 438
/
439
of Code of Criminal Procedure,
             as the case may be."
7.    When the matter was listed before this Court on 11.12.2020, a direction

was issued to issue notice to the High Court Bar Association, Jabalpur; High

Court Advocates' Bar Association, Jabalpur; High Court Bar Association,

Indore; and High Court Bar Association, Gwalior to address the Court on the

issue. Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma, learned Senior Advocate was appointed as

amicus to assist the Court.
8.    We have heard Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma, learned Senior Advocate

appearing as amicus curiae, Shri Arpan Shrivastava, learned counsel for the

appellant, Shri Harpreet Singh Ruprah, Advocate/Secretary, High Court

Advocates' Bar Association, Jabalpur and Shri Pushpendra Yadav, learned

Additional Advocate General for the State.
9.    Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma, learned Senior Advocate submitted that

there is no conflict between the two judgments passed by the Single Benches

of this Court in
Mohd. Juned
(supra) and
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra).

The ratio of both the judgments is that the
POCSO Act
being the latter Act, its

provisions would prevail over those of the Atrocities Act.
In both the

judgments, the learned Single Judges of this Court have relied on the

authoritative enunciations of law by the Supreme Court in
Sarwan Singh

and another vs. Kasturi Lal
, AIR 1977 SC 265 holding that the latter

enactment must prevail over the earlier one. It is argued by the learned Senior
[6]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



Counsel that both the
POCSO Act and Atrocities Act
contain non-obstante

clauses regarding applicability of various provisions of
Cr.P.C
. The Special

Courts have been constituted under both the enactments for the purpose of

taking cognizance, conducting trials etc. However, in Atrocities Act, the

application for bail is filed under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. before the Special

Court and if the same is refused or allowed then the remedy would be to file

an appeal under Section 14-A(2) of the Atrocities Act before this Court. But

there is no such appeal provided under the
POCSO Act
and in such an

eventuality, the regular bail application under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. has to be

filed. The learned Senior Counsel in support of his arguments has placed

reliance on the following judgments:-
(i)       In Re.: Registrar (Judicial) High Court, Madras, 2017 Cri.L.J. 4519
(ii)      State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Mangali Yadagiri, 2016 Cri.L.J. 1415
(iii)     Guddu Kumar Yadav vs. The State of Bihar, Cr. Misc. No.52792 of
2019
(iv)      Rinku vs. State of U.P., Cri. Misc. Bail Application No.33075/2018
(v)       Vikrambhai Amrabhai Malivad vs. State of Gujarat, R/Criminal

                Misc. Application No.11014/2020.
(vi)      Suraj S. Paithankar v. The State of Maharashtra, Bail. Application

                No.817/2020.
(vii) Lokesh        Kumar    Jangid   vs.   State   of   Rajasthan,   Criminal

                Miscellaneous Second Bail Application No.9440/2020.
10.          Shri Harpreet Singh Ruprah, learned counsel relying on
Section 42A
of

the POCSO Act submitted that both the Atrocities Act as well as
POCSO Act
[7]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



contain non-obstante clauses.
Section 42A
of the POCSO Act provides that

the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the

provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any

inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the

provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. Relying on

Section 20 of the Atrocities Act, it is submitted that save as otherwise

provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect

notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law

for the time being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having

effect by virtue of any such law. Relying on the judgment of Supreme Court

in
Sharat Babu Digumarti vs. Govt. (NCT of Delhi
), (2017) 2 SCC 18, the

learned counsel argued that where there are two special enactments, which

contain non-obstante clauses, the latter statute must prevail.
Similar view has

been taken by the Supreme Court in
Sarwan Singh vs. Kasturi Lal
(
supra),

K.S.L. and Industries Limited vs. Arihant Threads Limited and Others
,

(2008) 9 SCC 763, Guddu Kumar Yadav vs. The State of Bihar in

Cr.Misc. No.52792/2019.
Learned counsel has also relied on the judgment of

Allahabad High Court in
Rinku vs. State of U.P.
in Criminal Misc.
Bail

Application No.33075/2018 and of Chhattisgarh High Court in the case of

Ram Swarup Rajwade vs. State of Chhattisgarh in W.P. (Cr.)

No.540/2020.
Mr. Harpreet Singh Ruprah, learned counsel appearing for the High

Court Advocates' Bar Association, Jabalpur has also referred to the celebrated

book titled 'Principles of Statutory Interpretation' by Justice G.P. Singh
[8]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



13th Edition, Page 376 observing that conflict in such cases is resolved on

consideration of purpose and policy underlying the enactments and the

language used in them. Another test that is applied is that the latter enactment

normally prevails over the earlier one. It is argued that the
POCSO Act
has

much wider scope and has a detailed procedure which is evident from the

provisions contained in
Sections 19
to
27
of the POCSO Act.
11.   Shri Pushpendra Yadav, learned Additional Advocate General argued

that the Atrocities Act was enacted in 1989 to prevent the commission of

offence of atrocities against the member of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes with a non-obstante clause giving overriding effect on other laws.
The

POCSO Act
was enacted in the year 2012 with an object to provide protection

to the children from sexual offences which also contains the non-obstante

clause having overriding effect to the other inconsistent laws. The learned

Additional Advocate General submits that where there are two special statutes

containing non-obstante clauses, the latter statute must prevail. This is because

at the time of enactment of the latter statute, the legislature is presumed to be

aware about the earlier legislation and its non-obstante clause. If the

legislature still confers the latter enactment with a non-obstante clause, it

means that the legislature wanted that enactment to prevail. If the legislature

would not want the latter enactment to prevail, then it could provide in the

latter enactment that the provisions of the earlier enactment continue to apply.
In support of his argument, learned Additional Advocate General has placed

reliance on
Solidare India Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Fairgrowth Financial Services

Ltd
, (2001) 3 SCC 71;
Maruti Udyog Ltd. Vs. Ram Lal and others
, (2005)
[9]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



2 SCC 638;
KSN and Industries Ltd. Vs. Arihant Threads Ltd. and

others
, (2008) 9 SCC 763, KSN and Industries Ltd. Vs. Arihant Threads

Ltd. and others, (2015) 1 SCC 166.
Learned Additional Advocate General submits that Section 362 under

chapter XXVII of
Cr.P.C
. having title "The Judgement". Section 353 defines

judgment passed in Criminal Trial. Section 362 prescribes that no court, when

it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall alter or

review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error whereas

Section 439 talks about special power of the High Court and Sessions Court

for grant of bail. Section 439(1) confers the power to grant the bail on certain

conditions and Section 439(2) confers the power to cancel the bail. Therefore,

Section 362 cannot restrict the power of the High Court under Section 439(2)

to cancel the bail granted. The law in this respect has been correctly laid down

by this Court in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra).
12.   We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made by

the learned counsel for the parties.
13.   We have to first of all test the correctness of the argument that there is

in fact no conflict between the two judgments of different Single Benches of

this Court in
Mohd. Juned
(supra) and in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra)

and, therefore the reference was uncalled for.
14.
Mohd. Juned
(supra) is an earlier judgment, having been rendered on

04.10.2014. The aforesaid judgment was passed in Criminal Revision

No.645/2013 filed under Section 397 read with
Section 401
of Cr.P.C.

whereby Sessions Judge, Ratlam in Sessions Trial No.13/2013 by his order
[10]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



dated 15.05.2013 relegated the trial of a case registered for offences under
Sections 363
,
366
,
342
,
506-B
&
376-D
of IPC and also under Section 5(g), 6

and 12 of the POSCO Act and Section 3(1)(xi) of Atrocities Act to the Court

of Special Judge notified under Atrocities Act. The argument before the High

Court was that since cognizance has been taken by Special Judge notified

under the
POCSO Act
, which has been illegally transferred by the Sessions

Judge, Ratlam to the Special Judge notified under the Atrocities Act, this shall

prejudice the accused. It was therefore prayed that the order passed by the

Sessions Judge may be set aside and the trial of the case may be entrusted to

Special Judge notified under the
POCSO Act
.
The learned Single Judge has

relied on the judgments of Supreme Court in
Sarwan Singh
(supra),
Jain

Ink Mfg. & Co. v. LIC of India and another
,
AIR 1981 SC 670,

Sanwarmal Kejriwal vs. Vishwa Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. and

others
,
AIR 1990 SC 1563, Ashoka Marketing Ltd. v. Punjab National

Bank
,
AIR 1991 SC 855, A.P. State Financial Corporation v. Official

Liquidator
,
AIR 2000 SC 2642, Allahabad Bank v. Canara Bank and

another
, (2000) 4 SCC 406, Maruti Udyog Ltd. v. Ramlal & others, (2005)

2 SCC 638 and in
Jay Engineering Works v. Industry Facilitation Council

and another
, AIR 2006 SC 3252, in all of which the Supreme Court has laid

down the guidelines for resolving the conflict of two non-obstante clauses

contained in two different statutes and held that when two or more laws

operate in same field and each contained a non obstante clause indicating that

the provisions have been given overriding effect over any other law, the cases

shall be decided with reference to the object and purpose of the law under
[11]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



consideration by applying the test that the latter enactment must prevail over

the earlier one.
15.   Another argument that was examined by the learned Single Judge in
Mohd. Juned
(supra) was that challan in cases involving
POCSO Act
has to

be filed before the Special Court notified under that Act whereas for offences

under the Atrocities Act the trial of the case has to be made over to the Special

Court after committal by the Chief Judicial Magistrate. It was noted that in

that particular case the challan was filed before the Sessions Court, therefore,

it would affect the right of the applicant. Referring to
Section 193
of Cr.P.C.,

it was observed that except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or

by any other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take

cognizance of any offence as a Court of original jurisdiction unless the case

has been committed to it by the Magistrate under the Code. Since
in that case
the offences of
POCSO Act, Atrocities Act
and
IPC
were involved but the

challan was filed before the Court of Session, therefore, the challan filed

before the Court of Session cannot be said to be prejudicial to the interest of

the applicant, held the Court.
Relying on the judgment of Supreme Court in
Rattiram & others vs. State of M.P.
, (2012) 4 SCC 516, the learned Single

Judge noted that the Supreme Court
in that case
reversed the judgment of this

Court and held that mere filing of challan before the Session Court would not

amount to illegality and the trial would not vitiate for non-observance of

Section 193 of the Code. It was held that until and unless the prejudice is

shown and established by the accused, mere filing of the challan before the

Court of Sessions, does not amount to illegality.
In those facts, it was
[12]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



observed by this Court in
Mohd. Juned
(supra) that considering the

provisions of
Atrocities Act, POCSO Act
as well as
Cr.P.C
., it is apparent that

the offence registered under the
POCSO Act
shall be tried by the Court

notified under
Section 25
of the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights

Act, 2005
, which shall be deemed to be the "Children's Court" as per the

proviso to
Section 28
of the POCSO Act. Simultaneously, if the offence

registered under the provisions of the Atrocities Act, then such offences shall

be tried by the Special Court notified to try the said offence by Session Judge

posted in the said Court from the date of assuming the offence. If the offences

of
IPC
are also involved with respect to the offences of the respective special

enactments, then those offences shall also be tried by the said Special Court

notified under the respective enactments. It was further held that in a same

crime number if the offences have been registered under the provisions of
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
, then such offences shall be tried by a Court of

Session notified under the Atrocities Act with the aid of
Section 9
of Cr.P.C.

and as per the language of the notifications. In such circumstances, trial of the

offences involved under both the Acts is not required to be split up. But at the

same time, the learned Single Judge further made it clear that in case of any

inconsistency, the
POCSO Act
being latter enactment shall prevail over the

provisions of the Atrocities Act.
However, mere filing of challan before the

Sessions Court would not vitiate the trial ipso facto in view of the judgment of

the Apex Court in the case of
Rattiram
(supra).
16.
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra) is again a very considered and

detailed judgment.
It however, appears that the judgment of this Court in
[13]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



Mohd. Juned
(supra) was neither cited nor considered by the learned Single

Judge while deciding
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra) but a critical analysis

of the aforesaid judgment does not show any conflicting view having been

taken by the learned Single Judge in the case of Smt. Sunita Gandharva.
Para 17 of the judgment of Smt. Sunita Gandharva shows that unlike in

Mohd. Juned where a solitary question was whether the trial was vitiated for

the reason of being transferred to the Court of Special Judge notified under the

Atrocities Act, even though it also involves offences under the
POCSO Act
,

much larger issues were involved therein, which would be evident from para

17 of the judgment in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra), which is reproduced

hereunder:
"17. Instant case is by way of an application for cancellation of
      bail at the instance of complainant and the main objection to the said
      application is maintainability itself. Beside that question of interplay of
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
and extent of bail conditions as per
Section
      437(3)
Cr.P.C. are involved. Therefore, according to this Court Five
      Questions are involved in this case, viz.:-
(i)     Whether, High Court can entertain an application
                     under
Section 439(2)
of Cr.P.C. for cancelation of
                     bail granted in exercise of powers conferred under
                     Section 14-A(2) of Atrocities Act?;
(ii)    Whether, the Court granting bail in an appeal under
                     Section 14-A(2) of Atrocities Act can be
                     recalled/cancelled as the order granting bail does
                     not attain finality?;
(iii)   Whether, in an offence where the provisions of
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
are involved, the
                     procedural law of
POCSO Act
will apply or the
                     provisions of Atrocities Act?;
(iv)    Whether, in a composite offence involving of
                     provisions of POCSO Act and Atrocities Act, an
                     order refusing bail under Section 439 Cr.P.C. will
                     be appealable as per Section 14-A(2) of Atrocities
                     Act or an application under Section 439 Cr.P.C.
simpliciter will lie before the High Court?; and
[14]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020
(v)    What is the scope and extent of bail conditions as
                  referred in
Section 437(3)
of Cr.P.C.?"
What is relevant for the purpose of answering the reference in the

present case can be found in paragraphs 40 to 47 of the judgment in
Smt.

Sunita Gandharva
(supra), which are reproduced hereunder:-
"40. Conflict of jurisdiction between two Special Acts operating
           in the same field, both carrying non-obstante clause is always
           perplexing for the Courts to decide. Therefore, Aims and Objects
           and the Purpose of the enactments that operate in the same field are
           one of the first and foremost principles to be applied for
           application of statutes. On this touchstone, looking to the
           legislative intent, statement of objects and reasons, different other
           provisions contained in the respective enactments and the language
           of provisions providing overriding effect indicate that
POCSO Act
would get precedence over Atrocities Act.
41.     Perusal of provisions of
Section 42-A
of the POCSO Act
           reveals that it permits the Special Courts established under the said
           Act, to implement the provisions of other enactments also, insofar
           as they are not inconsistent with provisions of
POCSO Act
and in
           case of any inconsistency, the provisions of
POCSO Act
are given
           overriding effect over the provisions of such other enactments to
           the extent of inconsistency. It needs to be kept in mind that said
           provision (
Section 42-A
of POCSO Act) has been inserted in the
POCSO Act
w.e.f. 3/2/2013 by amendment and Atrocities Act
           underwent amendment in year 2018 but still
Section 20
does not
           carry any such analogous provision that may enable the Special
           Court under the said Act to extend safeguards and provide benefit,
           that are being contemplated under the provisions of the
POCSO
           Act
.
Provisions of POCSO Act
are in addition and not in
           derogation of the provisions of any law including Atrocities Act.
           Therefore, POCSO Act is all encompassing in nature, whereas,
           Section 20 of Atrocities Act limits the interplay of other statutes.
42.     Beside that, statement of objects and reasons of
POCSO
           Act and Atrocities Act
are to be seen, wherein, although both the
           statutes are dedicated to serve the interest of a special class of
           citizens but the legislative priority or preference appears to be in
           favour of the child because, if, Chapters V,VI, VIII and IX of
           POCSO Act and its different provisions are seen in tandem then it
           reveals that legislature intended to give delicate and protected
           treatment to the victim under the
POCSO Act
and special care of
           children as victims of crime have been designed to go through the
           process of investigation and trial of the accused. It applies
           irrespective of social or economic background of a child, therefore,
           welfare of children transcending all barriers of caste and creed and
           because of its all pervasive nature,
POCSO Act
is having
           overriding effect over the Atrocities Act.
[15]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020
43.     It is to be remembered that
POCSO Act
has much wider
scope so far as victims are concerned because
POCSO Act
is an act
to protect Children from sexual offences, sexual harassment and
pornography and provide for establishment of special Court for
trial of such offences and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto, therefore, ambit and scope of
POCSO Act
appears to be much wider than the Atrocities Act. Even otherwise,
Child being considered the father of man is a biological
evolution/phenomenon; whereas, Caste has a social/customary
connotation.
44.    One more facet of the controversy deserves attention is
Section 28 (2)
of the POCSO Act by which Special Court under
the
POCSO Act
has been bestowed with the authority to try an
accused for an offence other than the offence referred to in
subsection (1) of
Section 28
. Meaning thereby that
Special Court,
POCSO Act
can try for offence under other enactments also with
which the accused may under the
Cr.P.C
. be charged; whereas, no
such analogous provision for such inclusion exists in Atrocities
Act, therefore, on this Count also, legislative intent and rule of
harmonious construction weigh in favour of
POCSO Act
.
45.
Section 31
of the POCSO Act can also be profitably
referred in this regard:-
"31. Application of code of Criminal Procedure,
       1973 to proceedings before a Special Court.- Save
       as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of
       the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974),
       (including the provisions as to bail and bonds) shall
       apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and
       for the purpose of the said provisions, the Special
       Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions and
       the person conducting a prosecution before a
       Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public
       Prosecutor."
Perusal of above provision, makes it clear that provisions of
the
Code of Criminal Procedure
have been made applicable to all
the proceedings before the Special Court including bail and bonds
and in later part of the same provision deeming fiction has been
created whereby a Special Court for the purpose of all its
proceedings shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions. Therefore,
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. is impliedly included by such provision and
therefore, against the order of
Special Court (POCSO Act
),
application under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. for bail shall be
maintainable instead of appeal under Section 14-A (2) of the
Atrocities Act.
46.     Another principle for guidance in relation to non-obstante
clause in two legislations would be the settled principle that both
statutes have to be harmoniously construed as far as possible.
Taking the cue from such principle, if both the Acts are taken into
consideration where Special Protection, Remedies and Speedy
Trial have been contemplated, it appears that
POCSO Act
is
[16]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


            designed to a wider range of victims than the Atrocities Act. Since
            the procedure has been specifically provided, children of whatever
            background including the background from Scheduled Castes or
            Scheduled Tribes, process of investigation and trial of the accused
            meanders through different specifically enacted provisions while
            taking into consideration the delicate mind of a child victim, his
            probable subjugation to secondary victimization and procedural
            safeguards appear to be extensively incorporated in the
POCSO
            Act
, but not in Atrocities Act.
47.    In fact, a Special Court under the Atrocities Act does not
            have the kind of infrastructure, procedure, staff and training as
            contemplated in different provisions of the
POCSO Act
, specially
Section 33
to
38
of the POCSO Act, therefore, on this count also,
            harmonious construction and reconciliation between the two
            enactments would be achieved when
POCSO Act
given
            precedence over the Atrocities Act in case a Child suffers and
            when he belongs to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe
            Community."
17.   The learned Single Judge in
Sunita Gandharva
(supra) has relied on

all those judgments which have been cited by Shri Rakesh Kumar Sharma and

Shri Harpreet Singh Ruprah and thereafter recorded his conclusion in para 56

which is reproduced hereunder:-
"56. Conclusively, regarding questions No. (iii) and (iv), it can
            safely be concluded that when an accused is being tried by
            Atrocities Act as well as
POCSO Act
simultaneously, then Special
            Court under
POCSO Act
shall have the jurisdiction and if any bail
            application of accused is allowed or rejected under
Section 439
of
            Cr.P.C. by that Special Court then appeal shall not lie under
            Section 14-A (2) of Atrocities Act. Only an application under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. for bail shall lie."
18.   The view taken by the learned Single Judge in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra) finds support from the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Sharat

Babu Digumarti
(supra) which can be seen from para 36 and 37 of the

report, reproduced hereunder:-
"36.
In
Solidaire India Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services
            Ltd. [Solidaire India Ltd.
v. Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd.,
            (2001) 3 SCC 71, this Court while dealing with two special
            statutes, namely,
Section 13
of the Special Court (Trial of Offences
[17]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


            Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992 and
Section 32
of
            the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985,
            observed as follows: (SCC p. 74, para 10):-
"10. .....Where there are two special statutes
                   which contain non obstante clauses, the later statute
                   must prevail. This is because at the time of
                   enactment of the later statute, the legislature was
                   aware of the earlier legislation and its non obstante
                   clause. If the legislature still confers the later
                   enactment with a non obstante clause it means that
                   the legislature wanted that enactment to prevail. If
                   the legislature does not want the later enactment to
                   prevail then it could and would provide in the later
                   enactment that the provisions of the earlier
                   enactment continue to apply'. [Ed.: As observed in
Bhoruka Steel Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services
                   Ltd.
, 1996 SCC OnLine Bom 717]"
37. The aforesaid passage clearly shows that if legislative
            intendment is discernible that a latter enactment shall prevail, the
            same is to be interpreted in accord with the said intention. We have
            already referred to the scheme of the
IT Act
and how obscenity
            pertaining to electronic record falls under the scheme of the Act.
            We have also referred to
Sections 79
and
81
of the IT Act. Once
            the special provisions having the overriding effect do cover a
            criminal act and the offender, he gets out of the net of the
IPC
and
            in this case, Section 292. It is apt to note here that electronic forms
            of transmission are covered by the
IT Act
, which is a special law.
            It is settled position in law that a special law shall prevail over the
            general and prior laws.
When the Act
in various provisions deals
            with obscenity in electronic form, it covers the offence under
Section 292
IPC."
19.   The Supreme Court in
Sarwan Singh
(supra) has also taken the same

approach that in the case of conflict between two non-obstante clauses in two

different enactments, the latter will prevail. Para 20 of the report containing

relevant discussion is reproduced herein below:-
"20. Speaking generally, the object and purpose of a legislation
            assume greater relevance if the language of the law is obscure and
            ambiguous. But, it must be stated that we have referred to the
            object of the provisions newly introduced into the
Delhi Rent Act
in 1975 nor for seeking light from it for resolving an ambiguity, for
            there is none, but for a different purpose altogether. When two or
            more laws operate in the same field and each contains a non-
            obstante clause stating that its provisions will over-ride those of
            any other law, stimulating and incisive problems of interpretation
            arise. Since statutory interpretation has no conventional protocol,
            cases of such conflict have to be decided in reference to the object
[18]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


             and purpose of the laws under consideration. A piquant situation,
             like the one before us, arose in
Shri Ram Narain v. Simla Banking
             & Industrial Co. Ltd.
[AIR 1956 SC 614 : 1956 SCR 603] the
             competing statutes being the
Banking Companies Act, 1949
as
             amended by Act 52 of 1953, and the
Displaced Persons (Debts
             Adjustment) Act, 1951
.
Section 45A
of the Banking Companies
             Act, which was introduced by the amending Act of 1953, and
             Section 3 of the Displaced Persons Act 1951 contained each a non-
             obstante clause, providing that certain provisions would have
             effect "notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
             in any other law for the time being in force ......" This Court
             resolved the conflict by considering the object and purpose of the
             two laws and giving precedence to the
Banking Companies Act
by
             observing:
"It is, therefore, desirable to determine the
                    overriding effect of one or the other of the relevant
                    provisions in these two Acts, in a given case, on
                    much broader considerations of the purpose and
                    policy underlying the two Acts and the clear
                    intendment conveyed by the language of the
                    relevant provisions therein "(p. 615).
As indicated by us the special and specific purpose which
             motivated the enactment of Section 14A and
Chapter III-A of the
             Delhi Rent Act
would be wholly frustrated if the provisions of the
Slum Clearance Act
requiring permission of the competent
             authority were to prevail over them. Therefore, the newly
             introduced provisions of the
Delhi Rent Act
must hold the field
             and be given full effect despite anything to the contrary contained
             in the
Slum Clearance Act
.
21.     For resolving such inter se conflicts, one other test may
             also be applied through the persuasive force of such a test is but
             one of the factors which combine to give a fair meaning to the
             language of the law. That test is that the later enactment must
             prevail over the earlier one. Section 14-A and Chapter III-A having
             been enacted with effect from December 1, 1975 are later
             enactments in reference to
Section 19
of the Slum Clearance Act
             which, in its present form, was placed on the statute book with
             effect from February 28, 1965 and in reference to
Section 39
of the
             same Act, which came into force in 1956 when the Act itself was
             passed. The legislature gave overriding effect to Section 14-A and
             Chapter III-A with the knowledge that
Sections 19
and
39
of the
             Slum Clearance Act contained non-obstante clauses of equal
             efficacy. Therefore the later enactment must prevail over the
             former. The same test was mentioned with approval by this Court
             in
Shri Ram Narain
's case at p. 615."
20.   The Supreme Court in
K.S.L. and Industries Limited
(supra) in para

70 of the report similarly held as under:-
[19]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


            "70. I am thus at a point where two statutes employ non obstante
            clause having "overriding effect". Such a conflict, as
laid down in
several cases, may be resolved by judiciary on various
            considerations: such as the policy underlying the enactments, the
            language used, the object intended to be achieved; or mischief
            sought to be remedied, etc. One of the tests applied by Courts is
            that normally a later enactment should prevail over the former. The
            Courts would also try to reconcile both Acts by adopting
            harmonious interpretation and applying them in their respective
            fields so that both may operate without coming into conflict with
            each other. In resolving the clash, the Court may further examine
            whether one of the two enactments is "special" and the other one is
            "general". There can also be a situation in law where one and the
            same statute may be held to be a "special" statute vis-a`-vis one
            legislation and "general" statute vis-à-vis another legislation. On
            the basis of one or more tests, the Court will try to salvage the
            situation by giving effect to non obstante clause in both the
            legislations."
21.   Similarly, most of the High Courts have also taken the same line of

approach on the question involved in the present matter, which shall be

evident from some of such judgments. The Division Bench of Madras High

Court in Re: Registrar (Judicial) High Court (supra) held in paragraph

No.55 as under:-
"55. If the act of the accused is an offence under the
POCSO
            Act
and also an offence under the
SC & ST Act
, the Special Court
            under the
POCSO Act
alone shall have jurisdiction to exercise all
            the powers including the power to remand the accused under
            Section 167 of the Code, to take cognizance of the offences either
            on a police report or on a private complaint and to try the offender.
            The said Special Court shall have jurisdiction to grant all the
            reliefs to the victim for which the victim is entitled to under the
SC
            & ST Act
."
22.   The Andhra Pradesh High Court in Mangali Yadagiri (supra) in

paragraph Nos.19 and 20 held as under:-
"19. A perusal of both the enactments would show that POSCO
            Act is a self contained legislature which was introduced with a
            view to protect the children from the offences of sexual assault,
            harassment, pornography and other allied offences. It was
            introduced with number of safeguards to the children at every stage
            of the proceedings by incorporating a child friendly procedure. The
            legislature introduced the non obstante clause in Section 42-A of
            the POSCO Act with effect from 20.06.2012 giving an overriding
[20]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


             effect to the provisions of the POSCO Act, though the legislature
             was aware about the existence of non obstante clause in
Section 20
of the SC/ST Act.
20.     Applying the test of chronology the POSCO Act, 2012
             came into force with effect from 20.06.2012 whereas SC/ST Act
             was in force from 30.01.1990. The POSCO Act being beneficial to
             all and later in point of time, it is to be held that the provisions of
             POSCO Act have to be followed for trying cases where the
             accused is charged for the offences under both the enactments."
23.   The Patna High Court in Guddu Kumar Yadav (supra) after

considering all the relevant provisions and case law held as under:-
"18. Now the Court would proceed to consider the direct
             conflict between
Section 20
of the SC/ST Act, and
Section 42 A
of
             the POCSO Act, as both the provisions having overriding effects.
             Dealing with an issue identical to the case on hand, the Apex
             Court, in the case of
Sarwan Singh
(supra) held that cases of such
             conflict have to be decided in reference to the object and purpose
             of the laws under consideration. For, resolving such inter-se
             conflict, another test is that the later enactment must prevail over
             earlier one. Therefore, to resolve the issue, this Court would like to
             examine the object and purpose of the both enactments and further
             the point of time of such enactments.
19.    It would be apparent form the statement of Objects and
             Reasons of SC/ST Act, that it was enacted with a view to prevent
             the commission of offences of atrocities against the members of
             the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribes by persons other
             than SC/ST and to establish Special Courts for the trial of such
             offences and to provide relief and rehabilitation to the victims of
             such offences.
Now coming to the statements of Objects and Reasons described in
             the statute book of
POCSO Act
, which indicate that it was enacted
             towards securing that the tender age of children are not abused and
             their childhood and youth are protected against exploitation. It is a
             self-contained comprehensive legislation inter-alia to provide
             protection of children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual
             harassment and pornography with due regard for safeguarding the
             interest and well being of the child at every stage of the judicial
             process, incorporating child-friendly procedures for reporting,
             recording of evidence, investigation and trial of offences and
             provision for establishment of Special Courts for speedy trial of
             such offences. Apart the above mentioned, abatement of such
             offence is also punishable under
Section 17
of the POCSO Act,
             and
Section 18
of the said Act, makes an attempt to commit an
             offence also punishable under the said Act.
[21]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020
20.
Under the POCSO Act
, notwithstanding anything contained
             in the
Cr.P.C
., there is a separate procedure for reporting of cases
             and a protocol for media, it contemplates a Special Procedure for
             recording of statement of child i.e. below 18 years of age. There is
             another safeguard that at the time of testifying, the victim is not
             exposed in any way to the accused and for that purpose statement
             may be recorded through videoconferencing or curtains or any
             other device. It is worthwhile to notice that the Special Court
             constituted under the
POCSO Act
, has been invested with power to
             pass an order for interim compensation to meet the immediate
             needs of the child for relief or rehabilitation at any stage after
             lodging the F.I.R., and also to recommend the award of
             compensation to be paid by the State Government within thirty
             days of receipt of such order. The Special Court can recommend
             the award of the compensation even in case of acquittal or
             discharge or accused being not traced or identified, if in the
             opinion of the Special Court the child has suffered loss or injury as
             a result of that offence.
21.     After comparative analysis of the object, scheme and scope
             of the both Special Acts, i.e.
POCSO Act
and SC/ST Act, I,
             nowhere find such Special Provisions or procedure under the
             SC/ST Act for reporting of cases, recording of statements of the
             victim child, safeguard provided at the time of testifying the victim
             child and such a broad scheme of compensation and rehabilitation
             for child victim and the power invested to the Special Court as to
             grant interim compensation or compensations notwithstanding the
             result of the prosecution, as being contemplated under the
POCSO
             Act
.
In the SC/ST Act, no special procedure being contemplated for
             trial of the offences. The Special Court constituted under the
             SC/ST Act, shall follow almost procedure contemplated under the
             Cr. P.C. for trial of Session Cases. In the said Act there being no
             separate provision for investigation of the offences relating to child
             victims belonging to that section of the society.
22.     Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that the
POCSO Act
takes within its fold the protection of children of all sections of the
             society including those belonging to SC/
ST. The POCSO Act
,
             being later legislation than the SC/ST Act, and a self-contained
             legislation having number of safeguards to the children at every
             stage of proceeding with the better scheme of compensation and
             rehabilitation for child victims including those belonging to
             SC/ST."
24.   The Allahabad High Court in Rinku (supra) after elaborate discussions

of the law in para 14 to 16 of the report held as under:-
"14.     Conflict of jurisdiction between two special Acts operating
             in the same field, both carrying non obstante clauses, is not a new
             phenomenon to confront courts. When the question does arise as to
[22]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020


which special statute would prevail generally, or over a certain part
of the rights and liabilities regulated, the procedure or jurisdiction
provided, there are no thumb rules to determine the conflict. There
are, however, well settled principles for guidance to be applied in
such situations, in order to resolve which of the two special
enactments would prevail. The first and the more pervasive of the
principles to be applied, is to look to the object and the purpose of
the enactments that operate in the same field. Here, it has to be the
endeavor of the Court to find out the legislative priority. It has to
be discerned by the Court where in the compete and conflict
between two special statutes, the legislative priority lies. This
conflict can arise between two provisions of the same statute, and
that is why it is commonplace to come across statutory
phraseology that seeks to obviate the conflict by wording the non
obstante clause in one of the two provisions in the same statute
saying, "notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for
the time being in force .....".
15.     The test of looking to the object of the two special statutes
to determine which of the two would prevail, in cases where there
is a conflict between the two, is the more enduring one to guide.
The other that is invariably applied, or may be alongside the first,
is to see which of the two special statutes, both carrying non
obstante clauses was enacted subsequent in point of time. It is a
dependable principle that a subsequent legislation is enacted by the
legislature with knowledge of the provisions of the earlier special
statute. Thus, it is presumed that if a subsequent statute gives
overriding effect to a particular provision, that impinges upon the
field occupied by an existing special statute, the legislature is
presumed to have intended the subsequent enactment to take
precedence over the former. But, it may not be always so. There
the wider tests relating to the objects of the two legislations is to be
applied alongside, in order to arrive at a construction that resolves
the conflict, giving fullest effect to the legislative intent.
16.     It is in the aforesaid background of facts and fundamental
legal principles adumbrated above, that the submissions of learned
counsel appearing for the parties, and the learned Amicus Curiae,
may be considered with reference to the first of the two questions
formulated supra. The learned counsel appearing for the applicants
have relied heavily upon the provisions of
Section 28(2)
of the
POCSO Act, to submit that the Court constituted under the said
statute is invested with exclusive jurisdiction to try offences, other
than those under the
POCSO Act
, about which provision is made
under
Section 28(1)
of the said Act, wherever the accused may be
charged under the Code with such offences, at the same trial. They
submit that wherever it is permissible under the Code to try an
accused for an offence under the
POCSO Act
, and under any other
law, special or general, at the same trial, exclusive jurisdiction
would lie with the Special Court under the
POCSO Act
, and not
with any court under any other law. They have further referred to
the provisions of
Section 42-A
of the POCSO Act, that gives
overriding effect to the provisions of the said Act, over those of
any other law, to the extent that provisions of such other law are
inconsistent."
[23]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020
25.   On this very question of law, the Gujarat High Court in Vikrambhai

Amrabhai Malivad (supra) in para 12 and 13 of the report held as under:-
"12. In the present application, the applicant accused had
            approached the Court of Additional Sessions Judge & Special
            POCSO Judge & Special Atrocity Judge by filing Criminal Misc.
            Application No.272 of 2020 under
section 439
of the Cr.P.C,
            which resulted into rejection. The applicant, thereafter has filed the
            captioned application seeking bail by invoking the provisions of
section 439
of the Cr.P.C. The powers of granting bail by the High
            Court under
section 439
of the Cr.P.C. will not get diluted even
            after the special court has exercised such powers. Once it is
            established that the
POCSO Act
will have overriding effect on the
            Atrocity Act, the provisions of
section 31
of the POCSO Act will
            come into play which speaks of applicability of the provisions of
Cr.P.C
. The same declares that the Special Court shall be deemed
            to be a Sessions Court, whereas such deeming fiction is
            conspicuously absent in section 14 of the Atrocity Act.
Section 33
of the POCSO Act mandates the procedure for safeguarding the
            interest of the child during the trial proceedings. Thus, the
            comparative analysis of provisions of both the Acts, leads to sole
            conclusion, that the legislature in its wisdom has conferred
            precedence on the
POCSO Act
above the Atrocity Act. Hence, the
            only remedy available for the applicant will be of filing an
            application under
section 439
of the Cr.P.C. before the High Court.
13.     Before parting with the observations, I would like to deal
            with the case law cited by the respective advocates appearing for
            the parties. The R/CR.MA/11014/2020 CAV ORDER judgement
            of the Coordinate Bench of this Court in case of Anilaben (supra)
            will not apply in light of the given facts, since the issue before the
            Coordinate Bench only pertained to applicability of section 14-A
            of the Atrocity Act vis-à-vis
section 439
of the Cr.P.C. The
            Coordinate Bench has held that section 14-A of the Amendment
            Act, 2015 will have overriding effect on the provision of
section
            378
of the Cr.P.C. The Coordinate Bench was not seisin of any
            other
Special Act
having non-obstante clause. With regard to the
            judgement of the Patna High Court, it appears that while
            considering the provision of section 14-A of the Atrocity Act, the
            Court was invited the attention to the date of Amendment
            Act which was promulgated subsequent in 2015 after the
POCSO
            Act
. However, I am in complete agreement with the final opinion
            expressed by the Patna High Court with regard to the
            maintainability of an application for bail in terms of
section 439
of
            the Cr.P.C. in a case involving the POCSO Act and the Atrocity
            Act."
26.   The Bombay High Court in Suraj S. Paithankar (supra) where a

similar question arose, followed most of the judgments which have been
[24]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



referred to above and held that in the composite offence involving POCSO

Act and S.C. S.T. Act, the provision of the
POCSO Act
will prevail. The trial

of the case will also be done by Special Court constituted under
POCSO Act
.

Similarly, the Rajasthan High Court in Lokesh Kumar Jangid (supra) also

held that no appeal will lie in a composite offence of POCSO and SC ST Act

and a regular bail application under Section 439 would be maintainable.
27.   The Chhattisgarh High Court in Ram Swarup Rajwade (supra) on

this aspect of the matter had the following observations to make in para 40

and 41 of the report:-
"40. A careful perusal of
Section 28(2)
read with
Sections 31
and
42A
of the POCSO Act read with
Sections 26
and 220 of the
             Code of 1973, would reveal that it makes the path for operation /
             provisions of other laws particularly the trial of offences under the
             provisions of other law if the accused is charged at the same trial.
             In other words, the
POCSO Act
harmoniously allows the
             incorporation of other Acts for their operation by virtue of
Section
             28(2)
of the POCSO Act. In this regard, there is neither any
             inconsistency nor any conflict in the
POCSO Act
and as such, the
             SC-ST Act of 1989 and the
POCSO Act
can co-exist and stand
             independently together with each other for operational purpose and
             as such, "Special Court" designated under the
POCSO Act
would
             have exclusive jurisdiction to try the offence of both the Acts if
             arise out of same crime in one incident.
41.     Similarly, it is well settled position of law that if two Acts
             operate in the same field then the Act which is later enacted will
             prevail over the earlier one. This legal principle is based on the
             foundation that at the time of enactment of the later statute, the
             Legislature was well aware of the earlier legislation and its non
             obstante clause. Since the Legislature still confers the later
             enactment with a non obstante clause, it means that the Legislature
             wanted that enactment to prevail."
28.
In view of the above, it must be held that "even though the learned

Single Judge in last para of the judgment in
Mohd. Juned
(supra) mentioned

that if the offences have been registered under the
Atrocities Act and POCSO

Act
and such offences would be tried by the Court of Sessions under the
[25]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020



provisions of Atrocities Act with the aid of
Section 9
of Cr.P.C. and as per

language of the notification". But at the same time, the learned Single Judge

also made it clear that "
POCSO Act
being latter enactment shall prevail to the

provisions of the Atrocities Act in case of any inconsistency".
Then learned

Single Judge further held that "mere filing of challan before the Court of

Sessions as appears in the present case will not vitiate the trial in the light of

the judgment of the Apex Court in
Rattiram
(supra)".
The observances in

the first and third part of this para should, therefore, be taken to have been

confined to the facts of that particular case in view of peculiarity attached to

that case by relying on the ratio of the Supreme Court in
Rattiram
(supra) to

repel the argument that trial of the case was vitiated but simultaneously it was

also held by the learned Single Judge in that very judgment on the authority of

several Supreme Court judgments that in case of conflict between two

enactments having non-obstante clause, apart from object and purpose for

which the Act has been enacted, the latter enactment shall prevail over the

provisions of the former Act.
This was the precious view taken by another

Single Bench in
Smt. Sunita Gandharva
(supra).
That being the crux of the

judgment in
Mohd. Juned
(supra), it must be held that there in fact is no

conflict between the ratio of the two judgments.
29.   In view of the above discussions, the question No.1 is answered in the

terms that the trial of a case instituted under the provisions of two special Acts

viz.
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
, shall be conducted by the Special Courts

constituted under the
POCSO Act
.
[26]
Criminal Appeal No.5189/2020
30.    That in a case involving trial of the accused for the offences under both

                the
Atrocities Act and POCSO Act
shall be conducted by the Special Court

                constituted under
Section 28
of the POCSO Act and remedy of the accused

                against the order of rejection of bail under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C. by the such

                Special Judge, would be by filing the bail applications under
Section 439
of

                Cr.P.C. before the High Court. Question No.2 is answered accordingly.
31.    Referred questions having been answered as per above, let this matter

                be listed before the Single Bench as per Roster for appropriate orders.
(MOHAMMAD RAFIQ)                              (SANJAY DWIVEDI)
                        CHIEF JUSTICE                                   JUDGE

 psmishra
Digitally signed by
PREM SHANKAR
MISHRA
Date: 2021.05.03
14:07:28 +05'30'
