Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 83 of 2019
Citation: SCC




565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as follows,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/150476273/

[Cites
47
, Cited by
4
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Satish Singh vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 29 June, 2020
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA

                            Cr.MP(M) No. 299 of 2020
                            Reserved on: 16th June, 2020




                                                                   .
Date of Decision: 29th June, 2020





Satish Singh                                                    ...Petitioner.

                            Versus





State of Himachal Pradesh                                        ...Respondent.

Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 YES.
For the petitioner:        Mr. Naresh Kaul, Advocate.
For the respondent:
r Mr. Ram Lal Assistant A.G. & Mr. Rajat Chauhan,

                           Law Officer.
Ms. Richa Thakur, Advocate as Amicus Curiae.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge



           The petitioner, who is under incarceration for the last one year and
one month, for purchasing 6 kilograms and 324 grams of charas, and 413




grams of opium, and after that transporting it through another accused, has
come up before this Court seeking bail.
2.   Based on a First Information Report (FIR), the police arrested the
petitioner, on 27.5.2019, in FIR No.83 of 2019, dated 27.5.2019, registered





under
Sections 18
,
20
&
29
of the NDPS Act, read with S. 181, 192, 196 of
Motor Vehicles Act, 1860,
(MV Act
), in Police Station, Jogindernagar,, District
Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, disclosing cognizable and non-bailable offenses.
3.   Earlier, the petitioner filed a petition under
Section 439
CrPC before
Special Judge-III, Mandi, HP. However, vide order dated 5.11.2019, the Court
dismissed the petition, because in the opinion of the Court, the Petitioner could
not cross the rigors of
S. 37
of NDPS Act.
4.    Mr. Nand Lal Thakur learned Additional Advocate General had filed the
status report through e-mail, printout of which is available on file. He further
submits that he had sent a copy of the status report to learned counsel for the
petitioner on WhatsApp number.
1      Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
2
5.   I have read the status report(s) and heard Mr. Naresh Kaul, Advocate for
the petitioner, Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Ld. Additional Advocate General for the
State of H.P., and Ms. Richa Thakur, Advocate, Amicus Curiae.
.
FACTS:
6.   The allegations in the First Information Report and the gist of the evidence





collected by the Investigator are:
a)    On 26th May 2019, the Police party headed by inspector/in charge of
     Police Station Jogindernagar, District Mandi, has erected/laid a barrier on





     National Highway No.154. At around 8.15 p.m., one car came from the
     side of Mandi towards Jogindernagar. The Inspector signaled the driver of
     the said car to stop, and on this, the driver of the car brought it to a halt

     and parked it on the side of the road. After this, the Inspector checked the

     said car, which was Maruti Alto, and told him to show the car's documents.
On this, the driver of the vehicle became perplexed and could not produce
     the registration certificate and other records of the car. He also started


     stammering and was extremely baffled. On inquiry, he revealed his name
     as Tule Singh.
b)    The body language and gesture of said Tule Singh raise suspicion in




     the mind of the Investigating Officer, (I.O.), that he is most likely





     possessing some contraband or drugs. After that, the I.O. sent one of the
     constables to bring an independent witness, who returned after 20 minutes
     and brought two persons Rakesh Kumar and Gaurav Kumar for being





     associated as independent witnesses for the ensuing search.                In the
     presence of these witnesses, the I.O. searched the vehicle, and below the
     front left seat, they noticed one cloth bag. The Police took it out and
     opened it. It had three taped packets. On opening these three packets,
     the Police detected charas.
c)    Similarly, the Police recovered a bag from the dickey of the said car.
     This bag also contained one polythene, and one envelop and further
     contained five taped packets. On opening, the Police recovered charas
     from four packages and opium from one pack.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
3
d)   After that, the I.O. procured the weighing scale, and after weighing,
    the total quantity of charas measured as 6 kilograms and 324 grams and
    opium as 413 grams. After that, the police put back the charas and the




                                                                     .
opium in the same packets and in a similar way and sealed the same.
After that, the police completed the other procedural requirement of the
NDPS Act
and
CrPC
and proceeded to arrest the accused. The police





    also took into possession of said Alto Car.
e)   After that, on the spot itself, the I.O. made inquiries from Tule Ram,
    and upon this, he confessed before the Police that persons, namely Ram





    Singh s/o Tek Singh, R/o Village Manhon, P.O. Palahach, Tehsil Banjar;
    Tanu R/o Village Manhon, P.O. Palahach, Tehsil Banjar; and Satish Singh
    (bail petitioner) S/o Kishore Singh, R/o Village Dhanpatan, P.O. Matlahar,
    Tehsil Jawali, District Kangra are also involved. He further told the I.O. that

    they were escorting the Alto Car in Satish Singh's white color Scorpio

    bearing registration No. HP54B-3622.        Immediately on receipt of such
    information, the I.O. informed Police Post Ghattu, District Mandi, to detain
    the said vehicle.
f)   On this H.C. Swami Nand of Police Post, Ghattu informed that they
    had detained such vehicle, and in this Scorpio, only one person, namely




    Satish Singh (bail Petition), is present and none-else. H.C. Swami Nand
    further told the I.O. that Satish Singh had said to him that those two





    persons have alighted from the vehicle at Jogindernagar. After that, the
    I.O. arrested Tule Singh and sent the report to the police station to register





    the FIR mentioned above. Thus, the Police arraigned Tule Ram, Satish
    Singh, Tanu, and Ram Singh @ Om Chand as accused and subsequently
    arrested all of them.
g)   During the investigation, the Police procured call details between
    accused persons. Tule Singh. The Police also procured the CCTV footage
    wherein, in the Scorpio vehicle, the Police could notice three persons.
h)   On seizure of the Scorpio mentioned above, the police recovered its
    registration certificate, which showed Scorpio's registration in the name of
    Satish Singh, petitioner herein. Subsequently, the police sent the charas
    and opium mentioned above and opium to SFL Junga, which tested
    positive for charas and opium after conducting the scientific examination.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
4
i)    In the investigation, the police concluded that Satish Singh, the bail
      petitioner, went to accused Om Chand accused No.4 at the spot known as
      Palahach, and there he purchased charas and opium from him. It further




                                                                     .
came in the investigation that after that, both the accused hired taxi of Tule





      Singh accused No.1 and told him that he has to transport the charas and
      opium at a place ahead of Jogindernagar. They settled the fare as INR





      12,000/- it further came in the investigation that accused No.3 Tiwan
      Singh, was also present there. They put the charas and opium in the Alto
      Car, and themselves started escorting the Alto in the Scorpio owned and





      driven by Satish Singh. While driving, these people kept on talking to Tule
      Singh. It further came in the investigation that on the evening of 26th May
      2019, all these persons had taken food together in one place.
PREVIOUS CRIMINAL HISTORY
7.    As per the police report the accused Satish Singh involved himself in the
following cases:
1).    FIR No. 178/97, dated 10/09/1997, under
Section 324
,
323
,
506
IPC,


     Police Station Jawali, District Kangra, H.P
2).    FIR No.26/98, dated 28.1.1998, under
Section 452
,
323
,
34
, IPC,
     Police Station Jawali, District Kangra, H.P
3).     FIR No.242/98, dated 10.12.1998, under
Section 325
,
34
IPC, Police
     Station Jawali, District Kangra, H.P
4).    FIR No.93/99, dated 24.5.1999, under Section 61-1-14 of the
Excise
     Act
, Police Station Jawali, District Kangra, H.P .
5).    FIR No. 141/05, dated 12.09.2005, under Section 61-1-14 of the
     Excise Act, Police Station Jawali, District Kangra, H.P.
8.    According to learned Counsel for the petitioner, in all such cases, the
petitioner stands acquitted and as on date, no case is pending against him.
Learned Counsel further submits that after acquittal he stands absolved from all
accusation and no reliance can be placed on such cases, which resulted into
his acquittal.
SUBMISSIONS:
9.    The learned counsel for the bail petitioner submits that the allegations are
false and concocted.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
5
10. On the contrary, Mr. Nand Lal Thakur, Additional Advocate General,
contends that the investigating officer has collected sufficient prima facie
evidence. He further submits that if this Court is inclined to grant bail, then such




                                                                     .
a bond must be subject to very stringent conditions.
11.   Ms. Richa Thakur, Learned Amicus Curiae very vehemently argued and
also drew attention to the orders of this Court in
Budhi Singh v. State of H.P.,





CrMPM
595 of 2020;
Manohar Lal v. State of H.P., CrMPM
126 of 2018;
Thakur
Dass v. State of H.P., CrMPM
167 of 2010;
Stynder Singh v. State of Himachal
Pradesh
, 2010(1) SimLC 490; and Nisar Ahmed Thakkar v. State of H.P.,





CrMPM 672 of 2008.
ANALYSIS AND REASONING:
12.   Pre-trial incarceration needs justification depending upon the heinous

nature of the offence, terms of the sentence prescribed in the statute for such a

crime, probability of the accused fleeing from justice, hampering the
investigation, and doing away with the victim(s) and witnesses. The Court is
under an obligation to maintain a balance between all stakeholders and



safeguard the interests of the victim, accused, society, and State.
13.
In
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab
, 1980 (2) SCC




565, a Constitutional bench of Supreme Court holds in Para 30, as follows,





           It is thus clear that the question whether to grant bail or
           not depends for its answer upon a variety of
           circumstances, the cumulative effect of which must enter





           into the judicial verdict. Any one single circumstance
           cannot be treated as of universal validity or as necessarily
           justifying the grant or refusal of bail
14.
In
Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public Prosecutor, High
Court of Andhra
Pradesh, (1978) 1 SCC 240, Supreme Court in Para 16, holds,

           The delicate light of the law favours release unless
           countered by the negative criteria necessitating that
           course.
15.
In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav
, 2005 (2)
SCC 42, a three-member bench of Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
6
"18. It is trite law that personal liberty cannot be taken
           away except in accordance with the procedure established
           by law. Personal liberty is a constitutional guarantee.
           However,
Article 21
which guarantees the above right also




                                                                     .
contemplates deprivation of personal liberty by procedure





           established by law. Under the criminal laws of this country,
           a person accused of offences which are non-bailable is
           liable to be detained in custody during the pendency of
           trial unless he is enlarged on bail in accordance with law.
Such detention cannot be questioned as being violative of
Article 21
since the same is authorised by law. But even
           persons accused of non-bailable offences are entitled for
           bail if the court concerned comes to the conclusion that
           the prosecution has failed to establish a prima facie case





           against him and/or if the court is satisfied for reasons to be
           recorded that in spite of the existence of prima facie case
           there is a need to release such persons on bail where fact
           situations require it to do so. In that process a person
           whose application for enlargement on bail is once rejected

           is not precluded from filing a subsequent application for

           grant of bail if there is a change in the fact situation. In
           such cases if the circumstances then prevailing requires
           that such persons to be released on bail, in spite of his
           earlier applications being rejected, the courts can do so."
16.
Section 2
(vii-a) of the
NDPS Act
defines commercial quantity as the
quantity greater than the quantity specified in the schedule, and
S. 2
(xxiii-a),
defines a small quantity as the quantity lesser than the quantity specified in the




schedule of
NDPS Act
. The remaining quantity falls in an undefined category,





which is now generally called as intermediate quantity.
All Sections in the NDPS
Act
, which specify an offence, also mention the minimum and maximum





sentence, depending upon the quantity of the substance. When the substance
falls under commercial quantity statute mandates minimum sentence of ten
years of imprisonment and a minimum fine of INR One hundred thousand, and
bail is subject to the riders mandated in
S. 37
of NDPS Act.
17.   In the present case, the quantity of substance seized is commercial
quantity. Given the legislative mandate of
S. 37
of NDPS Act, the Court can
release a person, accused of an offence punishable under the
NDPS Act
for
possessing a commercial quantity of contraband only after passing its rigors.
Section 37
of the Act is extracted as under: -
"37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
7
(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of
           Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974)
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be
           cognizable;
.
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for





           2[offences under
section 19
or
section 24
or
section 27A
and also for offences involving commercial quantity] shall
           be released on bail or on his own bond unless
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to





           oppose the application for such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application,
           the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
           believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is
           not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations
           under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974) or
           any other law for the time being in force, on granting of
           bail."
18.   Reading of
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
mandates that two conditions are to be
satisfied before a person/accused of possessing a commercial quantity of drugs
or psychotropic substance, is to be released on bail.
19. The first condition is to provide an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor and
clear her stand on the bail application. The second stipulation is that the Court
must be satisfied that reasonable grounds exist for believing that the accused is




not guilty of such offence, and that he is not likely to commit any offence while
on bail. If either of these two conditions is not met, the ban on granting bail





operates. The expression "reasonable grounds" means something more than
prima facie grounds. It contemplates substantial probable causes for believing





that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. Be that it may, if such a
finding is arrived at by the Court, then it is equivalent to giving a certificate of
discharge to the accused. Even on fulfilling one of the conditions, the
reasonable grounds for believing that during the period of bail, the accused is
not guilty of such an offence, the Court still cannot give a finding or assurance
that the accused is not likely to commit any such crime. Thus, the grant of bail
or denial of bail for possessing commercial quantity would depend on facts of
each case.
20.   JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON
S. 37
OF NDPS ACT:
a)    In
Union of India v. Merajuddin
, (1999) 6 SCC 43, a three Judges Bench
of Supreme Court while cancelling the bail, observed in Para 3, as follows,
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
8
The High Court appears to have completely ignored the
            mandate of
Sec. 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and
            Psychotropic Substances Act while granting him bail. The
            High Court overlooked the prescribed procedure."
.
b)   In
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549, a
three Judges Bench of Supreme Court holds,
7. The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the





            question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from the
            grant of opportunity to the public prosecutor, the other twin
            conditions which really have relevance so far the present
            accused-respondent is concerned, are (1) the satisfaction
            of the Court that there are reasonable grounds for





            believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
            offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
            while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
            alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the
            accused being not guilty has to be based for reasonable

            grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means

            something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
            substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
            is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief
            contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
            facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to


            justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
            alleged offence.
c)   In
Satpal Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2018) 13 SCC 813, a bench of three




judges of Supreme Court directed that since the quantity involved was





commercial, as such High Court could not have and should not have passed the
order under sections 438 or 439
CrPC
, without reference to
Section 37
of the





NDPS Act.
d)   In
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705, Supreme
Court holds,
6.
Section 37
as amended starts with a non-obstante
            clause stating that notwithstanding anything contained in
            the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 no person accused
            of an offence prescribed therein shall be released on bail
            unless the conditions contained therein were satisfied.
The
            Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act
is a
            special enactment as already noted it was enacted with a
            view to make stringent provision for the control and
            regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and
            psychotropic substances. That being the underlying object
            and particularly when the provisions of
Section 37
of
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
9
Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act
are in
          negative terms limiting the scope of the applicability of the
          provisions of
Criminal Procedure Code
regarding bail, in
          our view, it cannot be held that the High Court's powers to




                                                                    .
grant bail under
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code are





          not subject to the limitation mentioned under
Section 37
of
          Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act. The
          non-obstante clause with which the Section starts should
          be given its due meaning and clearly it is intended to





          restrict the powers to grant bail. In case of inconsistency
          between
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code and
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
          Substances Act, 1985
Section 37
prevails.
e)   In
Babua v. State of Orissa
, (2001) 2 SCC 566, Supreme Court holds,
          [3] In view of
Section 37(1)(b)
of the Act unless there are
          reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not
          guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit

          any offence while on bail alone will entitle him to a bail. In
          the present case, the petitioner attempted to secure bail

          on various grounds but failed. But those reasons would be
          insignificant if we bear in mind the scope of
Section 37(1)
(b) of the Act. At this stage of the case all that could be
          seen is whether the statements made on behalf of the


          prosecution witnesses, if believable, would result in
          conviction of the petitioner or not. At this juncture, we
          cannot say that the accused is not guilty of the offence if
          the allegations made in the charge are established. Nor




          can we say that the evidence having not been completely
          adduced before the Court that there are no grounds to
          hold that he is not guilty of such offence. The other aspect





          to be borne in mind is that the liberty of a citizen has got to
          be balanced with the interest of the society. In cases
          where narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances are





          involved, the accused would indulge in activities which are
          lethal to the society. Therefore, it would certainly be in the
          interest of the society to keep such persons behind bars
          during the pendency of the proceedings before the Court,
          and the validity of
Section 37(1)(b)
having been upheld,
          we cannot take any other view.
f)   In Bijando Singh v. Md. Ibocha, 2004(10) SCC 151, Supreme Court
holds,
3. Being aggrieved by the order of the Special Court
          (NDPS), releasing the accused on bail, the appellant
          moved the Guwahati High Court against the said order on
          the ground that the order granting bail is contrary to the
          provisions of law and the appropriate authority never
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
10
noticed the provisions of
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs
          And Psychotropic Substances Act. The High Court,
          however, being of the opinion that if the attendance of the
          accused is secured by means of bail bonds, then he is




                                                                   .
entitled to be released on bail. The High Court, thus, in our





          opinion, did not consider the provisions of
Section 37
of
          the Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances Act.
g)   In N.C.B.Trivandrarum v. Jalaluddin, 2004 Law Suit (SC) 1598,





Supreme Court observed,
3.     ...Be that as it may another mandatory requirement
          of
Section 37
of the Act is that where Public Prosecutor
          opposes the bail application, the court should be satisfied





          that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
          accused is not guilty of such offence and he is not likely to
          commit any offence while on bail. In the impugned order
          we do not find any such satisfaction recorded by the High
          Court while granting bail nor there is any material available

          to show that the High Court applied its mind to these

          mandatory requirements of the Act.
h)   In
Union of India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798, Supreme
Court holds,
6. As the provision itself provides no person shall be
          granted bail unless the two conditions are satisfied. They




          are; the satisfaction of the Court that there are reasonable
          grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty and.
          that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
Both the conditions have to be satisfied. If either of these
          two conditions is not satisfied, the bar operates and the
          accused cannot be released on bail.
7. The expression used in
Section 37(1)(b)(ii)
is
          "reasonable grounds". The expression means something
          more than prima facie grounds. It connotes substantial
          probable causes for believing that the accused is not guilty
          of the offence charged and this reasonable belief
          contemplated in turn points to existence of such facts and
          circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to justify
          recording of satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of
          the offence charged.
8. The word "reasonable" has in law the prima facie
          meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances
          of which the actor, called on to act reasonably, knows or
          ought to know. It is difficult to give an exact definition of
          the word 'reasonable'. Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, Fourth
          Edition, page 2258 states that it would be unreasonable to
          expect an exact definition of the word "reasonable'.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
11
Reason varies it, its conclusions according to the
         idiosyncrasy of the individual, and the times and
         circumstances in which he thinks. The reasoning which
         built up the old scholastic logic sounds now like the jingling




                                                                    .
of a child's toy. (See : Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
M/s Jagan Nath Ashok Kumar and another, (1987)4 SCC
         497 and Gujarat Water Supplies and Sewerage Board v.
         Unique Erectors (Gujarat) Pvt Ltd and another [(1989)1
         SCC 532].
9. It is often said "an attempt to give a specific meaning to
         the word 'reasonable' is trying to count what is not number
         and measure what is not space". The author of 'Words and
         Phrases' (Permanent Edition) has quoted from in re Nice
         &., Schreiber 123 F. 987, 988 to give a plausible meaning





         for the said word. He says, "the expression 'reasonable' is
         a relative term, and the facts of the particular controversy
         must be considered before the question as to what
         constitutes reasonable can be determined". It is not meant
         to be expedient or convenient but certainly something

         more than that.
10. The word 'reasonable' signifies "in accordance with
         reason". In the ultimate analysis it is a question of fact,
         whether a particular act is reasonable or not depends on
         the circumstances in a given situation. (See :
Municipal
         Corporation of Greater Mumbai and another v. Kamla Mills


         Ltd.
, 2003(4) RCR(Civil) 265 : (2003)6 SCC 315)."
11. The Court while considering the application for bail
         with reference to
Section 37
of the Act is not called upon
         to record a finding of not guilty. It is for the limited purpose




         essentially confined to the question of releasing the
         accused on bail that the Court is called upon to see if





         there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
         accused is not guilty and records its satisfaction about the
         existence of such grounds. But the Court has not to





         consider the matter as if it is pronouncing a judgment of
         acquittal and recording a finding of not guilty.
12. Additionally, the Court has to record a finding that
         while on bail the accused is not likely to commit any
         offence and there should also exist some materials to
         come to such a conclusion.
i)   In
N.R. Mon v. Md. Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721, Supreme Court
holds,
9. ...The limitations on granting of bail come in only when
         the question of granting bail arises on merits. Apart from
         the grant opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other
         twin conditions which really have relevance so far as the
         present accused-respondent is concerned, are: the
         satisfaction of the court that there are reasonable grounds
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
12
for believing, that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
          offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
          while on bail. The conditions are cumulative and not
          alternative. The satisfaction contemplated regarding the




                                                                    .
accused being not guilty has to be based on reasonable





          grounds. The expression "reasonable grounds" means
          something more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
          substantial probable causes for believing that the accused
          is not guilty of the alleged offence. The reasonable belief





          contemplated in the provision requires existence of such
          facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to
          justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the
          alleged offence. In the case hand the High Court seems to
          have completely overlooked underlying object of Section
37.
j)   In
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009) 2 SCC 624, Supreme
Court holds,
14. We may, however, hasten to add that while

          considering an application for bail with reference to
Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
          Substances Act, the Court is not called upon to record a
          finding of 'not guilty'. At this stage, it is neither necessary
          nor desirable to weigh the evidence meticulously to arrive


          at a positive finding as to whether or not the accused has
          committed offence under the
Narcotic Drugs And
          Psychotropic Substances Act
. What is to be seen is
          whether there is reasonable ground for believing that the




          accused is not guilty of the offence(s) he is charged with
          and further that he is not likely to commit an offence under





          the said Act while on bail. The satisfaction of the Court
          about the existence of the said twin conditions is for a
          limited purpose and is confined to the question of





          releasing the accused on bail.
k)   In
Union of India v. Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738, Supreme
Court holds,
7. ...
Section 37
of the NDPS Act contains special
          provisions with regard to grant of bail in respect of certain
          offences enumerated under the said Section. They are :-
(1) In the case of a person accused of an offence
          punishable under
Section 19
, (2) Under
Section 24
, (3)
          Under
Section 27A
and (4) Of offences involving
          commercial quantity. The accusation in the present case is
          with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial
          quantity. Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor
          opposes the application for bail to a person accused of the
          enumerated offences under
Section 37
of the NDPS Act,
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
13
in case, the court proposes to grant bail to such a person,
          two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to
          the normal requirements under the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
. or any other enactment. (1) The court must be




                                                                    .
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing





          that the person is not guilty of such offence; (2) that
          person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
8. There is no such consideration with regard to the
          mandatory requirements, while releasing the respondents





          on bail.
9. Hence, we are satisfied that the matter needs to be
          considered afresh by the High Court. The impugned order
          is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for
          fresh consideration. It will be open to the parties to take all





          available contentions before the High Court.
l)   In
Sujit Tiwari v. State of Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84, in the given
facts, Supreme Court granted bail, by observing,
10. The prosecution story is that the appellant was aware

          of what his brother was doing and was actively helping his
          brother. At this stage we would not like to comment on the
          merits of the allegations levelled against the present
          appellant. But other than the few WhatsApp messages
          and his own statement which he has resiled from, there is


          very little other evidence. At this stage it appears that the
          appellant may not have even been aware of the entire
          conspiracy because even the prosecution story is that the
          brother himself did not know what was loaded on the ship




          till he was informed by the owner of the vessel. Even when
          the heroin was loaded in the ship it was supposed to go





          towards Egypt and that would not have been a crime
          under the
NDPS Act
. It seems that Suprit Tiwari and other
          7 crew members then decided to make much more money





          by bringing the ship to India with the intention of disposing
          of the drugs in India. During this period the Master Suprit
          Tiwari took the help of Vishal Kumar Yadav and Irfan
          Sheikh who had to deliver the consignment to Suleman
          who had to arrange the money after delivery. The main
          allegation made against the appellant is that he sent the
          list of the crew members after deleting the names of 4
          Iranians and Esthekhar Alam to Vishal Kumar Yadav and
          Irfan Sheikh through WhatsApp with a view to make their
          disembarkation process easier. Even if we take the
          prosecution case at the highest, the appellant was aware
          that his brother was indulging in some illegal activity
          because obviously such huge amount of money could not
          be made otherwise. However, at this stage it cannot be
          said with certainty whether he was aware that drugs were
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
14
being smuggled on the ship or not, though the allegation is
           that he made such a statement to the NCB under
Section
           67
of the NDPS Act.
11. At this stage, without going into the merits, we feel that




                                                                     .
the case of the appellant herein is totally different from the





           other accused. Reasonable possibility is there that he may
           be acquitted. He has been behind bars since his arrest on
           04.08.2017 i.e. for more than 2 years and he is a young
           man aged about 25 years. He is a B.Tech Graduate.
Therefore, under facts and circumstances of this case we
           feel that this is a fit case where the appellant is entitled to
           bail because there is a possibility that he was unaware of
           the illegal activities of his brother and the other crew
           members. The case of the appellant is different from that





           of all the other accused, whether it be the Master of the
           ship, the crew members or the persons who introduced
           the Master to the prospective buyers and the prospective
           buyers.
12. We, however, feel that some stringent conditions will

           have to be imposed upon the appellant.
SUM UP:
21.    From the summary of the law relating to rigors of
S.37
of NDPS Act,


while granting bail involving commercial quantities in the
NDPS Act
, the

following fundamental principles emerge:
a)    The limitations on granting of bail come in only when the question of
      granting bail arises on merits. [
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva





      Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
b)    In case the Court proposes to grant bail, two conditions are to be
      mandatorily satisfied in addition to the standard requirements under





      the provisions of the
CrPC
or any other enactment. [
Union of India v.
      Niyazuddin & Anr
, (2018) 13 SCC 738].
c)    Apart from the grant opportunity to the Public Prosecutor, the other
      twin conditions which really have relevance are the Court's
      satisfaction that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
      accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. [
N.R. Mon v. Md.
      Nasimuddin
, (2008) 6 SCC 721].
d)    The satisfaction contemplated regarding the accused being not guilty
      has to be more than prima facie grounds, considering substantial
      probable causes for believing and justifying that the accused is not
      guilty of the alleged offence. [
Customs, New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva
      Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
e)    Twin conditions of
S. 37
are cumulative and not alternative. [
Customs,
      New Delhi v. Ahmadalieva Nodira
, (2004) 3 SCC 549].
f)    If the statements of the prosecution witnesses are believed, then
      they would not result in a conviction. [
Babua v. State of Orissa
, (2001)
      2 SCC 566].
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
15
g)   At this stage, it is neither necessary nor desirable to weigh the
     evidence meticulously to arrive at a positive finding as to whether or
     not the accused has committed an offence under the
NDPS Act
and




                                                                   .
further that he is not likely to commit an offence under the said Act





     while on bail. [
Union of India v. Rattan Mallik @ Habul
, (2009) 2 SCC
     624].
h)   While considering the application for bail concerning
Section 37
, the
     Court is not called upon to record a finding of not guilty. [
Union of





     India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari
, (2007) 7 SCC 798].
i)   In case of inconsistency,
S. 37
of the NDPS Act prevails over
S. 439
CrPC. [
Narcotics Control Bureau v Kishan Lal
, 1991 (1) SCC 705].
j)   Bail must be subject to stringent conditions. [
Sujit Tiwari v. State of
     Gujarat
, 2020 SCC Online SC 84].
22. The difference in the order of bail and final judgment is similar to a sketch
and a painting. However, some sketches would be detailed and paintings with a
few strokes. Satisfying the rigors of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act is candling the

infertile eggs.
23. In the present case, a perusal of evidence collected so far, and as placed
in the Police report filed under
section 173(2)
CrPC, connects the petitioner with
the principal accused with three circumstances. Firstly, by his presence with



other accused in the same evening taking meals together, as recorded in CCTV
footage. Secondly, through confession of main accused before Police, and lastly




from the seizure of his Scorpio, soon after the confession of the main accused.
24. Even if all the accused took meals together in the evening, as recorded in





CCTV, there is nothing to infer the time and place where he had kept the
contraband in his Alto car. There is no legal evidence that he had placed





contraband prior to the CCTV recording. The only evidence qua the placing of
the contraband prior to taking meals is by way of the confession of the main
accused before Police, which is legally inadmissible. Moreover, perusal of the
phone records show no calls exchanged between Tule Ram and petitioner.
25.
In
Surinder Kumar Khanna v. Intelligence Officer Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence
, (2018) 8 SCC 271, Supreme Court holds,
           "13. In the present case it is accepted that apart from the
           aforesaid statements of co-accused there is no material
           suggesting involvement of the appellant in the crime in question.
           We are thus left with only one piece of material that is the
           confessional statements of the co-accused as stated above. On
           the touchstone of law
laid down by
this Court such a
           confessional statement of a co-accused cannot by itself be
           taken as a substantive piece of evidence against another co-
           accused and can at best be used or utilized in order to lend
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
16
assurance to the Court. In the absence of any substantive
           evidence it would be inappropriate to base the conviction of the
           appellant purely on the statements of co-accused."
.
26. Given the factual matrix, considerable time must have passed (Initial
inquiry, twenty minutes in arranging independent witnesses, search, seizure,
weighing by procuring a weighing machine, sampling, and preparation of search





memo, seizure memo, information to Police, preparation of NCB forms)
between the confession of Tule Ram of being escorted by the petitioner in his
Scorpio, and the interception of Scorpio at Police Post Ghattu, the vehicle





would have traveled a substantial. The investigation is silent about the time as
well as the distance between the place of a search of Tule Ram's Alto and
stoppage of Scorpio at Police Post Ghattu. The distance between these two

places assumes importance. Coupled with the fact that the Police noticed and

arrested only one person traveling in SUV, prima facie points out Scorpio's
interception, driven by the petitioner, possibly a setup. However, the
investigation is still not complete. It is for the Investigating Officer to look into


this aspect and conduct further investigation per law.
27. The report under
Section 173(2)
CrPC does not restrict the police's
powers to investigate further by following the law. Needless to say, that the




Prosecution has all the rights of further investigation under
S. 173(8)
CrPC,
following the law. However, the missing links mentioned above, take the case





out of the rigors of
S. 37
of the NDPS Act and makes out a case for bail.
28. Criminal conspiracies are hatched in secrecy. The recovery did not take





place directly from the petitioner. Suffice to say that the quantity involved in this
case is the commercial quantity, and the petitioner has crossed the riders of
Section 37
of the NDPS Act.
29. The petitioner is a permanent resident of District Kangra, therefore, his
presence can always be secured.
30. Without commenting on the merits of the evidence collected so far, the fact
that initial interception of the petitioner appears to be not above board, coupled
with the fact that the confession against co-accused is inadmissible, and the
silence on the points extracted mentioned above would create reasons to make
this Court believe that till now, the petitioner has made out a case for bail
secondly. Thus, acquittal absolves him of all charges. To fulfill the second part
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
17
of
Section 37
of the NDPS Act, this Court can impose stringent conditions to
ensure and satisfy that the accused does not repeat the offence.
31. Any detailed discussions about the evidence may prejudice the case of the




                                                                         .
prosecution or the accused. Suffice it to say that due to the reasons mentioned





above, and keeping in view the nature of allegations, this Court believes that
further incarceration of the accused during the period of trial is neither





warranted, nor justified, or going to achieve any significant purpose:
32. To ensure that the petitioner does not get an opportunity to commit an
offence while on bail and the Court is putting the following stringent conditions





and this bail shall be subject to the strict terms.
33. Given the above reasoning, the Court is granting bail to the petitioner,
subject to the imposition of following stringent conditions, which shall be over
and above, and irrespective of the contents of the form of bail bonds in chapter

XXXIII of
CrPC
. Consequently, the present petition is allowed. The petitioner

shall be released on bail in the present case, connected with the FIR mentioned
above, on his furnishing a personal bond of INR 10,000/, (INR Ten thousand
only), to the satisfaction of the Trial Court. The petitioner shall also furnish one



surety for INR 5000 (INR Five thousand only), to the satisfaction of the
Sessions Court/Special Court/ Chief Judicial Magistrate/Ilaqua Magistrate/Duty




Magistrate/the Court, which is exercising jurisdiction over the concerned Police
Station where FIR is registered. Trial Court. The furnishing of bail bonds shall





be deemed acceptance of all stipulations, terms, and conditions of this bail
order:
a)    The petitioner to give security to the concerned Court(s)/
     Investigating Officer, for attendance on every date, unless exempted, and
     in case of Appeal, also promise to appear before the higher Court, in terms
     of
Section 437-A
CrPC.
b)    The Attesting officer shall mention on the reverse page of personal
     bonds, the permanent address of the petitioner along with the phone
     number(s), WhatsApp number (if any), email (if any), and details of
     personal bank account(s) (if available).
c)    The petitioner shall join the investigation as and when called by the
     Investigating Officer or any superior officer.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
18
d)      The petitioner shall not influence, threaten, browbeat, or pressurize
    the witnesses and the Police officials.
e)      The petitioner shall not make any inducement, threat, or promise,




                                                                     .
directly or indirectly, to the Investigating officer, or any other person





    acquainted with the facts of the case, to dissuade them from disclosing
    such facts to the Police, or the Court, or to tamper with the evidence.
f)      Once the trial begins, the appellant shall not in any manner try to
    delay the trial. The petitioner undertakes to appear before the concerned
    Court, on the issuance of summons/warrants by such Court. The petitioner





    shall attend the trial on each date, unless exempted, and in case of
    Appeal, also promise to appear before the higher Court, in terms of
Section 437-A
CrPC.
g)      There shall be a presumption of proper service to the petitioner about

    the date of hearing in the concerned Court, even if it takes place through

    SMS/ WhatsApp message/ E-Mail/ or any other similar medium, by the
    Court.
h)      In the first instance, the Court shall issue summons and may inform



    the Petitioner about such summons through SMS/ WhatsApp message/ E-
    Mail.
i)      In case the petitioner fails to appear before the Court on the specified
    date, then the concerned Court may issue bailable warrants, and to enable





    the accused to know the date, the Court may, if it so desires, also inform
    the petitioner about such Bailable warrants through SMS/ WhatsApp





    message/ E-Mail.
j)      Finally, if the petitioner still fails to put in an appearance, then the
    concerned Court may issue Non-Bailable warrants to procure the
    petitioner's presence and send the petitioner to the Judicial custody for a
    period for which the concerned Court may deem fit and proper.
k)      In case of Non-appearance, then irrespective of the contents of the
    bail bonds, the petitioner undertakes to pay all the expenditure (only the
    principal amount without interest), that the State might incur to produce
    him before such Court, provided such amount exceeds the amount
    recoverable after forfeiture of the bail bonds, and also subject to the
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
19
provisions of
Sections 446
&
446-A
of CrPC. The petitioner's failure to
    reimburse the State shall entitle the trial Court to order the transfer of
    money from the bank account(s) of the petitioner. However, this recovery




                                                                     .
is subject to the condition that the expenditure incurred must be spent to





    trace the petitioner and it relates to the exercise undertaken solely to
    arrest the petitioner in that FIR, and during that voyage, the Police had not





    gone for any other purpose/function what so ever.
l)   The petitioner shall abstain from all criminal activities. If done, then
    while considering bail in the fresh FIR, the Court shall take into account





    that even earlier, the Court had cautioned the accused not to do so.
m)   The petitioner shall intimate about the change of residential address
    and change of phone numbers, WhatsApp number, e-mail accounts, within
    10 days from such modification, to the police station of this FIR, and also

    to the concerned Court.
n)   The petitioner shall, within ten days of his release from prison,
    procure a smartphone, and inform its IMEI number and other details to the
    SHO/I.O. of the Police station mentioned before. He shall keep the phone



    location always on the "ON" mode. Before replacing his mobile phone, he
    shall produce the existing phone to the SHO/I.O. of the police station and




    give details of the new phone. Whenever the SHO, I.O., or any officer of
    the concerned Police Station, ask him to share his location, then he shall





    immediately do so. The petitioner shall neither clear the location history
    nor format his phone without permission of the concerned SHO/I.O. or any





    officer of the concerned Police Station.
o)   During the pendency of the trial, if the petitioner commits any offence
    under
NDPS Act
, even if it involves small quantity, then it shall be open for
    the State to apply for cancellation of this bail order.
p)   In case of violation of any of the conditions as stipulated in this order,
    the State/Public Prosecutor may apply for cancellation of bail of the
    petitioner, and even the concerned trial Court shall be competent to cancel
    the bail. Otherwise, the bail bonds shall continue to remain in force
    throughout the trial and also after that in terms of
Section 437-A
of the
    CrPC.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
20
q)    The learned counsel for the petitioner, as well as the attesting officer,
     shall explain the conditions of this bail to the petitioner.
r)    The petitioner shall surrender all firearms along with ammunitions, if




                                                                      .
any, along with the arms license to the concerned authority within 30 days





     from today. However, subject to the provisions of the
Indian Arms Act,
     1959
, the petitioner shall be entitled to renew and take it back, in case of





     acquittal in this case.
34. In case the petitioner finds the bail condition(s) as violating fundamental,
human, or other rights, or causing difficulty due to any situation, then for





modification of such term(s), the petitioner may file a reasoned application
before this Court, and after taking cognizance, even before the Court taking
cognizance or the trial Court, as the case may be, and such Court shall also be

competent to modify or delete any condition.
35. The officer in whose presence the petitioner puts signatures on personal
bonds shall explain all conditions of this bail order to the petitioner, in
vernacular.
36. The petitioner undertakes to comply with all the directions given in this
order. Furnishing of bail bonds by the petitioner is the acceptance of all such
conditions.
37. On the reverse page of the personal bonds, the officer attesting the





personal bonds shall ascertain the identity of the bail-petitioner, through these
documents.
38. Consequently, the petitioner shall be released on bail in the present case,
in connection with the FIR mentioned above, on her/his furnishing bail bonds in
the terms described above.
39. This order does not, in any manner, limit or restrict the rights of the Police
or the investigating agency, from further investigation in accordance with law.
40. The present bail order is only for the FIR mentioned above. It shall not be
a blanket order of bail in any other case(s) registered against the petitioner.
41. Any observation made hereinabove is neither an expression of opinion on
the merits of the case, nor shall the trial Court advert to these comments.
42. The Court Master shall handover this order to the concerned branch of the
Registry of this Court, and the said official shall immediately send a copy of this
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
21
order to the District and Sessions Judge, concerned, by e-mail. The Court
attesting the bonds shall not insist upon the certified copy of this order and shall
download the same from the website of this Court, or accept a copy attested by




                                                                     .
an Advocate, which shall be sufficient for the record. The Court Master shall





handover an authenticated copy of this order to the Counsel for the Petitioner
and the Learned Advocate General if they ask for the same.
43. In return for the freedom curtailed for breaking the law, the Court believes
that the accused shall also reciprocate through desirable behavior.
44. The petition stands allowed in the terms mentioned above.
June 29, 2020 (ps)
                        r             to                  (Anoop Chitkara),
                                                               Judge.
::: Downloaded on - 29/06/2020 20:21:49 :::HCHP
