Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 11 of 1947
Citation: SCC 733,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/152057053/

[Cites
26
, Cited by
3
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Ultratech Cement Ltd vs Praveen Shukla on 8 June, 2021
Author:
Sanjay Dwivedi
Bench:
Sanjay Dwivedi
-:-   1   -:-
                                      W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


        THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
            PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
                    W.P. No.1442/2020
       UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Siya Sharan Pandey
                       W.P. No.3233/2020
      UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Durga Prasad Dwivedi
                       W.P. No.3235/2020
         UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Lalman Pandey
                       W.P. No.3348/2020
       UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Jwala Prasad Patel
                       W.P. No.3352/2020
       UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Sapan Kumar Bose
                       W.P. No.4160/2020
         UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Brijkishore Garg
                       W.P. No.4162/2020
         UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Jairam Gautam
                       W.P. No.4573/2020
         UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Praveen Shukla
                       W.P. No.4596/2020
   UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Jageshwar Prasad Sondhiya
                             and
                       W.P. No.4938/2020
       UltraTech Cement Ltd. Vs. Ram Prakash Mishra

Date of Order             08.06.2021
Bench Constituted         Single Bench
Order delivered by        Hon'ble Shri Justice Sanjay
                          Dwivedi, J.
Whether approved for      YES
reporting
Name of counsels for      For Petitioner : Shri Aditya Adhikari,
the parties               Senior Advocate with Shri Deepak
                          Tiwari, Advocate.
                                    -:-   2   -:-
                                             W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


                              For respondent :                Shri    Sanjay
                              Verma, Advocate.
Law laid down                 The cement industry is a controlled
                              industry and is Controlled by the
                              Central Government but the State
                              Government is also an "appropriate
                              Government" and can refer the
                              dispute of an employee working in
                              the said industry except in the case
                              of mines and quarries forming part
                              of the cement industry where the
                              Central Government alone has
                              jurisdiction.
Significant Para Nos.         14 to 18
Reserved on : 11.02.2021
Delivered on : 08.06.2021
                         (O R D E R)
Since this batch of petitions is involving same

question, therefore, it is analogously heard.
For the purpose of convenience, the facts of W.P.

No.1442/2020 are being taken up. All the petitions are listed for

final hearing in motion stage in pursuance to the order dated

18.01.2021, accordingly, parties are ready to argue the matter

finally and it is finally heard.
A petition has been filed under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India questioning the validity of the order dated

30.09.2019 (Annexure-P/13) passed in Case No.64/18 IDR by

Labour Court, Satna deciding reference made to it by the office

of Labour Commissioner, Indore, as the dispute was raised
-:-    3   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


under
Section 10(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947

(hereinafter referred to as the 'Act, 1947'). The question of

reference was

     "as to whether Siya Sharan Pandey s/o Ram Milan

Pandey has been retired from service prior to the prescribed

age of superannuation? If yes, then whether the order of

superannuation is legal and appropriate? If not, then what

benefit can be granted to the workman superannuated and

what direction should be given to the employer in this regard?"
2.         The reference was answered by the Labour Court

after framing as many as three issues holding that the order of

superannuation of the applicant (respondent herein) dated

26.10.2015 retiring him w.e.f. 31.01.2016 was illegal and

unjustified and as such, the same was set aside and direction

was issued to the employer (present petitioner) to allow the

respondent to be continued in service till the age of 60 years

and further directed that he be also paid back wages at the rate

of 50% from the date when he superannuated from service till

the date of order.
3.         The   factual   matrix       of    the   case    relevant     for

considering the question raised may be thus;
(3.1) The respondent had worked in the petitioner's
-:-   4   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


organisation w.e.f. 01.01.1996 till 31.01.2016. His last drawn

pay was Rs.24,426/-. He was retired after attaining the age of

58 years. As per the applicant (respondent herein) his

superannuation was contrary to the amendment made by the

State of Madhya Pradesh, published in State Gazette on

28.06.2014 enhancing the age of superannuation from 58 to 60

years, as such, retiring him w.e.f. 31.01.2016 was illegal as the

age of superannuation has already been determined as 60

years. The respondent challenged the said action of the

petitioner saying that his superannuation comes within the

definition of retrenchment according to the definition provided

under the provisions of the Act, 1947. He raised the dispute

seeking declaration of order dated 26.10.2015 retiring him w.e.f.
31.01.2016 illegal and void and further claimed that he may be

allowed to continue till the age of 60 years and be also paid

salary from the date of superannuation till the date of

reinstatement or attaining the age of 60 years.
(3.2) Reply has been filed by the petitioner taking stand

therein that according to the order of appointment and the terms

and conditions contained therein, the age of superannuation

was determined as 58 years and the amendment on which

reliance has been placed by the employee is not applicable to

the petitioner's organisation.
-:-   5   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


     (3.3) The Labour Court entertained the reference made to

it by the Labour Commissioner, Indore, and answered vide

impugned award dated 30.09.2019 holding that the order dated

26.10.2015 retiring the respondent w.e.f. 31.01.2016 at the age

of 58 years was illegal and void and directed him to be entitled

to get 50% of back wages till the date of attaining the age of 60

years.
(3.4) Challenging the award passed by the Labour Court,

this petition has been filed by the petitioner raising solitary

ground that the impugned award is without jurisdiction as the

petitioner/company is a group of cement manufacturing industry

engaged in manufacturing of cement and governs with the

provisions of the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,

1951
(for short the 'Act, 1951') and as per Schedule-I of the

said Act, cement industry is shown at Item No.35 under the

control of Central Government and as such, provisions of
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,

1961
(for brevity the 'Act, 1961') and Rules framed thereunder

are not applicable to the cement industry.
4.         The respondent-workman working in the petitioner's

company should have raised industrial dispute before the

Conciliation Officer appointed by the Central Government
-:-    6    -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


because the "appropriate Government" for the respondent was

the Central Government and as such, the State Government

has committed an error in entertaining and referring the dispute

decided by the Labour Court, Satna by the impugned award,

therefore, the same is without jurisdiction and declared to be

void. The hub of the issue is whether the State Government is

an "appropriate Government" and competent to refer the

dispute in regard to respondent or not?
5.         Shri Adhikari appearing for the petitioner giving

strength to his stand submits that the petitioner's organisation is

a group of cement industry and is under control of the Central

Government because the cement industry finds place at
Item

No.-35 of the First Schedule of the Act, 1951
and according to

him, the cement industry and the employees working therein

govern with the provisions of the Act, 1951 as the same is

under the control of the Central Government. He has drawn

attention of this Court towards
Section 2
of the Act, 1951 which

reads as under:-
"2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the
        Union.- It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the
        public interest that the Union should take under its
        control    the   industries       specified   in   the   First
        Schedule."
Further, Item No.-35 of the First Schedule of the Act
, 1951
-:-   7   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


reads as under:-
"35. Cement and Gypsum Products:
(1) Portland cement.
(2) Asbestos cement.
(3) Insulating boards.
(4) Gypsum boards, wall boards and the like."
6.         Shri Adhikari further submits that as per
Section 4
of

the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 since

the cement industries are under the control of the Central

Government, therefore, are governed with the provisions of the

Act, 1946 and no other provisions like the Act, 1961 would be

applicable to them. He has further drawn attention of this Court

towards
Section 4
of the Act, 1946 which reads as under:-
"3[(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to-
(i) any industry to which the provisions of Chapter
                  VII of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946
                  (Bombay Act 11 of 1947) apply; or
(ii) any industrial establishment to which the
                  provisions of the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial
                  Employment      (Standing      Orders) Act,    1961
(Madhya Pradesh Act 26 of 1961) apply:
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in
        the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Employment (Standing
        Orders) Act, 1961
(Madhya Pradesh Act 26 of 1961), the
        provisions of this Act shall apply to all industrial
        establishments under the control of the Central
        Government.]"
-:-   8   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases
7.         He has also submitted that the provisions of the Act,

1961 do not apply to the petitioner/company as per
Section 2
of

the Act, 1961. He has also drawn attention of this Court towards
Section 2
of the Act, 1961 which provides for applicability of the

provisions of the said Act which reads as under:-
"2.
Application of the Act
.- (1)
This Act
shall apply to :-
(a) every undertaking wherein the number of
                employees on any day during the twelve months
                preceding or on the day this Act comes into
                force or non any day thereafter was or is more
                than twenty; and
(b) such other class or classes of undertakings as
                the State Government may, from time to time, by
                notification, specify in this behalf :
2
[Provided that it shall not apply to an
         undertaking carried on by or under the authority of
         the Central Government or railway administration
         or a mine or an oilfield.]"
8.         Shri Adhikari submits that proviso attached to
Section 2
categorically provides that the provisions of the Act,

1961 would not be applicable to an undertaking carried on by or

under the authority of the Central Government. He has further

drawn attention of this Court towards
Section 4
of the Act, 1961

and submits that
Section 4
very categorically provides that

where the provisions of the Act, 1961 apply, the provisions of

the Act, 1946 would not apply as
Section 4
of the Act, 1961
-:-   9   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


provides as under:-
"4. Central Act XX of 1946 not to apply.-Nothing in
          Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (XX
          of 1946), shall, apply to any undertaking to which this Act
          applies :"
9.           Shri Adhikari also submits that in view of the

aforesaid submissions, it is clear that the amendment made

under the provisions of the M.P. Industrial Employment

(Standing Orders) Rules, 1963 which has been framed under

the power conferred in
Section 21
of the Act, 1961 wherein Rule

14-A prescribed the age of retirement and as such, the earlier

age of retirement i.e. 58 years was increased to 60 years. He

also submits that so far as the petitioner is concerned, the

provisions     of      the   Act,    1946           are   applicable    to   the

petitioner/company and the Rules made under the power

conferred in
Section 55
of the Act, 1946, are known as the

Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Central Rules, 1946

which itself contained the age of retirement which is prescribed

in Schedule-I-B attached to the said Rules, which reads as

under:-
"(3) Age of retirement

             The age of retirement or superannuation of a
          workman shall be as may be agreed upon between the
          employer and the workman under an agreement or as
          specified in a settlement or award which is binding on
-:-   10   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


         both the workman and the employer. Where there is no
         such agreed age, retirement or superannuation shall be
         on completion of [58] years of age by the workman."
10.         Shri Adhikari further submits that in view of the

provisions of the Act, 1946 there is a "wage settlement"
between the Cement Manufacturers' Association and Workers'

Federation & Central Trade Unions on 27.04.2005 which is

available on record as Annexures-R-J-1 to R-J-4 filed along with

rejoinder. He also submits that as per the "wage settlement",

the employees had taken the benefit of wage enhancement

made from time to time by the Central Government and,

therefore, at the verge of retirement, the respondent cannot

take the benefit of the age of retirement enhanced by the State

Government because there is no increase in the age of

retirement as prescribed under the provisions of the Central

Rules, 1946 which governed the service conditions of the

respondent. Shri Adhikari also submits that the State notification

published in the State Gazette on 28.06.2016 (Annexure-P/6)

increasing the age of superannuation from 58 to 60 years has

no    application   for   the   respondent         and     as    such,    the

communication made by the Assistant Labour Commissioner on

23.07.2020 (Annexure-P/7) is also unjustified asking the

petitioner/company to retire its employee at the age of 60 years
-:-   11 -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


as their age of superannuation has been increased to the age

of 60 years. He submits that as the provisions of the Act, 1961

and the Rules, 1963 do not have any application over the

petitioner/company, therefore, the State amendment has no

application   for   the   employees         working       under      the

petitioner/company. Shri Adhikari further submits that the

petitioner/company is having units all over the India and its

employees are transferred from one unit to another even out of

the State and, therefore, the State amendment has no

application and its applicability over the employees working

under the petitioner/company is unreasonable. Shri Adhikari

also submits that the cement industries are established in close

proximity to a mine and its employees are also attached to a

mine and indubitably, the age of retirement of the employees

working in a mine, is still 58 years. He further submits that

suppose if an employee of petitioner/company is attached to a

mine and retired at a relevant point of time at the age of 58

years, the same would cause discrimination with him as the

employees working with the petitioner/company would be

retired at the age of 60 years as per the State amendment. He

also submits that there cannot be discrimination within the

same set of employees and to maintain uniformity, the State

amendment has no application. Shri Adhikari further submits
-:-   12   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


that the Supreme Court in case of
Federal Bank Ltd. Vs.

Sagar Thomas and others
reported in (2003) 10 SCC 733,

has explained the employee of a controlled industry in the

context of provisions of the Act, 1961 and he placed reliance on

paragraph-26 of
the said judgment
which is reproduced

hereinbelow:-
"26. A company registered under the
Companies Act
for
        the purposes of carrying on any trade or business is a
        private enterprise to earn livelihood and to make profits
        out of such activities. Banking is also a kind of profession
        and a commercial activity, the primary motive behind it
        can well be said to earn returns and profits. Since time
        immemorial, such activities have been carried on by
        individuals generally. It is a private affair of the company
        though the case of nationalized banks stands on a
        different footing. There may well be companies, in which
        majority of the share capital may be contributed out of
        the State funds and in that view of the matter there may
        be more participation or dominant participation of the
        State in managing the affairs of the company. But in the
        present case we are concerned with a banking company
        which has its own resources to raise its funds without any
        contribution or shareholding by the State. It has its own
        Board of directors elected by its shareholders. It works
        like any other private company in the banking business
        having no monopoly status at all. Any company carrying
        on baking business with a capital of five lakhs will
        become a scheduled bank. All the same, banking activity
        as a whole carried on by various banks undoubtedly has
        an impact and effect on the economy of the country in
        general. Money of the shareholders and the depositors is
-:-   13   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


with such companies, carrying on baking activity. The
banks finance the borrowers on any given rate of interest
at a particular time. They advance loans as against
securities. Therefore, it is obviously necessary to have
regulatory check over such activities in the interest of the
company itself, the shareholders, the depositors as well
as to maintain the proper financial equilibrium of the
national economy. The banking companies have not
been set up for the purposes of building the economy of
the State; on the other hand such private companies
have been voluntarily established for their own purposes
and interest but their activities are kept under check so
that their activities may not go wayward and harm the
economy in general. A private banking company with all
freedom that it has, has to act in a manner that it may not
be in conflict with or against the fiscal policies of the
State and for such purposes, guidelines are provided by
Reserve Bank so that a proper fiscal discipline, to
conduct its affairs in carrying on its business, is
maintained. So as to ensure adherence to such fiscal
discipline, if need be, at times, even the management of
the company can be taken over. Nontheless, as
observed earlier, these are all regulatory measures to
keep a check and provide guidelines and not a
participatory dominance or control over the affairs of the
company. For other companies in general carrying on
other business activities, may be manufacturing, other
industries or any business, such checks are provided
under the provisions of the
Companies Act
, as indicated
earlier. There also, the main consideration is that the
company itself may not sink because of its won
mismanagement or the interest of the shareholders or
people generally may not be jeopardized for that reason.
Besides taking care of such interest as indicated above,
there is no other interest of the State, to control the
-:-   14   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


        affairs and management of the private companies. Care
        is taken in regard to the industries covered under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951
that
        their production, which is important for the economy, may
        not go down, yet the business activity is carried on by
        such companies or corporations which only remains a
        private activity of the entrepreneurs/companies."
11.        Shri Adhikari has further drawn attention of this Court

towards
Article 254
of the Constitution of India which clearly

provides that if there is any inconsistency between the law

made by the Parliament and the State Legislature, then the law

made by the Central Government would prevail. He further

submits that the subject matter of industrial and labour disputes

is a part of concurrent list which finds place at Serial No.22 and

under the existing circumstance, the law made by the

parliament would prevail and according to it, the age of

superannuation of the respondent-workman is 58 years.
12.        Per contra, Shri Sanjay Verma appearing for the

respondents has opposed the submissions made by the

counsel for the petitioner and supported the award passed by

the Labour Court, Satna saying that the issue raised by the

petitioner before this Court has rightly been considered by the

Labour Court and negate the said issue saying that the State

Government has also a jurisdiction to entertain the dispute
-:-   15   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


raised by the respondent-workman. He submits that admittedly

the petitioner/company is a controlled industry which has been

defined in
Section 2 (ee)
of the Act, 1947. He further submits

that the Central Government has issued a notification on

08.12.1977 exercising the power conferred under
Section 39
of

the Act, 1947 delegating all the State Governments to exercise

power in relation to the cement industry which is controlled by

the Central Government relating to the dispute between the

employers who are the member of a Cement Manufacturers

Association. As such, the State Government is also competent

to refer the dispute of a workman working under the

petitioner/company which is a controlled industry. He further

submits that only for those companies which are having their

own mines and quarries and are part of the cement industry, the

Central Government is an "appropriate Government" and the

workman working under those industries cannot approach the

State Government for redressal of their dispute/grievance. Shri

Verma relies upon an order passed by this Court in W.P.

No.10143/2014 parties being M/s.
Birla Corporation Limited

Vs. Ashwani Kumar Singh and another
and other connected

petitions   dealing   with   the    issue      regarding     "appropriate

Government" of workman working in the mine, in which the

High Court has relied upon the view taken by the Supreme
-:-   16   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


Court in case of Yovan India Cement Employees Union and

another vs. Management of India Cement Ltd. and others

reported in (1994) 1 SCC 572, in which the Supreme Court has

taken note of the notification dated 08.12.1977 published in

gazette India Extraordinary which is available on record as

Annexure-P/20 and has held that the State Government is also

competent to entertain the dispute in respect of the workman

working in the cement industry except in the case of mines and

quarries forming part of the cement industries because for the

workman    working   in   the     said       industries,   the   Central

Government alone has jurisdiction.
He further relies upon the

decision of Division Bench of the Andhra High Court passed in

W.P. No.33081/2014 on 08.03.2016 parties being
Ultratech

Cement Limited and another vs. Industrial Tribunal-cum-

Labour
Court, Anantapuramu, Anantapuramu district AP

and others, and submits that the Division Bench of the said

High Court has also dealt with the same issue which is involved

in the present case and also took note of the notification dated

08.12.1977 and finally held that the State Government has also

jurisdiction to entertain the dispute in relation to the workman

working under the controlled industry and also followed the view

taken by the Supreme Court in case of Yovan India Cement

Employees Union (supra).
Shri Verma further submits that the
-:-   17   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


petitioner/company nowhere stated that they have their own

mines and quarries and they are part of the cement industry

and in such a situation, the notification dated 08.12.1977 and

the view taken by different High Courts and also by the

Supreme Court make the order of Labour Court, Satna which is

impugned in this petition, valid and justified. The petition,

according to him, is without any substance and deserves to be

dismissed.
13.          I have heard the rival contentions of learned counsel

for the parties and perused the record.
14.          However, after considering the submissions made by

Shri Adhikari and perusing the record, I am not convinced with

the stand taken by the petitioner that the petitioner/company is

a controlled industry and is having their units all over the India

and is established to close proximity of a mine, therefore, it is

the Central Government only which is the "appropriate

Government" and could entertain the dispute in relation to the

respondent. Neither before the Court below nor before this

Court,   the      petitioner   tried       to    establish       that    the

petitioner/company has its own mines and quarries and it is a

part of cement industry. There is no pleading in that regard, but

Shri Adhikari has tried to convince this Court by saying that the
-:-   18   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


cement company is established in close proximity of a mine and

quarry and the employees of the cement company are also

engaged in the mines and, therefore, if an employee working in

the mine at the relevant point of time when he has to be

superannuated, the age of retirement is 58 years but similarly if

the workman at the same time is working in the cement

company/industry has to be retired at the age of 60 years in

view of the State amendment on which the respondent-

workman is relying upon. However, this submission has no

force for the reason that the workman appointed by the

petitioner/company temporarily attached to perform duties in a

mine situated in close proximity of cement company, does not

mean that the workman becomes an employee of the said mine

because that mine is not owned by the cement company and is

not a part of the cement industry, therefore, his age of

superannuation would be the same that of workman working in

the cement industry. On the contrary, the submission made by

the respondent is more convincing for the reason that the

respondent-workman appointed by the petitioner/company is

not an employee of mine and quarry and in view of the

Notification dated 08.12.1977 though the petitioner/company is

a controlled industry under the control of the Central

Government, but in view of the delegation of power to the State
-:-   19   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


Government to entertain the dispute in regard to the workman

working under the controlled industry, ergo, the State

Government is also an "appropriate Government", therefore,

nothing illegal has been done by the State Government

referring the dispute of the respondent-workman raised before

it.
15.        Considering the decision of the Supreme Court

passed in case of Yovan India Cement Employees Union

(supra) and the view taken therein as has been considered by

this High Court in case of
Ashwani Kumar Singh
(supra)

quoting relevant portion which is as under:-
""Subsequently, another notification was published in the
        Gazette of India Extraordinary dated December 8, 1977
        wherein the Government of India exercised its power
        under
Section 39
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
        and it was notified that the powers exercisable by
        Government of India under the
Industrial Disputes Act,
        1947
, in relation to cement industry shall also be
        exercisable by the State Governments, except in the
        case of mines and quarries forming part of the cement
        industry where the Central Government alone has
        jurisdiction. Thus both the Central Government and State
        Governments have concurrent jurisdiction in relation to
        cement industry under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
,
        except in the case of mines and quarries forming part of
        the cement industry. A true copy of said notification dated
        December 8, 1977 is annexed to this affidavit as
        Annexure R-II."
-:-   20   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)."
The view taken by the Supreme Court left nothing uncertain

regarding competency of the State Government in relation to

the respondent-workman.
16.          Likewise, the Division Bench of the Andhra High

Court in case of
Ultratech Cement Limited
(supra), has dealt

with the same issue which was as under:-
"1. Whether the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court at
          Anantapuram has jurisdiction to entertain the claim made
          by the 4th respondent/workman who was working in
          cement industry which is notified as controlled industry?"
and made observation from paragraph-17 onward which are as

under:-
"17. In case of controlled industry the 'appropriate
          Government' is the Central Government. The cement
          industry is a controlled industry. Section 2-a (i) vests
          exclusive jurisdiction in the Central Government in
          relation to Industrial dispute arising from employment in
          various sectors mentioned therein including Controlled
          Industry. Thus, in so far as cement industry is concerned,
          Central Government is the appropriate Government
          which is competent to deal with the matters arising out of
Industrial Disputes Act
. However,
section 39
of the Act
          vests residuary power in the Central Government to
          delegate the powers vested in the Central Government to
          the State Governments by way of a General or Special
          Order with reference to the controlled industry or other
          industries mentioned therein. In exercise of such power
-:-   21   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


Central Government issued notification in S.O.826(E)
dated    08.11.1977    published         in    the     Gazette   on
08.12.1977 delegating power to State Government with
reference to Cement industry. By virtue of this notification
the power as exercisable by the Central Government
under
Section 2 (a) (i)
is now vested in the State
Government in so far as cement industry is concerned.
(emphasis supplied)
18. The scope of such notification was considered by the
Supreme Court in Yovan's case. The Government of
Tamilnadu issued notification on 23.09.1987 under
Section 10 (1) (c)
of the Act referring the dispute between
the Union and Management of India Cements to the
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court. The respondent-
Company raised preliminary objection on the reference
by the State Government contending that the appropriate
authority in relation to the cement industry is the Central
Government. The said objection was accepted and the
claim petition was dismissed. The Supreme Court
construed the notification dated 08.12.1977 and held that
both Central and State Governments are appropriate
Governments under the Act and therefore, upheld the
notification issued by the Government of Tamilnadu.
Thus on the same issue, the Supreme Court has held
that    the   State   Government         is     also    appropriate
Government to exercise power under the
Industrial
Disputes Act
concerning the cement industry.
(emphasis supplied)
19. In Workmen of Bagalkot Udyog Limiteds case, the
Government of Karnataka issued notification dated
29.08.1986 under
Section 10(1)
of the Act, prohibiting
employment of contract labour in cement industry. On a
challenge made, learned Single Judge of the Karnataka
-:-    22    -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


High Court set aside the said notification holding that the
State Government is not the appropriate Government
within the meaning of
Section 10 (1)
of the Act.
20. The Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court was
of the view that a delegate cannot acquire status
equivalent to that of a delegator because despite
delegating its powers, the delegator is never denuded of
the same and delegator has an unrestricted right to strip
off the powers of its delegate. The Division Bench of the
Karnataka High Court therefore was of the view that the
State Government cannot be treated as appropriate
Government     in   relation    to         an   industrial   dispute
concerning the cement industry. The Division Bench also
sought to distinguish Yovan's case, on the ground that
the question raised before the Supreme Court is different
and in the context of the said facts of the case, the
observations were made. The Karnataka High Court was
of the view that what was mentioned by the Supreme
Court in Para 8 are only observations.
21. In the cases before the Karnataka, Chattisgarh and
Patna High Courts, matters arose under the
Contract
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act
1970. Reading of
the judgment of the Patna High Court would show that
there is no similar notification issued delegating power to
the State Governments. In fact the Patna High Court
observed that there is no such provision vested by the
Act, 1970 to delegate. It appears that no similar
notification as issued under
Section 39
of I.D Act was
issued under the Act, 1970. Thus all the three decisions
have to be seen in the light of the provisions contained in
the Act, 1970. The said decisions are not applicable to
the facts of the case on hand.
22. On a true and proper construction of relevant
-:-   23   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


        provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act
, I am of the
        considered opinion that once Central Government
        exercises power under
Section 39
of the Act and
        delegates the power vested in the Central Government to
        the State Government, the State Government is equally
        competent to exercise all the powers as vested in the
        Central Government by the Act. Once power is validly
        delegated to the State Government, it cannot be said that
        State Government cannot constitute Industrial Tribunal
        for adjudication of claims arising out of employment in
        cement industry. The delegation is still valid and such
        delegation is not under challenge."
I have no reason to differ with the views taken by the Supreme

Court and various High Courts. The counsel for the petitioners

has also not produced or argued anything which would compel

me to go beyond the view already discussed above. On the

contrary, the respondents relied upon the view of the Supreme

Court in case of Yovan India Cement Employees Union

(supra), which fortified my view. Therefore, I am also of the

opinion that the State Government did nothing wrong to

entertain the dispute and referring the same to the Labour

Court, Satna.
17.        So far as the contention raised by Shri Adhikari

regarding Article 254 of the Constitution of India is concerned, I

do not find any inconsistency in the law made by the Parliament

and the State Legislature and, therefore, there would be no
-:-   24   -:-
W.P. Nos.1442/2020 & connected cases


  application of
Article 254
of the Constitution in the present case

  for the reason which have been discussed above.
18.                After considering the view taken by the Supreme

  Court and also the High Court on which the respondent has

  placed reliance, it is clear that the State Government can also

  be treated as "appropriate Government" in case of employee

  working in the petitioner/company which is undoubtedly a

  controlled industry. Consequently, this Court finds substance in

  the submission made by the counsel for the respondent and

  further finds that the Labour Court, Satna has jurisdiction to

  decide the dispute referred to it by the State Government and

  as such, the order/award does not call for any interference for

  the aforesaid reasons.
19.                 As a result, the petitions are accordingly dismissed.
(Sanjay Dwivedi)
                                                                Judge

  ac/-
Digitally signed by ANIL
CHOUDHARY
Date: 2021.06.09
11:59:26 +05'30'
