Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 14 Sep 2020
Citation: SCC 221, (Para 9), Supreme Court declared that
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/154536113/

[Cites
61
, Cited by
43
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Ami Chand vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 14 September, 2020
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1




                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA


    Cr.M.P(M) No. 1116 of 2020 along with Cr.M.P.M Nos. 1138-1144, 1184, 1268-




                                                                     .
    1270, 1301, 1333, 1444, 1445, 1563, & 1592 of 2020





                                                       Date of Decision: Sep 14, 2020





    Ami Chand                                                   ...Petitioner.

                                 Versus

    State of Himachal Pradesh                                   ...Respondent.


    Coram:


    Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.

    Whether approved for reporting?1 YES

    For petitioners: Mr. Suresh Kumar Thakur, Mr. H.S.Rana, Mr. Peeyush Verma, Mr.
    I.N.Mehta, Mr. Deepak Kaushal, Mr. Neel Kamal Sharma, Mr. Mandeep Chandel,
    Mr. A.S.Rana, and Mr. Aditya Thakur, Advocates.



    For State: Mr. Ashok Sharma, Ld. Advocate General, assisted by Mr. Nand Lal
    Thakur and Mr. Ashwani Sharma, Additional Advocates General, Mr. Ram Lal




    Thakur, Ms. Divya Sood, and Mr. Manoj Bagga, Deputy Advocates General, and Mr.
    Rajat Chauhan, Law Officer.





    For Complainant: Mr. Anand Sharma, Advocate in CrMPM 1116 of 2020.

    Amici Curiae:





    Sr. Advocates Mr. Bipin Negi, Mr. Sanjeev Bhushan, and Mr. Virender Singh
    Chauhan; Advocates Mr. Chander Narayan Singh and Mr. Ishan Kashyap, assisted by
    Advocates Ms. Kiran Dhiman, Ms. Tim Saran, Ms. Babita, Ms. Megha Kapoor
    Gautam, and Ms. Shradha Karol.



                PROCEEDINGS CONVENED THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE




    1
                  Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the
    judgment?




                                                  ::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
                                                                                               2




    Anoop Chitkara, Judge:
1.    All the petitions mentioned above raise interlinked propositions of law and




                                                                          .
are taken up together. The petitioners on being arraigned as accused of commission





    of offences punishable under the
Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
    of Atrocities) Act, 1989
, after now called as 'SCSTPOA,' have come up under
section





    439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in short '
CrPC
,' seeking permission to
    surrender before this Court, and simultaneously seeking release on ad-interim bail.
    Given the propositions of law involved, instead of accepting surrender, in the
    interim, the Court stayed the arrests subject to their joining the investigation.
Introduction:
2.                                    to
          Within 895 days of Independence, We, the people of India, abolished the


    millennia-old evil practice of untouchability through fundamental right guaranteed
    under
Article 17
of India's Constitution by declaring that "Untouchability" is
    abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any


    disability arising out of "Untouchability" shall be an offence punishable in
    accordance with the law. Consequently, the Parliament enacted the
Protection of
    Civil Rights Act, 1955
. Later on, vide
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes




    (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
, the Parliament passed a more stringent law,





    wherein
Sections 18
&
18-A
state that nothing in
Section 438
of the CrPC shall apply
    concerning any case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having





    committed an offence under this Act.
In
State of M.P. v. Ram Kishna Balothia
(1995)
    3 SCC 221, (Para 9), Supreme Court declared that
S. 18
of SCSTPOA does not violate
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
However, in
Prathvi Raj v. Union of India
, AIR
    2020 SC 1036, a three-judge bench of Supreme Court read down
S. 18
by declaring
    as follows,
                  (10). Concerning the applicability of provisions of
section 438
Cr.PC, it shall not apply to the cases under Act of 1989.
However, if the complaint does not make out a prima facie case
                  for applicability of the provisions of the Act of 1989, the bar
                  created by
section 18
and
18A (i)
shall not apply.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
3
3.    There will be no issue whatsoever when the investigating agency has already
    arrested a person accused of committing an offence under SCSTPOA. Such a person
    is eligible to move for bail under
S. 439
CrPC. The proposition of law that crops up is




                                                                           .
the person against whom there are accusations of committing an offence under
    SCSTPOA and is not yet arrested. Furthermore, if such an accused cannot or does
    not want to opt for anticipatory bail under
S. 438
CrPC and instead, voluntarily





    appears before Sessions Court or High Court by applying
S. 439
CrPC and
    surrendering for such Court's disposal, and after deemed acceptance of such
    surrender, seeking interim bail till the disposal of bail application.
General provisions of bails:
4.
r               to
          Chapter XXXIII of
CrPC
codifies the provisions for bail and bonds. Following
S.
    436
CrPC, the arresting officer shall release the accused on bail in all bailable

    offences. However, in all Non Bailable offences, only the concerned Courts have the
    jurisdiction to grant bail and not the arresting officer.
5.    Anticipatory bail provides that when a person apprehends her likely arrest in a
    FIR in a Non-Bailable offence, she may apply to the Court of Sessions or High Court,
    under
S. 438
CrPC. Such Court may direct that in the event of her arrest, she shall be




    released on bail by the arresting officer. However, suppose she stands arrested





    before getting anticipatory bail or opts to surrender and thus taken into custody. In
    that case, she cannot file a petition for anticipatory bail because such a stage gets





    over. In such an event, the only remedy available to her is to file a regular bail
    petition in the Sessions Court or the High Court under
Section 439
CrPC.
    Furthermore, when the offence is triable by Magistrate, she can also file a bail
    petition under
Section 437
CrPC.
6.
S. 437
CrPC states that when any person accused of or suspected of the
    commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by
    an officer in charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Court other
    than the High Court or Court of Session; she may be released on bail. However, it is
    engraved with further restrictions and conditions detailed in the provision itself.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
4
Subject to exceptions contained in
S. 437
CrPC, usually, the Judicial Magistrates
    consider bails only in the offences triable before them.
In
Prahlad Singh Bhati v.
    NCT, Delhi
, (2001) 4 SCC 280, Supreme Court holds,




                                                                         .
(6). Even though there is no legal bar for a Magistrate to
               consider an application for grant of bail to a person who is
               arrested for an offence exclusively triable by a Court of Session
               yet it would be proper and appropriate that in such a case the





               Magistrate directs the accused person to approach the Court of
               Session for the purposes of getting the relief of bail...
               (7). Powers of the Magistrate, while dealing with the
               applications for grant of bail, are regulated by the punishment
               prescribed for the offence in which the bail is sought. Generally





               speaking if punishment prescribed is for imprisonment for life
               and death penalty and the offence is exclusively triable by the
               Court of Session, Magistrate has no jurisdiction to grant bail
               unless the matter is covered by the provisos attached to S. 437

               of the Code. The limitations circumscribing the jurisdiction of

               the Magistrate are evident and apparent. Assumption of
               jurisdiction to entertain the application is distinguishable from
               the exercise of the jurisdiction.
7.
In
Ishan Vasant Deshmukh v. State of Maharashtra
,                  2010 (7) RCR
    (Criminal) 332, Bombay High Court observed,
               (23).
The observations of the Supreme Court [In
Prahlad Singh




               Bhati v. NCT, Delhi
, (2001) 4 SCC 280] that generally speaking if
               the punishment prescribed is that of imprisonment for life or





               death penalty, and the offence is exclusively triable by the
               Court of Sessions, the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to grant
               bail, unless the matter is covered by the provisos attached to





               section 437 of the Code. Thus, merely because an offence is
               punishable when imprisonment for life, it does not follow a
               Magistrate would have no jurisdiction to grant bail, unless
               offence is also exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions. This,
               implies that the Magistrate would be entitled to grant bail in
               cases triable by him even though punishment prescribed may
               extend to imprisonment for life.
8.   When the person accused of committing a Non-bailable offence is in custody,
    then the only option available to her is to apply for regular bail under
S. 439
CrPC,
    and when the offences are exclusively triable by Judicial Magistrates, then also
    under
S. 437
CrPC. The filing of such an application is a legal right and cannot be
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
5
refused under any pretext. To grant or deny the bail is purely a Judicial function.
    The concerned Court may direct that any person accused of an offence and in
    custody be released on bail, subject to conditions and stipulations in S. 437 and 439




                                                                           .
CrPC
. However, neither the Parliament nor the Himachal Pradesh Legislative
    Assembly placed any restrictions on S. 437 or 439
CrPC
in SCSTPOA.
History of interim bail on surrender:
9.    Before the insertion of the provision of anticipatory bail in the
Code of
    Criminal Procedure
of 1973, the previous
Code of Criminal Procedure
of 1898 did





    not provide for anticipatory bail.
10.   In Emperor v. Mahammed Panah, AIR 1934 Sind 131, Para 3, [
CrPC
1898],

    Sindh High Court observed that the first step which must be taken by any person

    who wishes to be admitted to bail is to appear before the Court and to surrender.
11.    In Haidayat Ullah Khan v. The Crown, AIR 1949 Lah 77, [
CrPC
1898], full


    bench of Lahore High Court observed,
                (4). Whether the High Court can grant any relief, and if so what,
                to a person seeking an order for bail, in anticipation of his
                arrest for an offence?
(19). For the reasons given above, the reply which I would give
                to the question referred to us is that, in a proper case, the High





                Court has power under Section 498, Criminal P.C., to make an
                order that a person who is suspected of an offence for which he
                may be arrested by a police-officer or a Court, shall be admitted





                to bail.
(20). The exercise of this power should, however, be confined
                to cases in which, not only is good prima face ground made out
                for the grant of bail in respect of the offence alleged, but also, it
                should be shown that if the petitioner were to be arrested and
                refused bail, such an order would, in all probability, be made
                not from motives of furthering the ends of justice in relation to
                the case, but from some ulterior motive, and with the object of
                injuring the petitioner, or that the petitioner would in such an
                eventuality suffer irreparable harm.
12.
In
Amir Chand v. Crown
, 1950 CrLJ 480, [
CrPC
1898], Full Bench of High Court
    of East Punjab holds,
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
6
(26). My conclusions may now be briefly summarised. The very
               notion of bail presupposes some form of previous restraint.
               Therefore, bail cannot be granted to a person who has not
               been arrested and for whose arrest no warrants have been




                                                                        .
issued.
Section 498
, Criminal Procedure Code, does not permit





               the High Court or the Court of Session to grant bail to anyone
               whose case is not covered by
S.496
and S.
497
, Criminal
               Procedure Code. It follows, therefore, that bail can only be





               allowed to a person who has been arrested or detained without
               warrant or appears or is brought before a Court. Such person
               must be liable to arrest and must surrender himself before the
               question of bail can be considered. In the case of a person who
               is not under arrest, but for whose arrest warrants have been





               issued, bail can be allowed if he appears in Court and
               surrenders himself. No bail can be allowed to a person at
               liberty for whose arrest no warrants have been issued. The
               petitioners in the present case are, therefore, not entitled to
               bail. The question referred to the Full Bench is, therefore,

               answered in the negative.
13.
In
Juhar Mal v. State
, AIR 1954 Raj 279, [
CrPC
1898], a Division Bench of
    Rajasthan High Court observed,


               (1). The following question has been referred to by a learned
               Single Judge of this Court to a larger Bench for decision-- .
"Whether the High Court or the subordinate courts have power
               under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
to grant bail to a person




               seeking bail even though he may not have been arrested or
               detained in custody and no warrant of arrest has been issued





               against him, but prays that a case has been registered against
               him by the police and he will be arrested and thereby-disgraced
               if bail is not granted to him?"
(13). We are, therefore, of opinion that the question referred to
               us should be answered as follows--"Neither the High Court nor
               the subordinate courts have power under the
Code of Criminal
               Procedure
to grant bail to a person seeking bail if he has not
               been arrested or detained in custody or brought before them,
               or no warrant of arrest or even an order in writing for his arrest
               under Section 56, Cr. P. C. has been issued against him. The
               mere fact that a report of a cognizable offence has been made
               against him to the police and is under investigation, and he may
               be arrested by the officer-in-charge of the police station
               without a warrant and perhaps disgraced does not empower
               the court to grant him bail, as, in these circumstances, there is
               no actual danger of restraint to the person concerned.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
7
14.    Even under the new code of 1973, the State of Uttar Pradesh has not
    enforced the provision of
S. 438
CrPC, and thus the anticipatory bail is not
    permissible in the FIRs registered in its territorial jurisdiction. However, In Lal




                                                                          .
Kamlendra Pratap Singh v. State of U.P.
, (2009) 4 SCC 437, Supreme Court holds,
                (6).
Learned counsel for the appellant apprehends that the
                appellant will be arrested as there is no provision for





                anticipatory bail in the State of U.P. He placed reliance on a
                decision of the Allahabad High Court in the case of
Amaravati v.
                State of U.P.
, [2005 Crl.L.J 755] in which a Seven Judge Full
                Bench of the Allahabad High Court held that the Court, if it
                deems fit in the facts and circumstances of the case, may grant





                interim bail pending final disposal of the bail application. The
                Full Bench also observed that arrest is not a must whenever an
                F.I.R. of a cognizable offence is lodged.
The Full Bench placed
                reliance on the decision of this Court in
Joginder Kumar v. State
                of U.P.
, [1994 Cr.L.J. 1981].
(7). We fully agree with the view of the High Court in
Amaravati
's case and we direct that
the said decision
be
                followed by all Courts in U.P. in letter and spirit, particularly
                since the provision for anticipatory bail does not exist in U.P.
                (8).
In appropriate cases interim bail should be granted pending


                disposal of the final bail application, since arrest and detention
                of a person can cause irreparable loss to a person's reputation,
                as held by this Court in
Joginder Kumar
's case (supra).
Also,
                arrest is not a must in all cases of cognizable offences, and in




                deciding whether to arrest or not the police officer must be
                guided and act according to the principles
laid down in
Joginder





                Kumar
's case (supra).
15.
In
Hema Mishra v. State of Uttar Pradesh
, (2014) 4 SCC 453, Supreme Court





    of India holds,
                (21). I may, however, point out that there is unanimity in the
                view that in spite of the fact that Section 438 has been
                specifically omitted and made inapplicable in the State of Uttar
                Pradesh, still a party aggrieved can invoke the jurisdiction of the
                High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, being
                extraordinary jurisdiction and the vastness of the powers
                naturally impose considerable responsibility in its application.
16.   Thus, the Supreme Court read down the effect of repealing the provision of
    anticipatory bail by the Legislature of Uttar Pradesh.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
8
Arrest is not mandatory in non-bailable offences because it depends upon the
    nature of the crime, gravity of the offence, criminal history of the offender, and
    other attending circumstances:
.
17.   When a person is arraigned as an accused under SCSTPOA, then in





    appropriate cases, the SHO need not get custody of the accused, and can file a
    police report without arresting the accused, just intimating her to appear before the





    concerned Court.
18.
In
Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P.
, 1994 4 SCC 260, a three-Judge bench of
    Supreme Court holds,





               (20). ...No arrest can be made because it is lawful for the Police
               Officer to do so. The existence of the power to arrest is one
               thing. The justification for the exercise of it is quite another.
               The Police Officer must be able to justify the arrest apart from

               his power to do so. Arrest and detention in police lock up of a

               person can cause incalculable harm to the reputation and self-
               esteem of a person. No arrest can be made in a routine manner
               on a mere allegation of commission of an offence made against
               a person. It would be prudent for a police Officer in the interest


               of protection of the constitutional rights of a citizen and
               perhaps in his own interest that no arrest should be made
               without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some
               investigation as to the genuineness and bona fides of a




               complaint and a reasonable belief both as to the person's
               complicity and even so as to the need to effect arrest. Denying





               a person of his liberty is a serious matter. The
               recommendations of the Police Commission merely reflect the
               constitutional concomitants of the fundamental right to





               personal liberty and freedom. A person is not liable to arrest
               merely on the suspicion of complicity in an offence. There must
               be some reasonable justification in the opinion of the Officer
               effecting the arrest that such arrest is necessary and justified.
Except in heinous offences, an arrest must be avoided if a
               police Officer issues notice to person to attend the Station
               House and not to leave Station without permission would do.
19.
In
Bharat Chaudhary v. State of Bihar
, (2003) 8 SCC 77, Supreme Court holds,
               (7).
...In our opinion, the courts i.e. the Court of Sessions, High
               Court or this Court has the necessary power vested in them to
               grant anticipatory bail in non-bailable offences under Section
               438 of the CrPC even when cognizance is taken or charge sheet
               is filed provided the facts of the case require the Court to do so.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
9
20.
In
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar
, (2014) 8 SCC 273, Supreme Court holds,
               (11). Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure that police




                                                                       .
officers do not arrest accused unnecessarily and Magistrate do





               not authorise detention casually and mechanically. In order to
               ensure what we have observed above, we give the following
               direction:
1). All the State Governments to instruct its police





                     officers not to automatically arrest when a case
                     under
Section 498A
of the IPC is registered but to
                     satisfy themselves about the necessity for arrest
                     under the parameters laid down above flowing
                     from
Section 41
, Cr.P.C.;
2). All police officers be provided with a check list
                     containing specified sub-clauses under Section 41(1)
(b)(ii);
3). The police officer shall forward the check list

                     duly filled and furnish the reasons and materials

                     which       necessitated     the      arrest,    while
                     forwarding/producing the accused before the
                     Magistrate for further detention;
4). The Magistrate while authorising detention of
                     the accused shall peruse the report furnished by the


                     police officer in terms aforesaid and only after
                     recording its satisfaction, the Magistrate will
                     authorise detention;
5). The decision not to arrest an accused, be




                     forwarded to the Magistrate within two weeks from
                     the date of the institution of the case with a copy to





                     the Magistrate which may be extended by the
                     Superintendent of police of the district for the
                     reasons to be recorded in writing;
6). Notice of appearance in terms of
Section 41A
of
                     Cr.P.C. be served on the accused within two weeks
                     from the date of institution of the case, which may
                     be extended by the Superintendent of Police of the
                     District for the reasons to be recorded in writing;
7). Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid
                     shall apart from rendering the police officers
                     concerned liable for departmental action, they shall
                     also be liable to be punished for contempt of court
                     to be instituted before High Court having territorial
                     jurisdiction.
8). Authorising detention without recording reasons
                     as aforesaid by the judicial Magistrate concerned
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
10
shall be liable for departmental action by the
                     appropriate High Court.
(12). We hasten to add that the directions aforesaid shall not
               only apply to the cases under
Section 498A
of the I.P.C. or




                                                                         .
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in hand, but





               also such cases where offence is punishable with imprisonment
               for a term which may be less than seven years or which may
               extend to seven years; whether with or without fine.
Scope to file a petition under
section 439
CrPC for offences of SCSTPOA offering
    surrender in the Court seeking interim bail:
21.   Every person in custody has a statutory right to apply for bail, and denial of
    such a request would directly conflict with
Article 21
of India's Constitution.
    However, any person applying for bail under
S. 439
CrPC must fulfill twin conditions,
(i) Having been accused of some non-bailable offence, and (ii) In custody impliedly

    for the said offence. In the absence of any restrictions imposed by the Scheduled
    Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 on the powers of
    Courts under S. 439 CrPC, any person against whom accusations have been made of


    committing an offence under SCSTPOA would be entitled to seek bail under S. 439
    CrPC provided she is in custody or offers to do so.
22.
In
P.S.R. Sadhanantham v. Arunachalam
, (1980) 3 SCC 141, Constitutional





    Bench of Supreme Court holds,
               (3).
Article 21
, in its sublime brevity, guardians human liberty by
               insisting on the prescription of procedure established by law,





               not fiat as sine qua non for deprivation of personal freedom.
And those procedures so established must be fair, not fanciful,
               nor formal nor flimsy, as
laid down in
Maneka Gandhi's case,
               [(1978) 1 SCC 248]. So, it is axiomatic that our constitutional
               jurisprudence mandates the State not to deprive a person of his
               personal liberty without adherence to fair procedure laid down
               by law.
23.   Unlike
Section 37
of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
    1985, neither the Legislature has carved out any exceptions from general provisions
    of
S. 437
&
439
CrPC relating to the grant of bail by enactment in the
Scheduled
    Caste & Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
, nor does it impose
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
11
any fetters in exercising powers under
Section 439
CrPC. Thus, Sessions Court and
    High Court's powers, relating to SCSTPOA, remain untrammeled under
section 439
CrPC.
.
24.     When a person seeks surrender and simultaneously pray for interim bail,
    under SCSTPOA, she cannot pray for interim bail by appearing before a Magistrate





    under
S. 437
CrPC. The reason being that under
S. 14
of Scheduled Castes and
    Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, the offences are exclusively
    triable by Special Courts, which shall be the Court of Sessions. However, while





    exercising powers under
sections 438
&
439
CrPC, the Sessions and High Court
    import the relevant provisions of
S. 437
CrPC.
In
Basanta Sahu v. Padma Charan Sahu
, 1990 LawSuit(Ori) 78, a Division
25.


    bench of Orissa High Court observed,
                 (3). ... We deprecate the practice which is developing in some
                 quarters of seeking bail Under Section 439, Cr.P.C from the
                 learned Sessions Judge in proceedings Under Section 438, Cr.
P.C. by-passing the Magistrate who should ordinarily deal with
                 the matter as the Court of first instance. Since under the
                 procedure, the Magistrate is to be approached first, by-passing
                 him should not be encouraged.
26.     However, Supreme Court in
Sundeep Kumar Bafna v. State of Maharashtra
,





    AIR 2014 SC 1745, Supreme Court holds,
                 (26). In conclusion, therefore, we are of the opinion that the





                 learned Single Judge erred in law in holding that he was devoid
                 of jurisdiction so far as the application presented to him by the
                 appellant before us was concerned. Conceptually, he could
                 have declined to accept the prayer to surrender to the Courts'
                 custody, although, we are presently not aware of any reason
                 for this option to be exercised. Once the prayer for surrender is
                 accepted, the Appellant before us would come into the custody
                 of the Court within the contemplation of
Section 439
CrPC. The
                 Sessions Court as well as the High Court, both of which
                 exercised concurrent powers under Section 439, would then
                 have to venture to the merits of the matter so as to decide
                 whether the applicant/appellant had shown sufficient reason or
                 grounds for being enlarged on bail.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
12
27.
In
Rajendra Kishore Kanungo v. State of Orissa
, 1999 SCC OnLine Ori 175,
    Orissa High Court observed,
               (12). ...An accused may be brought before a Magistrate by the




                                                                        .
police, or an accused may, surrender voluntarily before the





               Magistrate having jurisdiction. The question of accepting or not
               accepting such surrender can arise only when there is doubt in
               the mind of the Magistrate regarding the status of the person





               proffering to surrender before the Court. If from the records
               available, the Magistrate is in doubt as to whether the person
               appearing before the Magistrate is an accused or not, the
               Magistrate may not accept such surrender. Where, however,
               there is no such doubt in this regard, there is no occasion for a





               Magistrate to refuse surrender.
28.
In
State v. Jagan Singh
, 1953 CrLJ 74, Madhya Pradesh High Court observed,
               (2). In all these cases certain persons directly appeared before

               the magistrate, stating that the police had not yet arrested

               them, but might arrest them in connection with some
               cognizable cases. The applicants feared that the arrest by the
               Police and their being marched to the Magistrate might cause
               them inconvenience of a serious nature. Accordingly, they
               themselves surrendered with a request that the magistrate


               might ascertain whether they were wanted by the police, and
               take bail and release them. The magistrate accordingly sent for
               the Public Prosecutor and asked him whether there was any




               process against these, and whether they were going to be
               arrested, The Public Prosecutor reported that no doubt the
               cases they were referring to were being investigated but till





               then no steps had been taken to arrest them; but it was not
               unlikely these men would be arrested in future though he could
               not be definite. Thereupon, the magistrate took bail for their





               appearance when and if wanted.
(3). I am unable to understand what else the Magistrate could
               have done. He could not put them into lock-up because Police
               have not shown any desire to arrest them till now; and certainly
               there was no warrant outstanding. The magistrate could
               certainly let them go, but then they themselves wanted to be
               on bail, so that they might come directly to the magistrate if
               and when the police wanted them in connection with the case
               concerned. It is certainly a restriction of the liberties of these
               persons, but they were voluntarily seeking it.
29.   Before accepting surrender, the concerned Court must satisfy the existence of
    the accused's involvement in the commission of a non-bailable offence. When the
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
13
Court is in doubt, it can ask the Public Prosecutor to confirm the prima facie facts
    through internet, phone, WhatsApp, e-mail, or any other fast-medium. Based on
    such input, the Court can form a prima facie opinion to accept, reject, or postpone




                                                                           .
the surrender. In the hiatus, when the accused on her own has appeared before the
    Court, and such Court is yet to make up its mind to accept surrender or not, the
    status of such accused is that of a free person. One of the solutions to come out of





    the suspended animation is to get the Prosecutor's input at the earliest and
    expedite consideration of interim relief, preferably on the same day.
Surrender:
30.
In
Dr. N.T. Desai v. State of Gujarat
, 1996 SCC Online Guj 428, Gujrat High
    Court observed,

                 (14). This takes us now to yet another important contention of

                 learned A.P.P. that the petitioner even if he surrenders to the
                 custody of this Court, the same should not be accepted and
                 instead be asked to go before the Special Court for the needful
                 reliefs as provided ordinarily under the law. This contention of


                 the learned A.P.P. cannot be accepted, as it is quite unfair,
                 harsh and unjust. If this Court has jurisdiction to take accused in
                 its custody, why should he be denied bail? Merely because he is
                 an accused of offence/s under the Atrocity Act? Does such pre-
trial prejudice against the accused enhance the image of the
                 Court doing justice? If on the allegation of having committed a





                 non-bailable offence under the Atrocities Act accused instead
                 of approaching High Court surrenders to the custody of the
                 Special Court, depending upon the facts and circumstances of





                 the case, even the Special Court ought too and must accept the
                 custody of the accused and release him on bail, why indeed the
                 High Court which is undoubtedly superior Court cannot take
                 the accused in its custody and order bail. This has already been
                 discussed and done by this Court in the case of
Jashubhai
                 Majdan Gadhvi v. State of Gujarat
[(1992 (2) GLH 405] and
                 accordingly, there is indeed no reason for this Court to disagree
                 with
the said decision
.
31.
In
Sundeep Kumar Bafna v. State of Maharashtra
, (2014) 16 SCC 623,
    Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
14
(2). In the impugned Judgment, the learned Single Judge has
     opined that when the Appellant's plea to surrender before the
     Court is accepted and he is assumed to be in its custody, the
     police would be deprived of getting his custody, which is not




                                                              .
contemplated by law, and thus, the Appellant "is required to be





     arrested or otherwise he has to surrender before the Court
     which can send him to remand either to the police custody or
     to the Magisterial custody and this can only be done under
Section 167
of CrPC by the Magistrate and that order cannot be
     passed at the High Court level.
(16). If the third sentence of para 48 is discordant to Niranjan
     Singh, the view of the coordinate Bench of earlier vintage must
     prevail, and this discipline demands and constrains us also to





     adhere to Niranjan Singh; ergo, we reiterate that a person is in
     custody no sooner he surrenders before the police or before
     the appropriate Court...
(24). In this analysis, the opinion in the impugned Judgment
     incorrectly concludes that the High Court is bereft or devoid of

     power to jurisdiction upon a petition which firstly pleads

     surrender and, thereafter, prays for bail. The High Court could
     have perfunctorily taken the Appellant into its custody and
     then proceeded with the perusal of the prayer for bail; in the
     event of its coming to the conclusion that sufficient grounds


     had not been disclosed for enlargement on bail, necessary
     orders for judicial or police custody could have been ordained.
     A Judge is expected to perform his onerous calling impervious
     of any public pressure that may be brought to bear on him.
(27). On behalf of the State, the submission is that the
     prosecution should be afforded a free and fair opportunity of





     subjecting the accused to custody for interrogation as provided
     under
Section 167
CrPC. This power rests with the Magistrate
     and not with the High Court, which is the Court of revision and





     appeal; therefore, the High Court under
Section 482
CrPC can
     only correct or rectify an order passed without jurisdiction by a
     subordinate Court. Learned State counsel submits that the High
     Court in exercise of powers under Section 482 can convert the
     nature of custody from police custody to judicial custody and
     vice versa, but cannot pass an order of first remanding to
     custody. Therefore, the only avenue open to the accused is to
     appear before the Magistrate who is empowered under
Section
     167
CrPC. Thereupon, the Magistrate can order for police
     custody or judicial custody or enlarge him on bail. On behalf of
     the State, it is contended that if accused persons are permitted
     to surrender to the High Court, it is capable of having, if not a
     disastrous, certainly a deleterious effect on investigations and
     shall open up the flood gates for accused persons to make
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
15
strategies by keeping themselves away from the investigating
               agencies for months on end. The argument continues that in
               this manner absconding accused in several sensitive cases,
               affecting the security of the nation or the economy of the




                                                                         .
country, would take advantage of such an interpretation of law





               and get away from the clutches of the investigating officer. We
               are not impressed by the arguments articulated by learned
               Senior Counsel for the complainant or informant because it is





               axiomatic that any infraction or inroad to the freedom of an
               individual is possible only by some clear unequivocal and
               unambiguous procedure known to law.
32.   Under
CrPC
, it is always open to the Investigating Officer to apply for remand,





    subject to the absolute ceiling of 15 days. On this, the Magistrate would take a
    judicial decision. Thus, the Sessions and High Court are under a legal obligation to
    accept the accused's surrender in an FIR disclosing Non-bailable offences, who has

    volunteered to do so by applying 439
CrPC
and simultaneously seeking interim bail.
This right is not just confined to the FIR under the
Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled
    Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
, but can be resorted to for any penal
    offence.
Refusal to accept surrender:
33.
In
Manubhai Ratilal Patel v. State of Gujarat
, (2013) 1 SCC 314, Supreme
    Court holds,





               (24). The act of directing remand of an accused is
               fundamentally a judicial function. The Magistrate does not act





               in executive capacity while ordering the detention of an
               accused. While exercising this judicial act, it is obligatory on the
               part of the Magistrate to satisfy himself whether the materials
               placed before him justify such a remand or, to put it differently,
               whether there exist reasonable grounds to commit the accused
               to custody and extend his remand. The purpose of remand as
               postulated under Section 167 is that investigation cannot be
               completed within 24 hours. It enables the Magistrate to see
               that the remand is really necessary.
34.
In
Bhura Lal v. State Rajasthan
, 1994 (4) R.C.R. (Criminal) 199, Full Bench of
    Rajasthan High Court observed,
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
16
(34.3) The Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in which
                offences under SC/ST Act are alleged to be committed,
                empowered to deal with the cases under Section 190 of the
                Code will also have the jurisdiction to deal with cases during




                                                                         .
the "inquiry" i.e. pre-trial stages including exercise of power





                under Section 156(3) of the Code and thereafter he shall
                transmit all such cases to the special Court situated within that
                jurisdiction.
35.   While considering plea of surrender and interim bail, when the Court gets
    information of FIR disclosing only bailable offences, then such Court has to set her
    free and let her go. On the contrary, when upon surrender, the accused neither





    pleads nor orally contends for interim bail, then it amounts to subverting
S. 437
CrPC and bypassing the Courts of Judicial Magistrate. In such matters, the Court
    need not accept surrender and leave it to the Public Prosecutor to take a call, or the


    concerned SHO/I.O., if present in Court.
On surrender seeking interim bail, in an FIR disclosing Non-Bailable offences, the
    accused would be in deemed custody of such Court:
36.
In
Bishnu Mallick v. State of Orissa
, 1993 CrLJ 3817, Orissa High Court
    observed,




                (3). ... 'Custody' always involves a concept of two parties, one
                who takes into custody or the other whose custody has been





                taken of. To effect a custody, the first one must act, though the
                other may either be active or be passive. It is true that when a
                petition is made by an accused surrendering before a Court, he





                offers his own custody to the Court. The Court if it accepts the
                application and assumes custody, it has accepted the custody
                of the accused and thereafter is bound to deal with him on his
                application for bail either to refuse or allow the same. In the
                event it is refused, the Court has to remand him to either police
                or judicial custody. It is however another thing to say that on
                the filing of the surrender application the Court must of
                necessity be deemed to have taken custody. There is no
                warrant for such proposition....
37.
In
Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak Mahajan
, (1994) 3 SCC 440,
    Supreme Court holds,
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
17
(48). Thus the Code gives power of arrest not only to a police
               officer and a Magistrate but also under certain circumstances
               or given situations to private persons. Further, when an
               accused person appears before a Magistrate or surrenders




                                                                        .
voluntarily, the Magistrate is empowered to take that accused





               person into custody and deal with him according to law.
               Needless to emphasize that the arrest of a person is a condition
               precedent for taking him into judicial custody thereof. To put it





               differently, the taking of the person into judicial custody is
               followed after the arrest of the person concerned by the
               Magistrate on appearance or surrender. It will be appropriate,
               at this stage, to note that in every arrest, there is custody but
               not vice-versa and that both the words 'custody' and 'arrest'





               are not synonymous terms. Though 'custody' may amount to an
               arrest in certain circumstances but not under all circumstances.
               If these two terms are interpreted as synonymous, it is nothing
               but an ultra legalist interpretation which if under all
               circumstances accepted and adopted, would lead to a startling

               anomally resulting in serious consequences, vide Roshan Beevi

               (1984 Cri Li 134 (FB) (Mad)) (supra).
Custody is sine qua non to consider application under
S. 439
CrPC:
38.   Bail implies release from restraint.
-Public Prosecutor, Andhra Pradesh v. G
    Manikya Rao
, AIR 1959 AP 639, DB, Para 7.
39.
In
Niranjan Singh v. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
, 1980 (2) SCC 559, Supreme





    Court holds,
               (6). ... We agree that no person accused of an offence can move
               the court for bail under
Section 439
Criminal Procedure Code





               unless he is in custody.
(7). When is a person in custody, within the meaning of
Section
               439
Criminal Procedure Code? When he is in duress either
               because he is held by the investigating agency or other police
               or allied authority or is under the control of the court having
               been remanded by judicial order, or having offered himself to
               the court's jurisdiction and submitted to its orders by physical
               presence. No lexical dexterity nor precedential profusion is
               needed to come to the realistic conclusion that he who is under
               the control of the court or is in the physical hold of an officer
               with coercive power is in custody for the purpose of Section
439.
(8). Custody, in the context of Section 439, (we are not, be it
               noted, dealing with anticipatory bail under Section 438) is
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
18
physical control or at least physical presence of the accused in
               court coupled with submission to the jurisdiction and orders of
               the court.
(9). He can be in custody not merely when the police arrests




                                                                       .
him, produces him before a Magistrate and gets a remand to





               judicial or other custody. He can, be stated to be in judicial
               custody when he surrenders before the court and submits to its
               directions. In the present case, the police officers applied for





               bail before a Magistrate who refused bail and still the accused,
               without surrendering before the Magistrate, obtained an order
               for stay to move the Sessions Court. This direction of the
               Magistrate was wholly irregular and may be, enabled the
               accused persons to circumvent the principle of
Section 439
CrPC. We might have taken a serious view of such a course,
               indifferent to mandatory provisions by the subordinate
               magistracy but for the fact that in the present case the accused
               made up for it by surrender before the Sessions Court. Thus,
               the Sessions Court acquired jurisdiction to consider the bail

               application. It could have refused bail and remanded the

               accused to custody, but, in the circumstances and for the
               reasons mentioned by it, exercised its jurisdiction in favour of
               grant of bail. The High Court added to the conditions subject to
               which bail was to be granted and mentioned that the accused


               had submitted to the custody of the court. We, therefore, do
               not proceed to upset the order on this ground. Had the
               circumstances been different we would have demolished the
               order for bail. We may frankly state that had we been left to




               ourselves we might not have granted bail but sitting under
Article 136
do not feel that we should interfere with a





               discretion exercised by the two courts below.
40.
In
Nirmal Jeet Kaur v. State of Madhya Pradesh
, (2004) 7 SCC 558, Supreme





    Court held that for making an application under Section 439 the fundamental
    requirement is that the accused should be in custody.
41.
In
State of Haryana v. Dinesh Kumar
, (2008) 3 SCC 222, Supreme Court holds,
               (25). We also agree with Mr. Anoop Chaudhary"s submission
               that unless a person accused of an offence is in custody, he
               cannot move the Court for bail under Section 439 of the Code,
               which provides for release on bail of any person accused of an
               offence and in custody (Emphasis supplied). The pre-condition,
               therefore, for applying the provisions of Section 439 of the
               Code is that a person who is an accused must be in custody and
               his movements must have been restricted before he can move
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
19
for bail.
This aspect of the matter was considered in
Niranjan
               Singh
's case where it was held that a person can be stated to be
               in judicial custody when he surrenders before the Court and
               submits to its directions.
.
42.
In
Karam Das v. State of Himachal Pradesh
, 1995 CrLJ 2995, a co-ordinate
    bench of this Court holds,





               (6). It is well established that no person accused of an offence
               can move the Court for bail under Section 439 Cr. P. C. unless
               he is in custody. As already stated, the accused persons
               appeared and surrendered themselves before this Court as is
               apparent from the previous order dated 22-7-1994. In the





               circumstances, the petitioners can be stated to be in judicial
               custody when each one of them surrendered before this Court
               and submitted to its directions.
I am fortified in taking this view
               by the case of
Niranjan Singh v. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
. In
               this view of the matter, the instant petition is maintainable.
43.   In Baldev Singh Bhardwaj v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 2003 (2) ShimLC 55,
    Himachal High Court holds,
               (10). In the present case the accused surrendered in the Court


               on 7th April. 2003 and is present in the Court even today
               submitting himself to the jurisdiction of the Court. Therefore,
               he would be deemed to be in custody for the purpose of
               Section 439 of the Code.
44.   Keeping pace with the changes in the law, the meaning of bail is no more





    confined to the dictionary but has become multifaceted. Bail comes into play only
    when a person apprehends arrest or is under arrest or custody.
In unavoidable circumstances, personal presence of accused can be dispensed
    with, who shall be considered in deemed custody:
45.  In Muzafaruddin v. State of Hyderabad, AIR 1953 Hyd 219, the full bench
    observed,
(a) that since the accused was not arrested, he
                     cannot be granted bail, and
(b) that an application presented by an advocate on
                     his behalf without his appearing personally in Court
                     cannot be entertained.
(3). The Bench referred these questions to the Full Bench
              (17). The only question which remains is whether his physical
              presence in Court is necessary before he can be granted bail.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
20
The learned Advocate-General submits that bail cannot be
               given to a person who has not appeared in Court personally or
               has not surrendered himself to the Court, while the Advocate
               for the applicant contends that this is not necessary. No




                                                                        .
authorities, however, have been cited which deal with this





               aspect of the case. In our view, where a person against whom
               an arrest warrant has been issued by the Court or who has
               been ordered to be arrested, is physically in a position to





               appear before the Court and does not so appear or surrender
               himself, he will not be entitled to bail. But, there may be
               instances where a person, in spite of his being desirous of
               appearing and surrendering himself to the Court is physically
               incapable of coming to Court or being brought to Court, except





               by exposing himself to danger of his life, applies for bail
               disclosing the place or abode in which he is staying, the
               condition in which he is and the reason, for his non-appearance
               personally, he may be deemed to have surrendered himself as
               being within reach of Court, if the Court after directing its mind

               to this question comes to the conclusion in the circumstances

               stated in the petition that his personal appearance is not
               possible except by exposing his life to risk or danger.
46.   In Sunder Singh v. State, AIR 1954 Hyd 55, High Court observed,


               (2). The point of law argued before us by the learned
               Government Advocate, Shri Gopalrao Murumkar, is that the
               accused is neither present in the court nor has he been




               arrested nor is he under detention; therefore, under
Section
               497
CrPC, he cannot be released on bail. With regard to the
               question of the presence of the accused in the court, it is





               submitted in the petition that he is seriously ill, very weak,
               suffering from dysentery and is unable to move about from his
               place and make himself bodily present in the court premises. At





               the time of submitting the petition, he was lying ill within the
               jurisdiction of the court. In - 'Muzafaruddin v. State of
               Hyderabad' AIR 1953 Hyd 219 (FB)'(A), it has been held that if
               the accused is not in a position on account of the illness to
               make himself bodily present in the court premises, he is
               entitled to be represented by the Counsel and he will be
               considered to have appeared in the court for the purposes of
               Section 497 if he submits a petition through his Counsel in such
               cases. In view of that ruling we are of the opinion that the
               petition filed through his Counsel is sufficient under Section
497.
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
21
47.
In
Niranjan Singh v. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
, 1980 (2) SCC 559, Supreme
    Court holds
                  (8). Custody, in the context of Section 439, (we are not, be it




                                                                           .
noted, dealing with anticipatory bail under Section 438) is





                  physical control or at least physical presence of the accused in
                  court coupled with submission to the jurisdiction and orders
                  of the court.
48.   Thus, the Court still can have physical control over such a person who in
    distress seeks surrender through her Counsel, due to the factors beyond her
    control.
49.
r              to
    Procedure when after taking custody, the Court denies the interim bail or
    withdraws interim protection:
Article 22(2)
of the Constitution provides that every person arrested and

    detained in custody shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate within 24
    hours of such arrest, excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of
    arrest to the court of Magistrate. Its further mandate is that no such person shall be


    detained in custody beyond the said period without the Magistrate's authority.
50.
S. 57
CrPC states that no police officer shall detain in custody a person




    arrested without a warrant for a more extended period than under all the case





    circumstances is reasonable. Such period shall not, in the absence of a special order
    of a Magistrate under section 167, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time





    necessary for the journey from arrest to the Magistrates Court.
51.
In
Central Bureau of Investigation v. Anupam J. Kulkarni
, (1992) 3 SCC 141,
    Supreme Court holds,
                  (13). Whenever any person is arrested under Section 57 Cr. P.C.
                  he should be produced before the nearest Magistrate within 24
                  hours as mentioned therein. Such Magistrate may or may not
                  have jurisdiction to try the case. If Judicial magistrate is not
                  available, the police officer may transmit the arrested accused
                  to the nearest Executive Magistrate on whom the judicial
                  powers have been conferred. The Judicial Magistrate can in the
                  first instance authorise the detention of the accused in such
                  custody i.e. either police or judicial from time to time but the
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
22
total period of detention cannot exceed fifteen days in the
                  whole. Within this period of fifteen days there can be more
                  than one order changing the nature of such custody either from
                  police to judicial or vice versa.
.
52.   In case, after accepting surrender, the Court denies interim bail or withdraws
    the protection, then the custody of the accused be handed over to the Judicial





    Magistrate, (Executive Magistrate in case no Judicial Magistrate is assigned), under
    whose jurisdiction the said Court falls. It is for the Investigator to seek police
    custody from the concerned Magistrate and seek transit remand. It is for the Transit
    Officer to hand over the custody to the Judicial Magistrate would be the SHO/I.O.,





    or any Police official present in the said FIR, and otherwise through the Public
    Prosecutor.               r
    Interim bail:
53.   In all bail applications filed before Judicial Magistrates under
Section 437
CrPC, including for petty offences, the accused presents her custody to the


    concerned Magistrate, who, after consideration, may grant bail. However, when the
    reference material like a Police report is not available, sometimes because the
    application filed at the fag-end of the day, the Magistrate, after considering the




    prima facie material available at that stage, releases the accused from its custody by





    giving interim bail.
54.
In
Mukesh Kishanpuria v. State of West Bengal
, (2010) 15 SCC 154, Supreme





    Court holds,
                  (2). This petition has been filed against the impugned judgment
                  and order dated 26.03.2010 of the High Court of Calcutta
                  whereby the petition under
Section 438
CrPC for grant of
                  anticipatory bail to the petitioner herein has been rejected.
                  (3). We have gone through the impugned judgment and order
                  and also perused the record. We also see no reason to grant
                  anticipatory bail to the petitioner.
(4). However, the petitioner may apply for regular bail before
                  the Court concerned and alongwith the said application, he
                  may file an application for interim bail pending disposal of the
                  regular bail application. We have made it clear on a number of
                  occasions that the power to grant regular bail includes the
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
23
power to grant interim bail pending final disposal of the regular
               bail application.
This power is inherent in the power to grant bail, particularly in
               view of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. We are of the




                                                                         .
opinion that in view of
Article 21
of the Constitution, a person





               should not be compelled to go to jail if he can establish prima
               facie that in the facts of the case he is innocent.
               (5). Hence, if the present petitioner applies for regular bail





               before the Court concerned, he may also file an application for
               interim bail alongwith the same, which application shall be
               decided on the same day on which it is filed, pending final
               disposal of the regular bail application.
55.
In
Sukhwant Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2009) 7 SCC 559, Supreme Court holds,
               This petition has been filed challenging the judgment and order
               dated 24.03.2009 of a learned Single Judge of the High Court of
               Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh whereby the Application

               under
Section 438
of the Cr.P.C. for grant of anticipatory bail

               has been dismissed.
(1). We are not inclined to interfere with the impugned
               judgment and order.
(2). However, following the decision of this Court in the case of
Kamlendra Pratap Singh v. State of U.P. and Ors.
, we reiterate


               that a Court hearing a regular bail application has got inherent
               power to grant interim bail pending final disposal of the bail
               application. In our opinion, this is the proper view in view of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India which protects the life
               and liberty of every person.
(3). When a person applies for regular bail then the court





               concerned ordinarily lists that application after a few days so
               that it can look into the case diary which has to be obtained
               from the police authorities and in the meantime the applicant





               has to go to jail. Even if the applicant is released on bail
               thereafter, his reputation may be tarnished irreparably in
               society. The reputation of a person is his valuable asset, and is a
               facet of his right under Article 21 of the Constitution vide
               Deepak Bajaj v. State of Maharashtra and Anr. JT 2008 (11) SC
609. Hence, we are of the opinion that in the power to grant
               bail there is inherent power in the court concerned to grant
               interim bail to a person pending final disposal of the bail
               application. Of course, it is in the discretion of the court
               concerned to grant interim bail or not but the power is
               certainly there.
(4). In the present case, if the petitioners surrender before the
               Court concerned and makes a prayer for grant of interim bail
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
24
pending final disposal of the bail application, the same shall be
               considered and decided on the same day.
56.
In
Haji Peer Bux v. State of Uttar Pradesh
, 1993 CrLJ 3574, a division bench of




                                                                        .
Allahabad High Court, while dealing with scope of bail in the absence of application
    of
S. 438
CrPC in the State of UP, observed,
               (14). Unfortunately there are still some supporters of the





               outmoded concept that the accused must be put in prison
               before their bail applications are considered. The word
               'custody' occurring in Section 439 of the Code simply implies
               that the person seeking bail should not be a fugitive...
57.    When persons stand arraigned as accused in SCSTPOA, the Investigators
    might not arrest them in every case. Probably despite being aware of this legal
    position, they prefer to surrender before the Courts handing over their custody

    voluntarily. It demonstrates strong belief in the Courts' majesty that they willingly

    put their liberty at stake. Only the overzealous Investigators would be disappointed,
    depriving them of marching with arrested accused to the Police station with
    paparazzi shooting with their cameras and reporting live on social media, forgetting



    in the process the uncountable social repercussions.
58.
In
Issma v. State of U.P.
, 1993 CrLJ 2432, Allahabad High Court observed,
               (5). It is matter of common knowledge that the professional





               criminals falsely implicate innocent persons who dare to stand
               as witness against them in any case. To add to the above, cases
               have come to light where police officers have been found to





               have framed up false cases and did not spare even the
               respectable citizens of our society. There has been spurt in such
               incidents in the recent past. A warning signal came when a false
               case was framed up against the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
               Nadiad for having consumed liquor. In (1991) 4 SCC 406 the
               Supreme Court characterises the same as a "horrendous
               incident". The incident sent shock waves throughout the
               country. This was the plight of a person who held a high judicial
               office what then is the plight of an ordinary citizen? Can the
               Courts afford to take an insular attitude to the changing
               currents of time.
(7). Putting an innocent person behind the jail bars even for a
               short period disfigures his honour and prestige in the society.
               Even if such a person is acquitted; none has time to read and go
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
25
through the reasons of his acquittal. The incarceration of a
     woman in jail affects her entire life. If unmarried, such a woman
     would not even get a suitable match. In a civilised society the
     honour of oneself is one's most precious possession. In




                                                                .
Bhagwat Gita the Lord told to Arjun :
"Akirlinchapi Bhutani Kathaishyanti te-a vyayam
            Sambhavitasua Chakirtir Maranadatirichayate."
(234) (Men will recount why perpetual dishonour,





            and to one highly esteemed, dishonour exceeded
            death.)
     (10). The question which remains to be considered is whether
     the Subordinate Courts i.e. the Courts of Sessions and the
     Courts of Magistrates can release an accused on personal bond





     for a short period pending the disposal of a bail application. It is
     well settled that when a court has jurisdiction to grant a relief,
     such jurisdiction includes the power of granting incidental
     ancillary or limited relief short of the ultimate and final relief.
In
Income-tax Officer v. M.K. Mohd. Kunhi
, AIR 1969 Supreme

     Court 430, the question arose whether the Income-Tax

     Appellate Tribunal had the power to grant stay in the absence
     of a specific provision regarding the same. The Supreme Court
     observed :-
"In our opinion, the Appellate Tribunal must be held


            to have power to grant stay as incidental or
            ancillary relief to its appellate jurisdiction."
(11). Since the Courts of Magistrates and the Courts of Sessions
     have jurisdiction to grant the ultimate relief of bail, they also




     have jurisdiction to grant limited relief short of grant of bail in
     suitable cases by way of releasing an accused on personal bond





     for a short period as an ancillary or incidental relief. The
     argument that if the accused is released on personal bonds it
     affects the statutory right of the police to arrest the accused, is





     fallacious. As soon as an accused surrenders before a Court he
     submits to the jurisdiction of the Court and the right of the
     police to arrest him does not exist thereafter. When an accused
     surrenders and is released on personal bond, he remains in the
     custody of the Court. Release on personal bond is nothing but a
     release on temporarily bail, pending the final disposal of the
     bail application in order to make the remedy effective and
     efficacious.
(12). Courts in a free nation cannot remain by standers to
     injustice being perpetrated and shut their eyes to the
     incarceration of innocent persons in jail, on false and frivolous
     accusations. The Court has to step in and safeguard an innocent
     person, by releasing him on personal bond pending the disposal
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
26
of the bail application. An accused who has been so released on
               personal bond still remains in the custody of the Court.
               (20). To sum up, my conclusions are :
1). When an accused surrenders in the court and




                                                                        .
applies for bail, the subordinate courts have





                      jurisdiction to release him on personal bond and
                      there is nothing in the case of Dr. Hidayat Hussain
                      Khan (supra) which lays down to the contrary.
2). The courts should be liberal in this matter, but
                      the facts and the circumstances of each case should
                      be considered and taken into account.
3). In cases of women and children courts should
                      prefer to release them on personal bonds pending





                      the disposal of their bail applications as there is
                      always a fear of sex abuse and child abuse in jail as
                      well as police custody and no one likes to report
                      such outrages to the authorities out of shame or
                      other reasons.
4). The bail applications should be decided as

                      expeditiously as possible and should not be allowed
                      to remain pending for long. If practicable the bail
                      applications should be considered the same day.
59.
In
Jones v. State
, 2004 Cr.LJ 2755, Madras High Court, observed:-
(16). This Court recently has brought to light the misuse of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of




               Atrocities) Act, 1989
against people of other community. This is
               another example of misuse of the Act. The purpose of bringing
SC & ST Act
is to put down the atrocities committed on the





               members of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The law
               enforcing authorities must bear in mind that it cannot be
               misused to settle other disputes between the parties, which is





               alien to the provisions contemplated under the Act.
An Act
enacted for laudable purpose can also become unreasonable,
               when it is exercised overzealously by the enforcing authorities
               for extraneous reasons. It is for the authorities to guard against
               such misuse of power conferred on them.
60.
In
Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra
, (2018) 6 SCC 454,
    Supreme Court holds,
               (38). In the light of submissions made, it is necessary to express
               concern that working of the Atrocities Act should not result in
               perpetuating casteism which can have an adverse impact on
               integration of the society and the constitutional values. Such
               concern has also been expressed by this Court on several
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
27
occasions. Secularism is a basic feature of the Constitution.
                Irrespective of caste or religion, the Constitution guarantees
                equality in its preamble as well as other provisions including
Articles 14
to 16. The Constitution envisages a cohesive, unified




                                                                         .
and casteless society.
(43). We are thus of the view that interpretation of the
                Atrocities Act should promote constitutional values of fraternity
                and integration of the society. This may require check on false





                implications of innocent citizens on caste lines.
                (71). Law
laid down by
this Court in Joginder Kumar (1994) 4
                SCC 260); Arnesh Kumar (2014) 8 SCC 273; Rini Johar (2016) 11
                SCC 703; Siddharam Satlingappa, (2011) 1 SCC 694, to check
                uncalled for arrest cannot be ignored and clearly applies to





                arrests under the Atrocities Act. Protection of innocent is as
                important as punishing the guilty.
61.
In
Rini Johar v. State of M.P.
, (2016) 11 SCC 703, Supreme Court holds,

                (24). We are compelled to say so as liberty which is basically the

                splendor of beauty of life and bliss of growth, cannot be
                allowed to be frozen in such a contrived winter. That would
                tantamount to comatosing of liberty which is the strongest
                pillar of democracy.
62.
In
Juli C J v. State of Kerala
, 2020 SCC Online Ker 2504, Kerala High Court
    observed,




                (20).
...The bar under Sections 18 and 18A of the Act will not
                apply at the stage of consideration of a bail application by the
                Special Court under Section 437 Cr.P.C.
Conclusion- The above analysis gleans that post surrender the grant of interim bail





    does not subvert the barred provision of anticipatory bail:
63.   Bail is the antithesis of custody. In the absence of any riders or restrictions
    under
S. 439
CrPC, any person accused of a non-bailable offence, under any penal
    law, including the violations under the
Scheduled Caste & Scheduled Tribes
    (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
, can apply under
section 439
CrPC, offering to
    surrender and simultaneously seeking interim bail. On receipt of such application,
    the Court is to satisfy that the applicant stands arraigned as an accused in a FIR
    disclosing Non-Bailable offences. If all these parameters are complete, then the
    Courts are under an obligation to accept surrender. Since custody is a sine qua non
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
28
for considering a bail application, the Court is under an obligation to consider the
    prayer for interim bail after this deemed custody. All such pleas fall under the scope
    of
S. 439
CrPC itself, and there is no need to invoke
S. 482
CrPC. After that, granting




                                                                           .
or refusing interim bail is a Judicial function.
64.   While granting interim bail, the rights of the victims, their families, the





    oppressed communities, the existence of reasonable grounds for believing that a
    person has committed an offence punishable with death or transportation for life,
    the gravity and heinous nature of the crime, the criminal history of the accused, as





    well as of the possibility of false implication, should always be gone into. Bail cannot
    be withheld merely as a punishment. One of the most significant considerations is
    the accused's conduct, which was not to abscond but voluntarily to surrender and

    submit herself to the majesty of Justice. Each case will have to be decided on the

    cumulative effect of all events put before the Court. However, there would be no
    justification in entering into a roving inquiry on either party's allegations.
65.   The offences committed against the persons extend to their family members,
    stigmatize them, affect their dignity, demotivate them, and make them unequal. To
    eliminate casteism, we need social re-engineering by developing herd immunity,




    ensuring that perpetrators of casteism run out of hosts. Thus, the prudent condition





    while granting interim bail in SCSTPOA is an assurance from the accused of not
    terrorizing the victim, with a rider that interim bail's order shall ipso facto vacate if





    the accused attempts to browbeat the victim or repeats any such act. Subject to the
    seriousness of allegations, the accused may also be directed to stay away from the
    victim's residence and workplace.
66.   The Court must decide the prayer for interim bail on that day itself when it
    takes the accused in its custody. Such interim bail can extend till the bail
    application's final disposal, on the police file's production, or the status report.
    However, powers to grant interim bail should be exercised in a judicial and not in an
    arbitrary manner, and if given, then for the purpose of interim bail, personal bonds
    alone would suffice. If the allegations are serious, keeping in view the object of the
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
29
SCSTPOA and the purpose for which this stringent provision in SCSTPOA was
    enacted, then indeed, such interim protection either be rejected or, if granted, can
    always be withdrawn on the next hearings.
.
67.   The interim bail is neither in contradiction to the judicial precedents nor
    obstructs Justice's path. Thus, resorting to
S. 439
CrPC and surrendering before





    Sessions Court or High Court and simultaneously obtaining ad-interim bail does not
    amount to bypassing the restrictions placed in
S. 18
and
18-A
of SCSTPOA. This
    practice of the accused surrendering and getting interim bail cannot be said to





    override the legislative intention of restraining the anticipatory bail to the violators
    of the SCSTPOA.
I express my gratitude to counsel for the petitioners, Mr. Ashok Sharma, Ld.

    Advocate General and his team, Mr. Anand Sharma, Ld. Counsel for the

    complainant, Ld. Amici Curiae, namely Sr. Advocates Mr. Bipin Negi, Mr. Sanjeev
    Bhushan, Mr. Virender Singh Chauhan, Advocates Mr. Chander Narayan Singh and
    Mr. Ishan Kashyap, assisted by Advocates Ms. Kiran Dhiman, Ms. Tim Saran, Ms.
    Babita, Ms. Megha Kapoor Gautam, and Ms. Shradha Karol, for excellent assistance,


    and Mr. Soham Krishan Luthra, student of Jindal Global Law School for quality
    research, and my Research Assistant Ms. Kalyani Acharya for outstanding
    contribution.
14 Sep 2020





                                                                             Anoop Chitkara
                                                                                     Judge
::: Downloaded on - 14/09/2020 20:19:10 :::HCHP
