Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 436],
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/154906090/

[Cites
45
, Cited by
23
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Smt.Gomati Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 April, 2019
1
             THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
                     Writ Petition No.5147/2019
              Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

Gwalior, Dated :02/04/2019

      Shri B.P. Singh, Advocate for petitioner.

      Shri      Anand   V.   Bhardwaj,   Government     Advocate     for

respondents/State.
This petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India has

been filed seeking the following reliefs:-
"(i)     That, a direction may kindly be given to the
               respondents to modify the order Annexure P-1 and
               to extend the benefit of increments, house rent and
               other service benefits as has been given to Shri
               Pavan Kumar Jain and Shri Girwar Singh
               Kushwaha.
(ii)     Any other relief, which this Hon'ble Court may
               deem fit and proper, may also be given to the
               petitioner."
2.    It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the

petitioner was granted appointment on compassionate ground after

the death of her husband. Initially she was appointed on daily wages

on the post of Water-woman and thereafter by order dated 31/12/2004

she was classified on the post of Water-woman. Thereafter, by order

dated 14/9/2011 appointment of the petitioner was declared as illegal,

which was challenged by the petitioner before this Court by filing

writ petition No.8239/2011. The said writ petition was allowed by

order dated 14/12/2011 in the light of the order passed by this Court

in writ petition No.7994/2011. It is submitted that against the order
2
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

dated 14/12/2011 passed in Writ Petition No.8239/2011 the State

Government filed a Writ Appeal, which was dismissed and the SLP

was also dismissed. It appears that since the petitioner was not

satisfied with the arrears of pay paid by the respondents, therefore,

she filed a Contempt Petition, which was registered as Conc.
No.289/2012 and was disposed of by this Court by order dated

12/5/2017 with the following observations:-
"Learned counsel for the respondents has filed
            compliance report dated 11/05/2017 in which it is
            mentioned that petitioner was earlier paid a sum
            of Rs.3,98,143/- towards difference of pay scale
            from 31/12/2004. It is petitioner's case that she
            was entitled for arrears from 01/03/1995 to
            30.12.2004. Now vide order dated 09/05/2017 as
            a result of classification w.e.f 01/03/1995
            petitioner has been paid a sum of Rs.1,81,135/- as
            difference of arrears w.e.f. 01/03/1995 to
            30/12/2012. Therefore, nothing survives for
            adjudication in this case. However, if there is any
            difference in the calculation, petitioner will be
            free to raise the issue by making an appropriate
            application for revival of this contempt petition.
Accordingly, this petition is disposed of.
            Further, she will be free to challenge the same by
            filing the fresh petition."
3.    It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that in fact the

similarly situated persons have been granted the benefit of regular

pay scale alongwith annual increments, house rent, time scale, which

is being given to the regular employees and the same benefit has not

been extended to the petitioner, whereas her case is squarely covered
3
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

by the case of co-employees. Thus, it is submitted that the State

should act as a model employer and should not discriminate.
4.    Per contra, it is submitted by the counsel for the State that

after the quashment of the order of discontinuation of the services of

the petitioner, the natural consequence was that the order of

classification dated 31/12/2004 again got revived and, therefore, the

factual position is that the petitioner was classified as Water-woman

by order dated 31/12/2004. The Supreme Court in the case of
Ram

Naresh Rawat vs. Ashwini Ray & Others
:[(2017) 3 SCC 436],

has held as under:-
''21. It is, thus, somewhat puzzling as to
       whether the employee on getting the designation of
       'permanent employee' can be treated as 'regular'
       employee. This answer does not flow from the
       reading of the Standing Orders Act and Rules. In
       common parlance, normally, a person who is known
       as 'permanent employee' would be treated as a
       regular employee but it does not appear to be exactly
       that kind of situation in the instant case when we find
       that merely after completing six months' service an
       employee gets right to be treated as 'permanent
       employee'. Moreover, this Court has, as would be
       noticed now, drawn a distinction between 'permanent
       employee' and 'regular employee'.
22. We may mention, at this stage that this
       aspect has come up for consideration, in another
       context, in
State of Madhya Pradesh and Others Vs.
       Dilip Singh Patel and Others
. That was a case where
       similarly situated employees, who were classified as
       'permanent employees' under the Standing Orders
       Act, were given minimum of the pay scale attached
       to their posts.
However, after the implementation of
4
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

Sixth Pay Commission, benefits thereof were not
extended to these employees. High Court held that
they would be entitled to have their pay fixed as per
the revised scales in accordance with the
recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission which
were accepted qua regular employees. This Court,
though, upheld the orders of the High Court giving
them the benefit of revision of pay-scale pertained to
Sixth Pay Commission, but at the same time made it
clear that they would be entitled to minimum salary
and allowances as per the said revised scales and
would not be entitled to any increments. It was
further held that such increments would be
admissible only after regularization of their services
which regularization was to take placed as per
seniority list with due procedure. Following passage
from the said judgment, which captures the aforesaid
directions, is quoted hereunder:
''we have heard learned counsel for the parties
 and perused the records. It appears that the
 respondents earlier moved before the Administrative
 Tribunal, Gwalior by filing original applications
 such as O.A. No. 648 of 1995, O.A. No. 293 of
 1991 etc. in compliance of the orders passed in such
 original applications, the Chief Engineer, Yamuna
 Kachhar Water Resources Department, Gwalior
 (M.P.) (by order issued in between April 2004 and
 June, 2004 provided the minimum wages and
 allowances to the respondents without increment as
 per the Schedule of the pay scale from the date of
 the order of the Tribunal. It was further ordered that
 the regularization of the daily wages employees
 shall be made as per the seniority list with due
 procedure and the benefit of increment and other
 benefits can only be granted after the regularization
 as per the Rules. It was ordered that the order of the
 Court for benefit of minimum wages and
 allowances shall be...........
From the aforesaid facts, it is clear that the
 respondents are entitled for minimum wages and
 allowances as per the fixed Schedule of the pay
5
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

        scale but without any increment. In such cases, if
        the pay scale is revised from time to time including
        the pay scale as revised pursuant to Sixth Pay
        Commission, the respondents will be entitled to
        minimum wages and allowances as per the said
        revised scale, without increment. Only after
        regularization of their service, as per seniority and
        rules, they can claim the benefit of increment and
        other benefits.''

      The contempt case was disposed of in the following terms:-
''It is also apprised by the learned counsel for
       the respondents that in similar Contempt Case
       No.891/2015, Coordinate Bench of this Court
       wherein one of us (A.K. Joshi, J.) was a member and
       disposed of contempt case in terms of the decision by
       the Supreme Court in the case of
Ram Naresh
       Rawat
(supra).
As the issue as regard to grant of pay
       sale after being classified as "permanent" under the
       Statutory Standing Order has been settled at (
Balram
       Vs. Shri Pramod Agrawal & others
) rest with the
       decision in
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra), we are
       inclined to dispose of the contempt petition in terms
       of order passed in
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra) and
       direct the respondents to consider and settle the claim
       of the petitioner in terms of decision rendered by the
       Supreme Court in
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra) within
       a period of three months from the date of
       communication of this order.''
5.    Accordingly, the petitioner has been granted the lowest pay

scale without any increment and if by mistake a benefit has been

extended to an employee, for which he is not entitled, then the

principle of negative equality cannot be applied and the petitioner

cannot be granted the same benefit.
6.
In reply, it is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that
6
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

the judgment passed in the case of
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra) has

been passed recently and, therefore, it does not have a retrospective

operation.
7.    Heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.    So far as retrospective operation of the judgment passed by the

Supreme Court in the case of
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra) is

concerned, suffice it to say that the principle of prospective

overruling is not applicable in India.
The Supreme Court in the case of
Sarwan Kumar and

Another Vs. Madan Lal Aggarwal
reported in (2003) 4 SCC 147

has held as under:-
"15. For the first time this Court in
Golak Nath v.
          State of Punjab
accepted the doctrine of
          "prospective overruling". It was held: (AIR p. 1669,
          para 51)
                "51. As this Court for the first time has been
                called upon to apply the doctrine evolved in a
                different      country        under        different
                circumstances, we would like to move warily
                in the beginning.
We would lay down the
                following propositions: (1) The doctrine of
                prospective overruling can be invoked only in
                matters arising under our Constitution; (2) it
                can be applied only by the highest court of
                the country i.e. the Supreme Court as it has
                the constitutional jurisdiction to declare law
                binding on all the courts in India; (3) the
                scope of the retroactive operation of the law
                declared by the Supreme Court superseding
                its 'earlier decisions' is left to its discretion to
                be moulded in accordance with the justice of
7
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

                 the cause or matter before it."
The doctrine of "prospective overruling" was
          initially made applicable to the matters arising
          under the Constitution but we understand the same
          has since been made applicable to the matters
          arising under the statutes as well. Under the
          doctrine of "prospective overruling" the law
          declared by the Court applies to the cases arising
          in future only and its applicability to the cases
          which have attained finality is saved because the
          repeal would otherwise work hardship on those
          who had trusted to its existence. Invocation of the
          doctrine of "prospective overruling" is left to the
          discretion of the Court to mould with the justice of
          the cause or the matter before the Court. This
          Court while deciding Gian Devi Anand case did
          not hold that the law declared by it would be
          prospective in operation. It was not for the High
          Court to say that the law laid down by this Court in
          Gian Devi Anand case would be prospective in
          operation. If this is to be accepted then conflicting
          rules can supposedly be laid down by different
          High Courts regarding the applicability of the law
          laid down by this Court in Gian Devi Anand case
          or any other case. Such a situation cannot be
          permitted to arise. In the absence of any direction
          by this Court that the rule laid down by this Court
          would be prospective in operation, the finding
          recorded by the High Court that the rule laid down
          in Gian Devi Anand case by this Court would be
          applicable to the cases arising from the date of the
          judgment of this Court cannot be accepted being
          erroneous."
The Supreme Court in the case of
M.A. Murthy Vs. State of

Karnataka and Others
reported in (2003) 7 SCC 517 has held as

under:-
"8. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted
          that the approach of the High Court is erroneous as
8
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

the law declared by this Court is presumed to be the
law at all times. Normally, the decision of this
Court enunciating a principle of law is applicable
to all cases irrespective of its stage of pendency
because it is assumed that what is enunciated by the
Supreme Court is, in fact, the law from inception.
The doctrine of prospective overruling which is a
feature of American jurisprudence is an exception
to the normal principle of law, was imported and
applied for the first time in
L.C. Golak Nath v.
State of Punjab
.
In
Managing Director, ECIL v. B.
Karunakar
the view was adopted. Prospective
overruling is a part of the principles of
constitutional canon of interpretation and can be
resorted to by this Court while superseding the law
declared by it earlier. It is a device innovated to
avoid reopening of settled issues, to prevent
multiplicity of proceedings, and to avoid
uncertainty and avoidable litigation. In other
words, actions taken contrary to the law declared
prior to the date of declaration are validated in
larger public interest. The law as declared applies
to future cases.
(See
Ashok Kumar Gupta v. State of
U.P.
and
Baburam v. C.C. Jacob
.) It is for this
Court to indicate as to whether the decision in
question will operate prospectively. In other words,
there shall be no prospective overruling, unless it is
so indicated in the particular decision. It is not open
to be held that the decision in a particular case will
be prospective in its application by application of
the doctrine of prospective overruling. The doctrine
of binding precedent helps in promoting certainty
and consistency in judicial decisions and enables an
organic development of the law besides providing
assurance to the individual as to the consequences
of transactions forming part of the daily affairs.
That being the position, the High Court was in
error by holding that the judgment which operated
on the date of selection was operative and not the
review judgment in
Ashok Kumar Sharma
case No.
II. All the more so when the subsequent judgment
is by way of review of the first judgment in which
case there are no judgments at all and the
9
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

         subsequent judgment rendered on review petitions
         is the one and only judgment rendered, effectively
         and for all purposes, the earlier decision having
         been erased by countenancing the review
         applications. The impugned judgments of the High
         Court are, therefore, set aside."
The Supreme Court in the case of
K. Madhava Reddy and

Others Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others
reported in (2014)

6 SCC 537 has held as under:-
"10. We have heard the learned counsel for the
         parties at length. The doctrine of prospective
         overruling has its origin in American jurisprudence.
         It was first invoked in this country in
Golak Nath v.
         State of Punjab
, with this Court proceeding rather
         cautiously in applying the doctrine, was conscious
         of the fact that the doctrine had its origin in another
         country and had been invoked in different
         circumstances.
The Court sounded a note of caution
         in the application of the doctrine to the Indian
         conditions as is evident from the following passage
         appearing in
Golak Nath
case wherein this Court
         laid down the parameters within which the power
         could be exercised. This Court said: (AIR p. 1669,
         para 51)
          "51. As this Court for the first time has been called
         upon to apply the doctrine evolved in a different
         country under different circumstances, we would
         like to move warily in the beginning.
We would lay
         down the following propositions: (1) The doctrine
         of prospective overruling can be invoked only in
         matters arising under our Constitution; (2) it can be
         applied only by the highest court of the country i.e.
         the Supreme Court as it has the constitutional
         jurisdiction to declare law binding on all the courts
         in India; (3) the scope of the retroactive operation
         of the law declared by the Supreme Court
         superseding its 'earlier decisions' is left to its
         discretion to be moulded in accordance with the
10
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

justice of the cause or matter before it."
11. It is interesting to note that the doctrine has not
remained confined to overruling of earlier judicial
decision on the same issue as was understood in
Golak Nath
case. In several later decisions, this
Court has invoked the doctrine in different
situations including in cases where an issue has
been examined and determined for the first time.
For instance in
India Cement Ltd. v. State of T.N.
,
this Court not only held that the levy of the cess
was ultra vires the power of the State Legislature
brought about by an amendment to the Madras
Village Panchayat Amendment Act, 1964 but also
directed that the State would not be liable for any
refund of the amount of that cess which has been
paid or already collected.
In
Orissa Cement Ltd. v.
State of Orissa
, this Court drew a distinction
between a declaration regarding the invalidity of a
provision and the determination of the relief that
should be granted in consequence thereof. This
Court held that it was open to the Court to grant,
mould or restrict the relief in a manner most
appropriate to the situation before it in such a way
so as to advance the interest of justice.
12. Reference may also be made to the decision of
this Court in
Union of India v. Mohd. Ramzan
Khan
where non-furnishing of a copy of the
enquiry report was taken as violative of the
principles of natural justice and any disciplinary
action based on any such report was held liable to
be set aside. The declaration of law as to the effect
of non-supply of a copy of the report was, however,
made prospective so that no punishment already
imposed upon a delinquent employee would be
open to challenge on that account.
13.
In
Ashok Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P.
, a three-
Judge Bench of this Court held that although
Golak
Nath
case     regarding     unamendability      of
fundamental rights under
Article 368
of the
Constitution had been overruled in
Kesavananda
Bharati v. State of Kerala
yet the doctrine of
prospective overruling was upheld and followed in
11
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

several later decisions. This Court further held that
the Constitution does not expressly or by necessary
implication provide against the doctrine of
prospective overruling. As a matter of fact
Articles
32(4)
and
142
are designed with words of width to
enable the Supreme Court to declare the law and to
give such directions or pass such orders as are
necessary to do complete justice.
This Court
observed: (
Ashok Kumar Gupta
case, SCC pp. 246-
47, para 54)
"54. ... So, there is no acceptable reason as to why
the Court in dealing with the law in supersession of
the law declared by it earlier could not restrict the
operation of law, as declared, to the future and save
the transactions, whether statutory or otherwise,
that were effected on the basis of the earlier law.
This Court is, therefore, not impotent to adjust the
competing rights of parties by prospective
overruling of the previous decision in Rangachari
ratio.
The decision in Mandal case postponing the
operation for five years from the date of the
judgment is an instance of, and an extension to the
principle of prospective overruling following the
principle evolved in
Golak Nath
case."
14. Dealing with the nature of the power exercised
 by the Supreme Court under
Article 142
, this Court
 held that the expression "complete justice" are
 words meant to meet myriad situations created by
 human ingenuity or because of the operation of
 statute or law declared under
Articles 32
, 136
or
 141 of the Constitution. This Court observed:
(
Ashok Kumar Gupta
case, SCC pp. 250-51, para
60)
"60. ... The power under
Article 142
is a
constituent power transcendental to statutory
prohibition. Before exercise of the power under
Article 142(2)
, the Court would take that
prohibition (sic provision) into consideration
before taking steps under
Article 142(2)
and we
find no limiting words to mould the relief or when
this Court takes appropriate decision to mete out
justice or to remove injustice. The phrase
12
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

'complete justice' engrafted in
Article 142(1)
is the
word of width couched with elasticity to meet
myriad situations created by human ingenuity or
cause or result of operation of statute law or law
declared under
Articles 32
, 136
and
141
of the
Constitution and cannot be cribbed or cabined
within any limitations or phraseology. Each case
needs examination in the light of its backdrop and
the indelible effect of the decision. In the ultimate
analysis, it is for this Court to exercise its power to
do complete justice or prevent injustice arising
from the exigencies of the cause or matter before it.
The question of lack of jurisdiction or nullity of the
order of this Court does not arise. As held earlier,
the power under
Article 142
is a constituent power
within the jurisdiction of this Court. So, the
question of a law being void ab initio or nullity or
voidable does not arise."
15.
In
Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. v. State of
U.P.
, this Court held that the doctrine of
prospective overruling was in essence a
recognition of the principle that the court moulds
the relief claimed to meet the justice of the case
and that the Apex Court in this country expressly
enjoys that power under
Article 142
of the
Constitution which allows this Court to pass such
decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
complete justice in any case or matter pending
before this Court. This Court observed: (SCC p.
532, para 27)
"27. In the ultimate analysis, prospective
overruling, despite the terminology, is only a
recognition of the principle that the court moulds
the reliefs claimed to meet the justice of the case --
justice not in its logical but in its equitable sense.
As far as this country is concerned, the power has
been expressly conferred by
Article 142
of the
Constitution which allows this Court to 'pass such
decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
complete justice in any cause or matter pending
before it'.
In exercise of this power, this Court has
often denied the relief claimed despite holding in
13
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

         the claimants' favour in order to do 'complete
         justice'."
16. The "doctrine of prospective overruling" was,
         observed by this Court as a rule of judicial
         craftsmanship laced with pragmatism and judicial
         statesmanship as a useful tool to bring about
         smooth transition of the operation of law without
         unduly affecting the rights of the people who acted
         upon the law that operated prior to the date of the
         judgment overruling the previous law."
The Supreme Court in the case of
B.A. Linga Reddy and

others Vs. Karnataka State Transport Authority and others
reported in (2015) 4 SCC 515 has held as under:-
34. The view of the High Court in Ashrafulla has
         been reversed by this Court. The decision is of
         retrospective operation, as it has not been laid
         down that it would operate prospectively; more so,
         in the case of reversal of the judgment. This Court
         in
P.V. George v. State of Kerala
held that the law
         declared by a court will have a retrospective effect
         if not declared so specifically.
Referring to Golak
         Nath v. State of Punjab it had also been observed
         that the power of prospective overruling is vested
         only in the Supreme Court and that too in
         constitutional matters.
It was observed: (
P.V.
         George
case, SCC pp. 565 & 569, paras 19 & 29)
         "19. It may be true that when the doctrine of stare
         decisis is not adhered to, a change in the law may
         adversely affect the interest of the citizens. The
         doctrine of prospective overruling although is
         applied to overcome such a situation, but then it
         must be stated expressly. The power must be
         exercised in the clearest possible term. The
         decisions of this Court are clear pointer thereto.
* *        *
29. Moreover, the judgment of the Full Bench has
         attained finality. The special leave petition has been
         dismissed. The subsequent Division Bench,
14
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

therefore, could not have said as to whether the law
declared by the Full Bench would have a
prospective operation or not. The law declared by a
court will have a retrospective effect if not
otherwise stated to be so specifically. The Full
Bench having not said so, the subsequent Division
Bench did not have the jurisdiction in that behalf."
35.
In
Ravi S. Naik v. Union of India
, it has been
laid down that there is retrospective operation of
the decision of this Court. The interpretation of the
provision becomes effective from the date of
enactment of the provision.
In
M.A. Murthy v. State
of Karnataka
, it was held that the law declared by
the Supreme Court is normally assumed to be the
law from inception. Prospective operation is only
exception to this normal rule. It was held thus:
(
M.A. Murthy
case, SCC pp. 520-21, para 8)
"8. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that the approach of the High Court is erroneous as
the law declared by this Court is presumed to be the
law at all times. Normally, the decision of this
Court enunciating a principle of law is applicable
to all cases irrespective of its stage of pendency
because it is assumed that what is enunciated by the
Supreme Court is, in fact, the law from inception.
The doctrine of prospective overruling which is a
feature of American jurisprudence is an exception
to the normal principle of law, was imported and
applied for the first time in
Golak Nath v. State of
Punjab
.
In
ECIL v. B. Karunakar
the view was
adopted. Prospective overruling is a part of the
principles of constitutional canon of interpretation
and can be resorted to by this Court while
superseding the law declared by it earlier. It is a
device innovated to avoid reopening of settled
issues, to prevent multiplicity of proceedings, and
to avoid uncertainty and avoidable litigation. In
other words, actions taken contrary to the law
declared prior to the date of declaration are
validated in larger public interest. The law as
declared applies to future cases.
(See
Ashok Kumar
Gupta v. State of U.P.
and
Baburam v. C.C. Jacob
.)
15
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

         It is for this Court to indicate as to whether the
         decision in question will operate prospectively. In
         other words, there shall be no prospective
         overruling, unless it is so indicated in the particular
         decision. It is not open to be held that the decision
         in a particular case will be prospective in its
         application by application of the doctrine of
         prospective overruling. The doctrine of binding
         precedent helps in promoting certainty and
         consistency in judicial decisions and enables an
         organic development of the law besides providing
         assurance to the individual as to the consequences
         of transactions forming part of the daily affairs.
That being the position, the High Court was in
         error by holding that the judgment which operated
         on the date of selection was operative and not the
         review judgment in
Ashok Kumar Sharma
case. All
         the more so when the subsequent judgment is by
         way of review of the first judgment in which case
         there are no judgments at all and the subsequent
         judgment rendered on review petitions is the one
         and only judgment rendered, effectively and for all
         purposes, the earlier decision having been erased
         by countenancing the review applications. The
         impugned judgments of the High Court are,
         therefore, set aside."
The Supreme Court in the case of
P.V. George Vs. State of

Kerala
reported in (2007) 3 SCC 557 has held as under :
"27. The rights of the appellants were not
         determined in the earlier proceedings. According to
         them, merely a law was declared which was
         prevailing at that point of time; but the appellants
         were not parties therein. Thus, no decision was
         rendered in their favour nor any right accrued
         thereby."
Thus, it is clear that the principle of prospective overruling

would not apply in respect of the judgment passed by the Supreme
16
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

Court unless and until it is expressly so mentioned in the judgment.
Furthermore, there cannot be an estoppel against the statute.
The Supreme Court in the case of Bengal Iron Corpn. v. CTO

reported in 1994 Supp (1) SCC 310 has held as under:-
"18. ............... There can be no estoppel against
          the statute. .................. Law is what is declared
          by this Court and the High Court -- to wit, it is
          for this Court and the High Court to declare
          what does a particular provision of statute say,
          and not for the executive. Of course, the
          Parliament/Legislature never speaks or explains
          what does a provision enacted by it mean. (See
Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. v. Bharat Coking Coal
          Ltd
.)"
Thus, where the question of law has been settled by the Courts,

then it has to be held that the said question of law was in existence

right from day one.
9.    Thus, it has to be held that the judgment passed by the

Supreme Court in the case of
Ram Naresh Rawat
(supra) would

apply to all those cases where the litigation is still pending. Under

these circumstances, it cannot be said that the grant of lowest pay

scale without any increment by the respondents is bad in law.
10.   So far as the grant of regular pay scale with other emoluments

to the co-employees is concerned, this Court is of the considered

opinion that by applying the principle of negative equality no such

benefit can be extended to the petitioner.
17
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

      The Supreme Court in the case of
Mangalam Organics

Limited Vs. Union of India
reported in (2017) 7 SCC 221 has held

as under:-
"41. Examination of the matter in the aforesaid
         perspective would provide an answer to most of the
         arguments of the appellants. It would neither be a
         case of discrimination nor can it be said that the
         appellants have any right under
Article 14
or
Article
         19(1)(g)
of the Constitution which has been violated
         by non-issuance of notification under Section 11-C of
         the Act. Once the appellant accepts that in law it was
         liable to pay the duty, even if some of the units have
         been able to escape payment of duty for certain
         reasons, the appellant cannot say that no duty should
         be recovered from it by invoking
Article 14
of the
         Constitution. It is well established that the equality
         clause enshrined in
Article 14
of the Constitution is a
         positive concept and cannot be applied in the
         negative."
The Supreme Court in the case of
Union of India and another

Vs. International Trading Co. and another
reported in (2003) 5

SCC 437 has held as under:-
"13. What remains now to be considered, is the
         effect of permission granted to the thirty two vessels.
         As highlighted by learned counsel for the appellants,
         even if it is accepted that there was any improper
         permission, that may render such permissions
         vulnerable so far as the thirty two vessels are
         concerned, but it cannot come to the aid of the
         respondents. It is not necessary to deal with that
         aspect because two wrongs do not make one right. A
         party cannot claim that since something wrong has
         been done in another case direction should be given
         for doing another wrong. It would not be setting a
         wrong right, but would be perpetuating another
18
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

         wrong. In such matters there is no discrimination
         involved. The concept of equal treatment on the logic
         of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India (in short
         "the Constitution") cannot be pressed into service in
         such cases. What the concept of equal treatment
         presupposes is existence of similar legal foothold. It
         does not countenance repetition of a wrong action to
         bring both wrongs on a par. Even if hypothetically it
         is accepted that a wrong has been committed in some
         other cases by introducing a concept of negative
         equality the respondents cannot strengthen their case.
         They have to establish strength of their case on some
         other basis and not by claiming negative equality."
The Supreme Court in the case of
Doiwala Sehkari Shram

Samvida Samiti Ltd. Vs. State of Uttaranchal and others
reported

in (2007) 11 SCC 641 has held as under:-
"28. This Court in
Union of India v. International
         Trading Co.
has held that two wrongs do not make
         one right. The appellant cannot claim that since
         something wrong has been done in another case,
         directions should be given for doing another wrong. It
         would not be setting a wrong right but could be
         perpetuating another wrong and in such matters, there
         is no discrimination involved. The concept of equal
         treatment on the logic of
Article 14
cannot be pressed
         into service in such cases. But the concept of equal
         treatment presupposes existence of similar legal
         foothold. It does not countenance repetition of a
         wrong action to bring wrongs on a par. The affected
         parties have to establish strength of their case on some
         other basis and not by claiming negative quality. In
         view of the law
laid down by
this Court in the above
         matter, the submission of the appellant has no force.
         In case, some of the persons have been granted
         permits wrongly, the appellant cannot claim the
         benefit of the wrong done by the Government."
The Supreme Court in the case of Vishal Properties (P) Ltd.
19
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

Vs. State of U.P. and others reported in (2007) 11 SCC 172 has held

as under:-
"13. Even otherwise,
Article 14
is not meant to
         perpetuate an illegality. It provides for positive
         equality and not negative equality. Therefore, we are
         not bound to direct any authority to repeat the wrong
         action done by it earlier.
In
Sushanta Tagore v. Union
         of India
this Court rejected such a contention as
         sought to be advanced in the present case by
         observing: (SCC pp. 28-29, para 36)
                 "36. Only because some advantages would
             ensue to the people in general by reason of the
             proposed development, the same would not mean
             that the ecology of the place would be sacrificed.
             Only because some encroachments have been
             made and unauthorised buildings have been
             constructed, the same by itself cannot be a good
             ground for allowing other constructional activities
             to come up which would be in violation of the
             provisions of the Act. Illegal encroachments, if
             any, may be removed in accordance with law. It is
             trite law that there is no equality in illegality."
14. This view also finds support from the
         judgments of this Court in
Sneh Prabha v. State of
         U.P.
,
Secy., Jaipur Development Authority v. Daulat
         Mal Jain
,
State of Haryana v. Ram Kumar Mann
and
Faridabad CT Scan Centre v. D.G. Health Services
.
15. In Financial Commr. (Revenue) v. Gulab
         Chand this Court rejected the contention that as other
         similarly situated persons had been retained in
         service, persons senior to the petitioner could not
         have been discharged during the period of probation
         observing that even if no action had been taken in
         similar situation against similarly situated persons
         then too it did not confer any legal right upon the
         petitioner.
16.
In
Jalandhar Improvement Trust v. Sampuran
         Singh
and
Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar
this Court
         held that courts cannot issue a direction that the same
         mistake be perpetuated on the ground of
20
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Petition No.5147/2019
Smt. Gomati Bai Vs. State of M.P. and others

                 discrimination or hardship.
17. Any action/order contrary to law does not
                 confer any right upon any person for similar
                 treatment. (See
State of Punjab v. Dr. Rajeev Sarwal
;
Yogesh Kumar v. Govt. of NCT, Delhi
;
Union of India
                 v. International Trading Co.
and
Anand Buttons Ltd.
                 v. State of Haryana
.)
18. Recently in
State of Kerala v. K. Prasad
it was
                 inter alia held as follows: (SCC p. 147, para 14)
                         "14. Dealing with such pleas at some length,
                     this Court in Chandigarh Admn. v. Jagjit Singh has
                     held that: (SCC p. 750, para 8)
                         '8. ... If the order in favour of the other person
                     is found to be contrary to law or not warranted in
                     the facts and circumstances of his case, it is
                     obvious that such illegal or unwarranted order
                     cannot be made the basis of issuing a writ
                     compelling the respondent authority to repeat the
                     illegality or to pass another unwarranted order.
                     The extraordinary and discretionary power of the
                     High Court [under
Article 226]
cannot be
                     exercised for such a purpose.'
                     This position in law is well settled by a catena of
                     decisions of this Court.
(See
Secy., Jaipur
                     Development Authority v. Daulat Mal Jain
and
Ekta Shakti Foundation v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi
.)
                     It would, thus, suffice to say that an order made in
                     favour of a person in violation of the prescribed
                     procedure cannot form a legal premise for any
                     other person to claim parity with the said illegal
                     or irregular order. A judicial forum cannot be used
                     to perpetuate the illegalities."
11.   Accordingly, this Court is of the considered opinion that the

        petition sans merits and is hereby dismissed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia)
Arun*                                                                        Judge
                                         ARUN KUMAR MISHRA
                                         2019.04.05 10:43:56 +05'30'
