Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 496, Premier Automobile Ltd. v. Kamlekar
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/156930699/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
6
]
Delhi High Court
Americn Express Bank Ltd. And Anr. vs Ravinder Kumar Saini on 29 August, 2008
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
A.K. Sikri
,
Manmohan Singh
Reportable
*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+                     FAO (OS) Nos. 465-466 of 2006

%                                            Reserved on : August 13, 2008
                                          Pronounced on : August 29, 2008

American Express Bank Ltd. & Anr.                     . . . Appellants

                   through :              Mr. Lalit Bhasin, Advocate

              VERSUS

Ravinder Kumar Saini                                  . . . Respondent

                   through :              Mr. B.K. Pal, Advocate


CORAM :-
    THE HON‟BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
    THE HON‟BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SINGH

       1.     Whether Reporters of Local newspapers may be allowed
              to see the Judgment?
       2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not?
       3.     Whether the Judgment should be reported in the Digest?


A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.     The respondent herein was employed as a Special Teller with the

       appellant bank. On certain allegations of misconduct, he was served

       with the charge sheet and departmental inquiry held.                   The

       respondent was proceeded ex parte in the said inquiry, in which

       charges were held as proved and as a consequence he was awarded

       the punishment of dismissal from service vide orders dated 7.11.1996.

       Appeal to the appellate authority also was rejected, which order was

       communicated to him vide letter dated 30.4.1997. He submitted

       representation thereagainst followed by legal notice and thereafter

       filed a suit on the original side of this Court being CS (OS) No.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                          Page 1 of 20
772/1998 inter alia alleging that ex-parte inquiry held against him

       was in violation of principles of natural justice and in the inquiry

       proper procedure was not followed. On this basis, the respondent

       has sought a decree of declaration to the effect that dismissal from

       service on the basis of the said inquiry be treated as illegal and

       damages to the tune of Rs.30 lacs on account of said dismissal faced

       by him as well as defamatory nature of alleged charges, due to which

       he has been made to suffer. Exact prayer made by him in the suit is

       as under :-
"I, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon‟ble High
              Court may be pleased to grant declaration to the effect of
              declaring the order of dismissal as made to against the plaintiff
              by the defendant as wrong and illegal and this Hon‟ble Court
              may be further pleased to grant token damages of Rs.30.00
              lakhs on account of the consequences of the dismissal being
              faced by the plaintiff as well as the defamatory nature of the
              alleged charges due to which the plaintiff has been made to
              suffer by the defendant ... (illegible)."
2.     The appellant herein, which is the defendant in the said suit, filed

       written statement refuting the various averments made in the plaint.

       Preliminary objection was also taken to the effect that civil court had

       no jurisdiction to try the suit as the complete machinery for redressal

       of the grievance of the respondent was available under the

       provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(for short, „the Act‟).

       On this objection, following preliminary issue was framed by the

       learned Single Judge - "Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try

       the present suit in view of objections raised by the defendant No.1 in

       its written statement?" The learned Single Judge has decided the

       aforesaid issue against the appellant/defendant No.1 vide orders
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                            Page 2 of 20
dated 18.4.2006 holding that since the suit is for recovery of

       damages for his wrongful termination, the jurisdiction of the civil

       court is not ousted to try such a suit. In this appeal, the said order is

       impugned by the appellant bank.
3.     It is not in dispute that the respondent, who was serving as Special

       Teller, fits into the definition of „workman‟ as contained in
Section

       2(s)
of the Act.       It is also not in dispute that the appellant is an

       „industry‟ under the provisions of
Section 2(j)
of the Act. Dispute

       with regard to dismissal will also fall within the definition of

       „industrial dispute‟ as contained in
Section 2(k)
read with
Section 2-A
of the said Act.           However, though the respondent is seeking

       declaration to the effect that his dismissal is illegal and wrongful, he is

       not seeking relief of reinstatement in service. He is only praying for

       damages for wrongful termination of service on the basis of alleged

       charges which according to him are false and defamatory. It is a

       common case between the parties that had there been a relief of

       reinstatement, the same could be granted only by the Labour Court

       under the Act and civil suit is barred. Such a relief is not admissible in

       view of
Section 14
read with
Section 41(h)
of the Specific Relief Act,

       1963.
Section 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which defines

       civil suits and the jurisdiction of the civil courts, reads as under :-
"9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.
The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein contained)
              have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits
              of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly
              barred.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                               Page 3 of 20
[Explanation I].- A suit in which the right to property or to an
                office is contested is a suit of a civil nature, notwithstanding
                that such right may depend entirely on the decision of
                questions     as    to     religious   rites   or    ceremonies.
[Explanation ll].- For the purposes of this section, it is
                immaterial whether or not any fees are attached to the office
                referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office is
                attached to a particular place.].
4.     It is clear from the reading of the aforesaid provision that normally

       civil court has the jurisdiction to decide all matters of civil nature

       unless jurisdiction is expressly or impliedly barred.             There is no

       provision in the Act expressly excluding the jurisdiction of the civil

       court.      However, the Supreme Court had occasion to consider the

       issue as to whether jurisdiction of civil court is impliedly barred

       having regard to the complete machinery for enforcement of the

       rights provided under the Act. The principles laid down in various

       judgments of the Supreme Court as well as some High Courts are not

       in dispute.       The learned Single Judge has taken note of these

       principles in his judgment. We may reproduce the same :-
"11. The learned counsel for the defendants have relied on
                (
1976) 1 SCC 496, Premier Automobile Ltd. v. Kamlekar
                Shantaram Wadke
where the principles applicable to the
                jurisdiction of the civil Court were summed up in relation to an
                industrial dispute. The Apex Court had held:
"23.       To sum up, the principles applicable to the
                   jurisdiction of the civil court in relation to an industrial
                   dispute may be stated thus:
(1) If the dispute is not an industrial dispute, nor does it
                       relate to enforcement of any other right under the
                       Act the remedy lies only in the civil court.
                   (2) If the dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a
                       right or liability under the general or common law
                       and not under the Act, the jurisdiction of the civil
                       court is alternative, leaving it to the election of the
                       suitor concerned to choose his remedy for the relief
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                               Page 4 of 20
which is competent to be granted in a particular
                     remedy.
(3) If the industrial dispute relates to the enforcement of
                     a right or an obligation created under the Act, then
                     the only remedy available o the suitor is to get an
                     adjudication under the Act.
(4) If the right which is sought to be enforced is a right
                     created under the Act such a Chapter V-A then the
                     remedy for its enforcement is either
Section 33-C
or
                     the raising of an industrial dispute, as the case may
                     be."
12.    In a suit for recovery of damages for wrongful dismissal
              where there was no prayer for reinstatement, a division bench
              of Calcutta High Court in Austin Distributors (P) Ltd. v. Nil
              Kumar Das, 1970 Lab I.C. 323 has held that the Civil Court‟s
              jurisdiction is not barred, inasmuch as the only ground upon
              which the dismissal was impugned was in violation of the
              contract of service governed by general law.
In
Syndicate Bank
              v. Vincent Robert Lobo
, 1971 Lab.I.C. 1055 the Mysore High
              Court has also held to the same effect.
Both these judgments
              were approved by the Apex Court in
Premier Automobile
(supra) holding as under:
We approve what has been said by a Bench of the
                     Calcutta High Court in the case of Austin Distributors
                     Pvt. Ltd. v. Nil Kumar Das that a suit for recovery of
                     damages for wrongful dismissal, on the grounds
                     which are clearly entertainable in civil court, would
                     lie in that court even though a special remedy is
                     provided in the Act in respect of that matter. This
                     would be so on the footing that the dismissal was in
                     violation of the contract of service recognized under
                     the general law.
More or less to the same effect is
                     the view taken by a learned Single Judge of the
                     Mysore High Court in the case of
Syndicate Bank v.
                     Vincent Robert Lobo
. It is not necessary to refer to
                     some unreported decisions of the Bombay High
                     Court taking one view or the other.
13.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on
Rajasthan SRTC v. Krishna Kant
, (1995) 5 SCC 75 where it was
              reiterated that a case for awarding compensation though the
              civil court cannot decree reinstatement was maintainable.
The
              Supreme Court had approved the ratio in the case of
Sitaram
              Kashiram Konda Vs Pigment Cakes and Chemicals Mfg.
(1979)
              4 SCC 12. It was held:
We may also refer to a decision of this Court
                     rendered by Untwalia, J., on behalf of a Bench
                     comprising himself and A.P. Sen, J., in
Sitaram
                     Kashiram Konda v. Pigment Cakes and Chemicals
                     Mfg. Co. That
was a case arising from a suit
                     instituted by the workman for a declaration that
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                            Page 5 of 20
termination of his service is illegal and for
                     reinstatement.      In the alternative, he claimed
                     compensation for wrongful termination.               The
                     jurisdiction of the civil court was sustained by this
                     Court on the ground that he has made out a case for
                     awarding compensation though the civil court could
                     not decree reinstatement. Though the report does
                     not indicate the basis put forward by the workman-
                     plaintiff therein, the court found on an examination
                     of all the facts and circumstances of the case that "it is
                     not quite correct to say that the suit filed by the
                     appellant is not maintainable at all in a civil court".
                     Obviously it was a case where the dispute related to
                     enforcement of rights flowing from general law of
                     contract and not from certified Standing Orders. This
                     decision cannot also be read as laying down a
                     different proposition from Premier Automobiles.
14.
In
Rajasthan SRTC v. Krishna Kant
(supra) the Supreme
              Court had summarized the principles about the jurisdiction of
              the Civil Court which are as follows:
(1) Where the dispute arises from general law of
                     contract, i.e., where reliefs are claimed on the basis of
                     the general law of contract, a suit filed in civil court
                     cannot be said to be not maintainable, even though
                     such a dispute may also constitute an "industrial
                     dispute" within the meaning of
Section 2(k)
of
Section 2-A
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
(2) Where, however, the dispute involves recognition,
                     observance or enforcement of any of the rights or
                     obligations created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
, the
                     only remedy is to approach the forums created by the
                     said Act.
(3) Similarly, where the dispute involves the recognition,
                     observance or enforcement of rights and obligations
                     created by enactments like
Industrial Employment
                     (Standing Orders) Act, 1946
- which can be called
                     "sister enactments" to
Industrial Disputes Act
- and
                     which do not provide a forum for resolution of such
                     disputes, the only remedy shall be to approach the
                     forums created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
provided they constitute industrial disputes within the
                     meaning of
Section 2(k)
and
Section 2-A
of Industrial
                     Disputes Act or where such enactment says that such
                     dispute shall be either treated as an industrial dispute
                     or says that it shall be adjudicated by any of the
                     forums created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
Otherwise, recourse to civil court is open.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                               Page 6 of 20
(4) It is not correct to say that the remedies provided by
                     the
Industrial Disputes Act
are not equally effective
                     for the reason that access to the forum depends upon
                     a reference being made by the appropriate
                     Government.        The power to make a reference
                     conferred upon the Government is to be exercised to
                     effectuate the object of the enactment and hence not
                     unguided. The rule is to make a reference unless, of
                     course, the dispute raised is a totally frivolous one ex
                     facie. The power conferred is the power to refer and
                     not the power to decide, though it may be that the
                     Government is entitled to examine whether the
                     dispute is ex facie frivolous, not meriting an
                     adjudication.
(5) Consistent with the policy of law aforesaid, we
                     commend to Parliament and the State Legislatures to
                     make a provision enabling a workman to approach
                     the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal directly - i.e.,
                     without the requirement of a reference by the
                     Government - in case of industrial disputes covered
                     by
Section 2-A
of the Industrial Disputes Act. This
                     would go a long way in removing the misgivings with
                     respect to the effectiveness of the remedies provided
                     by the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
(6) The certified Standing Orders framed under and in
                     accordance with the
Industrial Employment (Standing
                     Orders) Act, 1946
are statutorily imposed conditions
                     of service and are binding both upon the employers
                     and employees, though they do not amount o
                     "statutory provisions".       Any violation of these
                     Standing Orders entitles an employee to appropriate
                     relief either before the forums created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
or the civil court where
                     recourse to civil court is open according to the
                     principles indicated therein.
(7) The policy of law emerging from
Industrial Disputes
                     Act
and its sister enactments is to provide an
                     alternative dispute-resolution mechanism to the
                     workmen, a mechanism which is speedy, inexpensive,
                     informal and unencumbered by the plethora of
                     procedural laws and appeals upon appeals and
                     revisions applicable to civil courts.     Indeed, the
                     powers of the courts and tribunals under the
Industrial Disputes Act
are far more extensive in the
                     sense that they can grant such relief as they think
                     appropriate in the circumstances for putting an end to
                     an industrial dispute.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                             Page 7 of 20
5.     We may also refer to a recent Supreme Court judgment in the case of
Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation & Ors. v. Mohar Singh
,

       (2008) 5 SCC 542, wherein the aforesaid principles are reiterated

       specifically observing that jurisdiction of civil court would be barred

       only when right is claimed under the
Industrial Disputes Act
or sister

       laws. The relevant observations can be found in paras 15 to 19 of
the said judgment
, which are to the following effect :-
"15. Civil court may have a limited jurisdiction in service
              matters but it cannot be said to have no jurisdiction at all to
              entertain a suit. It may not be entitled to sit in appeal over the
              order passed in the disciplinary proceedings or on the quantum
              of punishment imposed. It may not in a given case direct
              reinstatement in service having regard to
Section 14(1)(b)
of the
              Specific Relief Act, 1963 but, it is a trite law that where the
              right is claimed by the plaintiff in terms of common law or
              under a statute other than the one which created a new right
              for the first time and when a forum has also been created for
              enforcing the said right, the civil court shall also have
              jurisdiction to entertain a suit where the plaintiff claims benefit
              of a fundamental right as adumbrated under
Article 14
of the
              Constitution of India or mandatory provisions of statute or
              statutory rules governing the terms and conditions of service.
16.    Under the industrial law, and in particular the 1947 Act,
              the authorities specified therein including the appropriate
              Governments and Industrial Courts have various functions to
              perform. Terms and conditions can be laid down thereunder.
              Violation of the terms and conditions of service at the hands of
              the employer is also justiciable.       Safeguards have been
              provided under the Act to see that services of workmen are
              not unjustly terminated. The 1947 Act provides for a wider
              definition of "termination of service". Conditions precedent
              for termination of service have been provided for thereunder.
17.    A decision taken by the disciplinary authority under the
              1951 Act ordinarily would be a subject-matter of suit. The civil
              court, however, as noticed hereinbefore exercises a limited
              jurisdiction.   If, however, the employee concerned is a
              "workman" within the meaning of the provisions of the 1947
              Act, he apart from the common law remedies, may take
              recourse to the remedies available before an Industrial Court.
18.   When a right accrues under two statutes vis-à-vis the
              common law right, the employee concerned will have an
              option to choose his forum.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                              Page 8 of 20
19.    We must also notice the distinction between a right
              which is conferred upon an employer (sic employee) under a
              statute for the first time and also providing for a remedy and
              the one which is created to determine the cases under the
              common law right. Only in a case of the former, the civil
              court‟s jurisdiction may be held to be barred by necessary
              implication."
6.     It is clear from the above that if the dispute arises from General Law

       of Contract and the reliefs are claimed on the basis of the General

       Law of Contract, a civil suit is maintainable even if such a dispute also

       constitutes an industrial dispute. It is equally important to note that

       even if the dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a right or

       liability under the General Law or the Common law and not under

       the Act, both the remedies, i.e. that of a civil court as well as the

       labour court under the Act, are available to the workman and it is to

       be left to him to elect as to which remedy he would like to invoke.

       It is only when the workman is seeking enforcement of a right or an

       obligation created under the Act that his only remedy is to get an

       adjudication invoking the machinery provided under the said Act.

       This could be either by invoking the provisions of Section 33-C or

       raising an industrial dispute, as the case may be.
7.     From the aforesaid principles, it is clear that the appellant can

       succeed in its submission only it is able to establish that the right

       claimed by the respondent in the suit is the one arising out of the Act

       or sister laws. In his endeavour to put the case within this principle,

       Mr. Bhasin, learned counsel for the appellant, submitted that the

       service conditions of the respondent are governed by the Bi-partite

       Settlement arrived at on 19.10.1966. His submission was that this Bi-
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                         Page 9 of 20
partite Settlement was under the provisions of the
Industrial Disputes

       Act
, which was arrived at between certain banking companies and

       their workmen. He submitted that since then all the „workmen‟ of

       these banks, which includes the appellant bank as well, are governed

       by the terms and conditions contained in the said Bi-partite

       Settlement. This Bi-partite Settlement also lays down the code of

       conduct and provisions for taking disciplinary action and penalties.

       Chapter XIX of the said settlement titled as "Disciplinary Action and

       Procedure Therefor" specifically deals with the misconducts,

       disciplinary action that may be taken for „gross misconduct‟ or minor

       misconduct, the procedure for conducting inquiry and the nature of

       punishments which can be imposed. His submission was that since

       this Bi-partite Settlement is under the provisions of the
Industrial

       Disputes Act
, and as the disciplinary action was taken against the

       respondent under this provision, the impugned dismissal challenged

       by the respondent has to be treated as the one which is under the

       provisions of the Act.          Therefore, the only remedy for the

       respondent was to raise an industrial dispute under the Act.            He

       further referred to Item 3 of Second Schedule attached to the Act

       under which even the mandatory compensation could be awarded

       by the labour court. This item reads as under :-
"               THE SECOND SCHEDULE
                     Matters within the Jurisdiction of Labour Courts

                                  xx    xx    xx
3.     Discharge or dismissal of workmen including re-
              instatement of, or grant of relief to, workmen wrongfully
              dismissed;
xx   xx    xx                       "
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                         Page 10 of 20
He, thus, submitted that it is principle 3 of
Premier Automobile
(supra) which shall be applicable to the facts of this case and the

       jurisdiction of the civil court should be held to be completely barred.
8.     The principles which were
laid down in
Premier Automobile
(supra)

       have withstood the test of time. The Supreme Court has reiterated

       those principles time and again and even explained the implications

       of these principles in various subsequent judgments.
In
Krishna Kant
(supra) these principles are re-formulated and explained in further

       detail, though essence thereof remains the same as
laid down in
Premier Automobile
(supra). In fact, it is not these principles but the

       application thereof in particular cases which has given rise to

       controversy.
The bone of contention has always remained the
Principle No.2 of Premier Automobile
(supra) which gives alternate

       jurisdiction to civil court as well as industrial court. That principle

       stipulates that even if the dispute is an industrial dispute, but it arises

       out of a right or liability under the General or Common Law and not

       under the
Industrial Disputes Act
, the jurisdiction of civil court is

       alternative and it is for the concerned employee to elect as to which

       remedy he would prefer to invoke - whether remedy under the
Industrial Disputes Act
or civil court remedy. Thus, the dispute which

       generally arises is as to whether, in a given case, the dispute arises out

       of a right or liability under the General or Common Law.
This

       problem was highlighted by the Supreme Court in
Krishna Kant
(supra) as well, as is clear from para 25 of
the said judgment
, which

       reads as under :-
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006    nsk                                         Page 11 of 20
"26. Before we proceed to consider the effect and impact of
              para 24 on Principle No.2 in para 23, it would be appropriate
              to refer briefly to the decisions referred to in para 26 of
the
              said judgment
. The Court approved the following decisions:
(
i) Krishnan v. East India Distilleries and Sugar Factories Ltd.
,
              (1964) 1 LLJ 217 : AIR 1964 Mad 81 (Mad), a decision rendered
              by a Single Judge of the Madras High Court, it was held therein
              that "the jurisdiction of the civil court is ousted impliedly to try
              a case which could form subject-matter of an industrial dispute
              collectively between the workmen and their employer".
(
ii)
              Madura Mills Co. Ltd. v. Guruvammal
, (1967) 2 LLJ 397 :
              (1967) 2 MLJ 287 (Mad) decided by Alagiriswami, J. (at that
              time a Judge of the Madras High Court). It was a case
              concerning the enforcement of a right created by
Industrial
              Disputes Act
.
(iii) The decision of a learned Single Judge of
              Mysore High Court in
Nippani Electricity Co. (P) Ltd. v.
              Bhimarao Laxman Patil
(1969) 1 LLJ 268 : 1968 Lab IC 1571
              (Mys), a decision of the Division Bench of the Bombay High
              Court in
Pigment Lakes and Chemical Manufacturing Co. (P)
              Ltd. v. Sitaram Kashiram Konde
71 Bom LR 452 : 1970 Lab IC
              415 (Bom) and the decision of a learned Single Judge of the
              Kerala High Court in
Nanoo Asan Madhavan v. State of Kerala
(1970) 1 LLJ 272 (Ker) where it was held that the jurisdiction of
              the civil court to deal with matters mentioned in Chapter V-A
              is impliedly barred.
(iv) The decision of a Division Bench of
              the Calcutta High Court in Austin Distributors (P) Ltd. v. Nil
              Kumar Das, 1970 Lab IC 323 which arose from a suit for
              recovery of damages for wrongful dismissal. There was no
              prayer for reinstatement. The High Court held that Civil
              Court‟s jurisdiction is not barred, inasmuch as the only ground
              upon which the dismissal was impugned was in violation of the
              contract of service governed by general law.
A decision of the
              Mysore High Court in
Syndicate Bank v. Vincent Robert Lobo
,
              (1971) 2 LLJ 46 to the same effect."
9.
In para 26 of the judgment the Supreme Court noted certain

       decisions of various High Courts which were discussed in
Premier

       Automobile
(supra). Thereafter, implications of Principle No.2 were

       discussed in para 28 in the following manner :-
"28. Now, coming back to Principle No.2 and its qualification
              in para 24, we must say that para 24 must be read
              harmoniously with the said principle and not in derogation of
              it - not so as to nullify it altogether. Indeed, Principle No.2 is
              a reiteration of the principle affirmed in several decisions on
              the subject including Dhulabhai.         Principle No.2 is clear
              whereas para 24 is more in the nature of a statement of fact. It
              says that most of the industrial disputes will be disputes
              involving the rights and obligations created by the Act. It,
              therefore, says that there will hardly be any industrial dispute
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                              Page 12 of 20
which will fall under Principle No.2 and that almost all of them
              will fall under Principle No.3. This statement cannot be
              understood as saying that no industrial dispute can ever be
              entertained by or adjudicated upon by the civil courts. Such an
              understanding would not only make the statement of law in
              Principle No.2 wholly meaningless but would also run counter
              to the well-established principles on the subject. It must
              accordingly be held that the effect of Principle No.2 is in no
              manner whittled down by para 24. At the same time, we must
              emphasise the policy of law underlying the
Industrial Disputes
              Act
and the host of enactments concerning the workmen made
              by Parliament and State Legislatures. The whole idea has been
              to provide a speedy, inexpensive and effective forum for
              resolution of disputes arising between workmen and their
              employers. The idea has been to ensure that the workmen do
              not get caught in the labyrinth of civil courts with their layers
              upon layers of appeals and revisions and the elaborate
              procedural laws, which the workmen can ill afford. The
              procedures followed by civil courts, it was thought, would not
              facilitate a prompt and effective disposal of these disputes. As
              against this, the courts and tribunals created by the
Industrial
              Disputes Act
are not shackled by these procedural laws nor is
              their award subject to any appeals or revisions. Because of
              their informality, the workmen and their representatives can
              themselves prosecute or defend their cases. These forums are
              empowered to grant such relief as they think just and
              appropriate. They can even substitute the punishment in many
              cases. They can make and re-make the contracts, settlements,
              wage structures and what not. Their awards are no doubt
              amenable to jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
as
              also to the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
, but they
              are extraordinary remedies subject to several self-imposed
              constraints. It is, therefore, always in the interest of the
              workmen that disputes concerning them are adjudicated in the
              forums created by the Act and not in a civil court. That is the
              entire policy underlying the vast array of enactments
              concerning workmen. This legislative policy and intendment
              should necessarily weigh with the courts in interpreting these
              enactments and the disputes arising under them."
10.    Thereafter, the Apex Court proceeded to apply the principles
laid

       down in
Premier Automobile
(supra) on the facts of that case to

       determine as to whether Principle No.2, which gives alternate

       jurisdiction, or Principle No.3 which gives exclusive jurisdiction to the

       machinery under the
Industrial Disputes Act
, would be applicable.

       The exercise undertaken by the Supreme Court is contained in para
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                           Page 13 of 20
29, which will serve as guide for determining the controversy in the

       present case as well and, therefore, we deem it proper to reproduce

       the same :-
"29. Now let us examine the facts of the appeals before us in
              the light of the principles adumbrated Premier Automobiles.
              The first thing to be noticed is the basis upon which the
              plaintiffs-respondents have claimed the several reliefs in the
              suit. The basis is the violation of the certified Standing Orders
              in force in the appellant-establishment. The basis is not the
              violation of any terms of contract of service entered into
              between the parties governed by the law of contract. At the
              same time, it must be said, no right or obligation created by
              the
Industrial Disputes Act
is sought to be enforced in the suit.
              Yet another circumstance is that the Standing Orders Act does
              not itself provide any forum for the enforcement of rights and
              liabilities created by the Standing Orders. The question that
              arises is whether such a suit falls under Principle No.3 of
              Premier Automobiles or under Principle No.2? We are of the
              opinion that it falls under Principle No.3. The words "under
              the Act" in Principle No.3 must, in our considered opinion, be
              understood as referring not only to
Industrial Disputes Act
but
              also to all sister enactments - (like
Industrial Employment
              (Standing Orders) Act
) which do not provide special forum of
              their own for enforcement of the rights and liabilities created
              by them. Thus a dispute involving the enforcement of the
              rights and liabilities created by the certified Standing Orders has
              necessarily got to be adjudicated only in the forums created by
              the
Industrial Disputes Act
provided, of course, that such a
              dispute amounts to an industrial dispute within the meaning of
Sections 2(j)
and
2-A
of Industrial Disputes Act or such
              enactment says that such dispute shall be either treated as an
              industrial dispute or shall be adjudicated by any of the forums
              created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
. The civil courts have no
              jurisdiction to entertain such suits. In other words, a dispute
              arising between the employer and the workman/workmen
              under, or for the enforcement of the Industrial Employment
              Standing Orders is an industrial dispute, if it satisfies the
              requirements of
Section 2(k)
and/or
Section 2-A
of the
              Industrial Disputes Act and must be adjudicated in the forums
              created by the
Industrial Disputes Act
alone. This would be so,
              even if the dispute raised or relief claimed is based partly upon
              certified Standing Orders and partly on general law of
              contract."
11.    It would also be useful to refer to para 33 which gave the reasons for

       distinguishing the judgment of two Judge Bench dated 18.10.1999 in

       another case explaining the reasons which persuaded the Court to
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                             Page 14 of 20
take a view that civil court will also have the jurisdiction in the facts

       of that case :-
"33. Coming to the order dated 18.10.1989 in SLP (C) No.
              9386 of 1988 made by a Bench of two learned Judges, the
              important fact to be noticed is that in that suit, no allegation of
              violation of the certified Standing Orders was made. The only
              basis of the suit was violation of principles of natural justice. It
              was, therefore, held that it was governed by Principle No.2 in
              Premier Automobiles. In this sense, this order cannot be said
              to lay down a proposition contrary to the one in Jitendra Nath
              Biswas. We may also refer to a decision of this Court rendered
              by Untwalia, J., on behalf of a Bench comprising himself and
              A.P. Sen, J. in
Sitaram Kashiram Konda v. Pigment Cakes and
              Chemicals Mfg. Co. That
was a case arising from a suit
              instituted by the workman for a declaration that termination of
              his service is illegal and for reinstatement. In the alternative, he
              claimed compensation for wrongful termination.                  The
              jurisdiction of the civil court was sustained by this Court on the
              ground that he has made out a case for awarding
              compensation though the civil court could not decree
              reinstatement. Though the report does not indicate the basis
              put forward by the workman-plaintiff therein, the court found
              on an examination of all the facts and circumstances of the case
              that "it is not quite correct to say that the suit filed by the
              appellant is not maintainable at all in a civil court". Obviously
              it was a case where the dispute related to enforcement of rights
              flowing from general law of contract and not from certified
              Standing Orders. This decision cannot also be read as laying
              down a different proposition from Premier Automobiles."
12.    A conjoint reading of paras 29 and 33 would demonstrate that

       following aspects are to be considered in determining the

       applicability of a particular principle of Premier Automobile :
(a)    The basis on which the plaintiff claims the several reliefs in the

              suit - If the basis is the violation of certified standing orders in

              force in the establishment and not in terms of contract of

              service, Principle No.3 would be applied and the labour court

              shall have exclusive jurisdiction.
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                              Page 15 of 20
(b)    Before holding that Principle No.2 applies, it is to be ensured

              that no right or obligation created by the
Industrial Disputes

              Act
is sought to be enforced in the suit.
(c)    The enforcement of rights and liabilities is not to be limited to

              the
Industrial Disputes Act
alone but also of sister enactments

              like
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act
, etc.
(d)    Even when dispute raised or relief claimed is based partly upon

              certified Standing Orders Act or partly on General Law of

              Contract, civil court will not have jurisdiction to entertain the

              suit and such dispute must be adjudicated in the forums created

              by the
Industrial Disputes Act
alone.
13.    Thus, when the concerned workman seeks enforcement of a right or

       an obligation created under the Act or sister laws, then the only

       remedy is under the said Act. On the other hand, if the dispute arises

       out of a right or liability under the General or Common Law, the

       workman has the choice to invoke the machinery under the
Industrial

       Disputes Act
or to file a civil suit, inasmuch as both the remedies are

       available to the said person.
14.    What is the basis upon which the plaintiff/respondent has claimed

       relief in the suit? No doubt, departmental inquiry was conducted

       against the respondent under the provisions of Bi-partite Settlement.

       It is also not in dispute that this Settlement has statutory flavour

       which was arrived at under the provisions of the
Industrial Disputes

       Act
.   The perusal of the plaint, however, would show that the
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                        Page 16 of 20
plaintiff is not seeking enforcement of any of the provisions of the Bi-

       partite Settlement. He has filed the suit for declaration and damages

       for an amount of Rs.30 lacs. It is based on the averments that on

       false allegations charge sheet dated 20.7.1990 was served upon him

       to which he had given his reply.          The basic objection is to the

       conducting of the inquiry ex-parte against the respondent.                 It is

       pleaded that this was in violation of principles of natural justice. It is

       further alleged that on account of the acts of the defendants

       (appellants herein) he was put to undergo tremendous mental agony

       and harassment and his reputation also has been considerably

       damaged. In para 40, following averments are made :-
"40. That in the aforesaid circumstances the contract of
              employment as made by the defendant with the plaintiff has
              been wrongly and illegally breached by dismissing the plaintiff
              from service, which is liable to be declared as wrong and illegal
              and further the plaintiff is legally entitled for damages worth
              Rs.30.00 lakhs which are only token in nature.... Illegible..."
There is not even a reference to the provisions of Bi-partite

       Settlement or enforcement of any right or obligation under the said

       Settlement. Merely because the inquiry is conducted under the Bi-

       partite Settlement and punishment also imposed in terms thereof,

       would not mean that the respondent is claiming his right under the

       Act. Bi-partite Settlement, at the most, can be treated as a document

       laying down various terms and conditions of employment with

       which the banks and their workmen are bound. In the suit filed by

       the respondent he has not sought enforcement of any of the terms of

       the said Bi-partite Settlement.       He has founded his case on the

       principles of natural justice.     Of course, he would remain bound
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                           Page 17 of 20
thereby and would not be entitled to base his rights under the Bi-

       partite Settlement.
15.
In
Mohar Singh
(supra), which judgment was relied upon by Mr.

       Bhasin himself, the court spelled out a categorical distinction between

       a right which is conferred upon an employee under a Statute for the

       first time and also providing for a remedy, and the one which is

       created to determine the cases under the Common Law right. The

       claim for damages is admissible under the Common Law for wrongful

       termination. What is barred under the Common Law is that contract

       of personal service cannot be specifically enforced, which would only

       mean that the dismissed employee, even if the termination or

       dismissal is found to be illegal, cannot force himself back upon the

       employer against the employer‟s wishes. He can at the most claim

       damages if his services were terminated wrongly.
The Industrial

       Disputes Act
, for the first time, created a right in favour of the

       „workmen‟ whereby they have become entitled to seek reinstatement

       as well in case their termination from services is found to be illegal.

       It is this right which is conferred upon the workmen under the Statute

       for the first time. However, the respondent in the present case has

       not chosen to enforce this right. The relief he has sought remains

       under the realm of Common Law, namely, that of damages for

       alleged wrongful termination of the contract of employment.
At this

       stage, we would again like to reproduce the following discussion

       contained in
Mohar Singh
(supra) :-
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                      Page 18 of 20
"21. We may in this behalf profitably notice the following
              excerpts from Principles of Statutory Interpretation (11th Edn.)
              by Justice G.P. Singh :
" „It is a principle by no means to be whittled down‟ and
                 has been referred to as a „fundamental rule‟. As a
                 necessary corollary of this rule provisions excluding
                 jurisdiction of civil courts and provisions conferring
                 jurisdiction on authorities and tribunals other than civil
                 courts to decide questions of civil nature being the
                 general rule and exclusion being an exception, the
                 burden of proof to show that jurisdiction is excluded in
                 any particular case is on the party raising such a
                 contention. The rule that the exclusion of jurisdiction of
                 civil court is not to be readily inferred is based on the
                 theory that civil courts are courts of general jurisdiction
                 and the people have a right, unless expressly or
                 impliedly debarred to insist for free access to the courts
                 of general jurisdiction of the State. Indeed, the principle
                 is not limited to civil courts alone, but applies to all
                 courts of general jurisdiction including criminal courts.
                 The rule as stated above relating to strict construction of
                 provisions excluding jurisdiction of courts of general
                 jurisdiction was recently expressly approved by the
                 Supreme Court."
22.       In Krishna Kant this Court opined that where a
                 dispute     involves    recognition,    observance    and
                 enforcement of rights and obligations created under the
Industrial Disputes Act
and/or its sister enactments such
                 as
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act
, the civil
                 court will have no jurisdiction."
16.    It will be significant to state that in the said case, the Supreme Court

       held that civil court had the jurisdiction to entertain the dispute

       which was filed by the respondent therein against his dismissal on the

       ground that it was in violation of the principles of natural justice.

       The Supreme Court specifically opined that violation of no right

       under the
Industrial Disputes Act
or the
Industrial Employment

       (Standing Orders) Act
was claimed. The Court pointed out, in para

       29, as under :-
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                            Page 19 of 20
"29. The decisions referred to hereinbefore clearly brings
              about a distinction which cannot be lost sight of. If a right is
              claimed under the
Industrial Disputes Act
or the sister laws, the
              jurisdiction of the civil court would be barred, but if no such
              right is claimed, civil court will have jurisdiction."
17.    We are, therefore, of the opinion that the preliminary issue in

       question is rightly decided by the learned Single Judge holding that

       civil court had the jurisdiction to entertain the civil suit.              We,

       therefore, do not find any merit in this appeal, which is dismissed

       with costs.
(A.K. SIKRI)
                                                                 JUDGE




                                                        (MANMOHAN SINGH)
                                                             JUDGE

August 29, 2008
nsk
FAO (OS) Nos. 465-66/2006   nsk                                           Page 20 of 20
