Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 1541
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/157998765/

[Cites
60
, Cited by
8
]
Delhi High Court
Mohd. Arbaz vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 3 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 1541
Author:
Vibhu Bakhru
Bench:
Vibhu Bakhru
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%                                         Judgment delivered on: 03.11.2020

+       CRL.REV.P. 1219/2019 and CRL.M.A. 10252/2020

MOHD. ARBAZ                                                 .....Petitioner

                                 Versus

STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                       ..... Respondent

                                           AND

+       CRL. REV.P. 1220/2019

ABDUL RASHID                                                .....Petitioner

                                 Versus

STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                       ..... Respondent

                                           AND

+       CRL. REV.P. 1222/2019

MOHD. NAZIM                                                 .....Petitioner

                                 Versus

STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                       ..... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners  : Mr Rudro Chatterjee, Mr Shariq Nisar and
                       Mr Faisal Mohammed, Advocates.
For the Respondent   : Mr Ravi Nayak, APP for State.



CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters                    Page 1 of 47
 CORAM
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU

                                     JUDGMENT
VIBHU BAKHRU, J
1.      The petitioners impugn a common order dated 20.08.2019,
whereby their respective applications for grant of bail in default under
Section 167(2)
of Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter the '
Cr.PC
')
were rejected.
2.      The petitioners' claim that they are entitled to bail in default is
premised on the assertion that the investigating agency has failed to
file a police report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC within the
stipulated period of one-hundred and eighty days. Although, it is not
disputed that a report was filed within the stipulated period, the
petitioners contend that the said report was incomplete as it was not
accompanied by the report of the Chemical Examiner.
3.      The petitioners are being prosecuted for committing an offence
under
Sections 21
and
29
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 2012 (hereafter the '
NDPS Act
'). They claim it
cannot be asserted that the substance allegedly recovered from them
was a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance without a Chemical
Examiner's report indicating the same. This being the foundation of
the allegation against the petitioners, a police report not accompanied
by a Chemical Examiner's report cannot be considered as a report
under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC. The Chemical Examiner's report
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 2 of 47
was furnished before the learned Special Court on the same date when
the applications filed by the petitioners were taken up for
consideration. Nonetheless, the petitioners claim that they are entitled
to bail in default under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC as their respective
applications seeking the same were filed prior to the Public Prosecutor
placing the FSL Report before the Special Court.
4.      In view of the above, the following questions fall for
consideration of this Court:
(i)     Whether in a case of commission of an offence
                punishable under the provisions of the
NDPS Act
, which
                is founded on recovery of narcotic drugs and/or
                psychotropic substance, a police report under
Section
                173(2)
of the Cr.PC can be considered as such if it is not
                accompanied by a Chemical Examiner's Report with
                regard to the substance recovered, and;
(ii)    Whether an accused would be entitled to bail in default
                under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC where his application
                for such bail has been filed prior to the submission of the
                report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC but is taken up
                for consideration simultaneously with the said report
                being filed.
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 3 of 47
5.      The relevant facts necessary to address the aforesaid
controversy are set out below:
5.1     It is alleged that on 16.12.2018 at about 09:00 pm, information
was received through a special messenger at the office of Special Cell,
Sector- 7, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi - that one Abdul Rashid (petitioner
in Crl. Rev. P. 1220/2019), who is a resident of Bhilwara, Rajasthan
and deals in the business of narcotic drugs (Heroin) would arrive near
Ambedkar Park, Sector 12, R.K. Puram, Ring Road on that date in a
vehicle bearing Registration No. RJ 06 UA9729 between 09:00 pm
and 12:00 pm. It was informed that he would be carrying heroin for
its distribution in Delhi. After obtaining the necessary authorization, a
raiding team was constituted. The raiding team so constituted
positioned themselves near the spot (Ambedkar Park, Sector 12, R.K.
Puram, New Delhi) at about 10:15 pm. It is alleged that at about 11:40
pm, a white coloured Ertiga car was seen approaching the spot. The
driver of the said vehicle parked the same approximately ten meters
from the spot. It was observed that the registration number plate of the
said vehicle bore the same registration number as informed by the
messenger. It was observed that there were three persons in the said
vehicle including Abdul Rashid, who was driving the car. All the three
persons came out of the car and stood outside. At that stage, Abdul
Rashid handed over one bag each to two other persons who slung it on
their back. At that stage, they were surrounded by the raiding team.
The driver of the vehicle (Abdul Rashid) took out one bag from the
said vehicle and attempted to flee in the direction of Hyatt Hotel. He
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 4 of 47
was apprehended by one of the members of the raiding team. The
bags carried by the said three persons were searched and were found
to contain five kgs of light coloured brown powder each. In addition,
15 kgs of the said similar looking substance was also recovered from
the vehicle. It was tested on a field-testing kit and the same yielded a
positive result for heroin.
5.2     The petitioners were arrested. Thereafter, on 17.12.2018, the
FIR in question (FIR No. 150/2018), under
Sections 21
and
29
of the
NDPS Act was registered with PS Special Cell.
5.3     On 27.05.2019, a police report under
Section 173(2)
of the
Cr.PC was filed with the Special Court. The said report was not
accompanied by the Chemical Examiner's report confirming that the
substance recovered from the petitioners and their vehicle was heroin.
5.4     The statutory period of one hundred and eighty days for
completion of the investigation under
Section 36A(4)
of NDPS Act
read with
Section 167
of the Cr.PC expired on 15.06.2019.
5.5     On 29.07.2019, the petitioners filed an application seeking bail
in default under the provisions of
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC. This
was premised on the basis that the investigating agency had failed to
file the complete police report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC
within the stipulated period of one hundred and eighty days as the
report filed 27.05.2019 was not accompanied with the Chemical
Examiner's report and therefore, was incomplete and could not be
considered as a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC. Further, it
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 5 of 47
had neither sought extension of the said period in terms of
Section
36A(4)
of the NDPS Act nor any such permission was granted. It is
stated that the said application was filed in the Registry at about 10:00
am.
5.6     On the same day, the petitioners were produced before the
Special Court. And, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor filed the
Chemical Examiner's Report and supplied a copy of the same. At that
time, the applications were filed by the petitioners at 10:00 am on the
same date were not before the Court and therefore, the hearing of the
matter was deferred till 02:00 pm on that date. The applications were
heard and orders were reserved.
5.7     The applications filed by the petitioners were dismissed by the
Special Court by a common order dated 20.08.2019, which is
impugned in the present petition.
6.      The learned Special Court held that the proceedings on that day
(that is, 29.07.2019) for purposes of the case could take place only
when the accused were placed before the Court. Thus, even if the
applications for seeking bail in default were filed on that date, prior to
the accused being produced, it would deem to coincide with the
appearance of the accused before the Court and since the IO had filed
the FSL Report at the same time, it could not be stated that the
applications filed by the accused (petitioners) seeking bail in default,
were filed prior to the filing of the FSL Report. The learned Court held
that since the right to statutory bail under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 6 of 47
cease as soon as the FSL Report is filed and the said report had been
filed simultaneously to the petitioners being produced in Court, their
applications were liable to be dismissed.
Whether a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC is incomplete if
not accompanied with the Chemical Examiner's Report
7.      Mr. Chatterjee, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
contended that the entire purpose of submitting a report under
Section
173(2)
of the Cr.PC is to enable the Magistrate/Court to take
cognizance of the said offence. And, a Magistrate cannot take
cognizance of an offence, which is founded on the basis of recovery of
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, if the Chemical Examiner's
report indicating the nature of substance recovered is not placed before
the Court. He submitted that there may be other offences where the
Chemical Examiner's report or an expert examiner's report may not be
of a pivotal importance and the cognizance of the offence can be taken
without reference to the said report. However, in a case relating to an
offence punishable under the
NDPS Act
, which is founded on the
basis of recovery of contraband, a Chemical Examiner's report would
be necessary as the Court would not be in a position to take
cognizance of the said offence without the same. He referred to a
decision of the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court
in
Ajit Singh @ Jeeta and Anr. v. State of Punjab
: Crl.
Rev. No.
4659/2015, decided on 30.11.2018; a decision of the Division Bench
of the Bombay High Court in
Sunil Vasantrao Phulbande and Anr. v.
State of Maharashtra
: (2002) 3 MahLJ 689 and a decision of this
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters           Page 7 of 47
Court in
Nitin Nagpal v. State
: 2006 (90) DRJ 745, in support of his
contention.
8.      Mr. Nayak, learned APP for the State countered the aforesaid
submissions. He submitted that the decision in the case of
Ajit Singh
@ Jeeta
(supra) cannot be considered good law as
the said decision
is
contrary to the decision of the Full Bench of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court in
State of Haryana v. Mehal Singh and Ors.
: AIR 1978
P&H 341.
He further referred to the decision in
Himmat Singh v.
State of Rajasthan
: (1995) Crl.
LJ 2967, whereby the Rajasthan High
Court had not accepted the reasoning of the Division Bench of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Ajit Singh
's (supra) case.
He also
referred to the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in
Taj
Singh v. The State (Delhi Admn
.): (1988) Crl.
LJ 1634 and the
decision of the Supreme Court in
Tara Singh v. State
: (1951) AIR SC
441 in support of his contention.
9.      It is apparent from above that there are divergent opinions
whether a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC could be
considered as a complete report in absence of the Chemical
Examiner's Report/FSL Report. There appears to be no dispute that
absence of the Chemical Examiner's Report/FSL Report or an
Expert's report does not render the report under
Section 173(2)
of the
Cr.PC an inchoate report, incapable of being considered as such, in
cases where the prosecution's case is not founded on recovery of
contraband. In such cases, such expert report may not be central to the
prosecution's case. However, in cases of offences under the NDPS
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters          Page 8 of 47
Act, where the prosecution's case rests on recovery of an illicit
substance, the Chemical Examiner's Report evidencing the nature of
the substance allegedly recovered would undoubtedly be at the core of
the prosecution's case. It is in this context that certain courts have held
that a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC would be incomplete if
it is not accompanied by a Chemical Examiner's Report identifying
the substance recovered.
10.
In
Mehal Singh
(supra), the full Bench of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court examined the question whether the investigation
of an offence could be considered complete in terms of
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC, even though the police officer investigating the case had
not received the reports of experts such as the chemical examiner, the
serologist, the ballistic expert or the finger print expert, which are
admissible in law under
Section 293
of the Cr.PC. And, whether such
a chargesheet would qualify to be termed as a police report in terms of
Section 190(1)(b)
of the Cr.PC to enable a Magistrate to take
cognizance of the offence disclosed therein.
The Court referred to the
decision of the Supreme Court in
Noor Khan v. State of Rajasthan
:
AIR 1964 SC 286 and observed that it was deducible from
the said
decision
that it is not incumbent upon the investigating officer to
reduce in writing the statements of witnesses. The Court held that he
may merely include their names in the list of witnesses in support of
the prosecution's case when submitting the chargesheet. The Court
reasoned that surely if the chargesheet thus submitted would be
complete as enabling the Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence,
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 9 of 47
there is no rational basis for holding that a similar chargesheet would
not be a police report of the requisite kind if the statement of
witnesses, which although recorded under
Section 161(3)
of the Cr.PC
are not appended to the report, either by design or by inadvertence.
11.     The Court further reasoned that the contention that a
chargesheet would be incomplete if not accompanied by the report of
experts such as chemical analyst, serologist, ballistic expert,
fingerprint expert etc. stands on a weaker ground.
12.
In
Mehal Singh
(supra), the Court also referred to the decision
of the Supreme Court in
Tara Singh v. The State
: (1951) SCR 729.
However, in
Ajit Singh @ Jeeta
(supra), the Division Bench of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court distinguished the aforesaid decisions.
It observed that the courts in those decisions had interpreted the scope
of the
Cr.PC
in the backdrop of general offences confined to the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (hereafter the '
IPC
') and some other statutes;
but the Courts were not ceased of a matter relating to a special act
such as the
NDPS Act
, which although raises a similar question but
requires to be addressed keeping in view the specific provisions of
aspecial act. The Division Bench, thereafter, referred to various
provisions of the
NDPS Act
and observed as under:
"What would also necessary flow from this, would be a
          prima facie opinion by the Court of the commission of
          an offence which under the
N.D.P.S. Act
would revolve
          around establishing the possession of contraband, its
          nature, content and extent.
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters           Page 10 of 47
With respect to the question posed by the learned Single
          Judge regarding some of the contraband being
          identifiable through naked eye, inspection based on
          experience and knowledge, would be a great fallacy and
          we would respectfully state that it would be grossly
          unsafe to rely upon such an opinion based on naked eye
          inspection backed by experience or knowledge to arrive
          at a prima facie opinion of the commission of an
          offence to submit an accused to the rigors of trial by the
          Magistrate in the exercise of its powers under Section
          190 Cr.P.C.
The only way that it can be done is to establish the
          nature of contraband on the basis of the Chemical
          Examiner's report and for this reason, the Chemical
          Examiner's report assumes an immense significance for
          the trial Court, to formulate an opinion as the very
          cognizance of an offence would depend on it. Non-
          inclusion of the Chemical Examiner's opinion in the
          report under
Section 173
Cr.P.C. would expose the
          accused to unfounded dangers imperiling and
          endangering his liberty since the provisions of the
N.D.P.S. Act
in its applicability to a trial and conclusion
          are stringent in consequence.
For this reason as well, it is essential that the report of
          the Chemical Examiner be included in the report under
Section 173
Cr.P.C. and without which it can at best be
          termed to be an incomplete challan depriving the
          Magistrate of relevant material take cognizance and if it
          is not submitted within the requisite period of 180 days,
          it would essentially result in a default benefit to the
          accused unless an application is moved by the
          Investigating Agency apprising the Court of status of
          investigation with a prayer for extension of time to the
          satisfaction of the Court.
We emphasize on the stringent aspect of the
N.D.P.S.
          Act
which would compellingly persuade us to take the
          aforesaid view. Without determining the nature and
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 11 of 47
content of the contraband, it would be draconian to
          propel an accused into the throes of a trial. The liberty
          of an individual would constantly be imperiled at the
          hands of dubious officials of the police who may
          venture to falsely implicate a person.
It is for this reason that we would unhesitatingly
          conclude that the Chemical Examiner's report is an
          essential; integral and inherent part of the investigation
          under the
N.D.P.S. Act
as it would lay the foundation of
          an accused's culpability without which a Magistrate
          would not be enabled to form an opinion and take
          cognizance of the accused's involvement in the
          commission of offence under the Act."
13.     The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court took a similar
view in
Sunil Vasantrao Phulbande
(supra). The Court reasoned that
in a case involving seizure of contraband, the prosecution's case
would rest on the substance seized being either a narcotic drug or a
psychotropic substance. And, a police report under
Section 173
of the
Cr.PC which is not accompanied by a Chemical Examiner's report
could not be contemplated as a chargesheet/report under
Section
173(2)
of the Cr.PC, as the Magistrate would not be in a position to
take cognizance of the offence. The relevant extract of
the said
decision
embodying the reasoning of the Court is set out below: -
"15. In the instant case, it is not in dispute that report of
          Chemical Analyser is the foundation on the basis of
          which Magistrate can proceed to take cognizance of the
          offences. The contraband, which is seized in the present
          case, is Ganja and unless and until sample, which was
          drawn by the prosecution, conforms with the article,
          which is seized during investigation, i.e. Ganja, the
          Magistrate is not in a position to proceed to take
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters                Page 12 of 47
cognizance of the offence. The charge-sheet/report as
          contemplated under section 173(5) of the Code,
          forwarded to the Magistrate should be such that on the
          basis of which Magistrate should be able to proceed
          further and take cognizance. The documents, which are
          required to be accompanied with the charge-sheet/report
          as contemplated under sub-section (5) of section 173 of
          the Code, therefore, assume importance, without which
          charge-sheet/report submitted by the Police under
          section 173 of the Code would be incomplete and
          Magistrate also may not be in a position to proceed to
          take cognizance on the basis of the said report. The
          concept of filing of charge-sheet by the Police in the
          Court must fulfil requirement of section 173(2) and (5)
          of the Code and it is only after such compliance, report
          which is filed by the Police in the Court can be
          construed as complete report under section 173(2) and
          (5) of the Code.
16. It is true that in the given case, certain documents
          which are formal in nature, if not accompanied with the
          report/charge-sheet may not change the nature of
          report/charge-sheet contemplated under section 173(2)
          and (5) of the Code particularly when material is
          sufficient for the Magistrate to take cognizance of the
          offence as per provisions of the Code. However, in the
          instant case, the Chemical Analyser's report is the basis
          for deciding whether substance which is seized during
          raid is Ganja or not, which would determine whether
          provisions of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
          Substances Act
are attracted or not. The Magistrate in
          such situation undoubtedly cannot proceed to take
          cognizance of the offence for want of complete charge-
sheet/report and, therefore, in the present case, the
          charge-sheet/report which is submitted by the Police in
          the Court on 4-8-2001 cannot be said to be a charge-
          sheet/report as contemplated under section 173(5) of the
          Code."
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 13 of 47
14.     A similar view was expressed by the Single Judge of the
Bombay High Court in Ranjeet Manohar Machrekar v. State of
Maharashtra, Crl. Bail Appln. No. 509/2014.
In
Manik Sahebrao
Chougule v. State of Maharashtra
: Crl. Bail Appln. No. 241 of 2017,
decided on 23.03.2017, another bench of the Bombay High Court
followed the aforesaid decision and held as under:
"6. In     a   similar    case,     Ranjeet    Manohar
          Machrekar (supra) was prosecuted under
section 20(b)
of N.D.P.S Act. When the chargesheet was filed, it was
          without report of the Chemical Analyzer. The learned
          Single Judge of this Court has considered that
section
          167(2)
of Cr.P.C. does not speak about the filing of the
          chargesheet, but refers to the completion of
          investigation. It is further explained that without
          collection of any evidence i.e. report of Chemical
          Analyzer, how the investigation in respect of
          psychotropic substances could be said to be completed
          in the absence of such Chemical Analyzer's report,
          where the material is seized and then the chargesheet is
          filed in the Court. The investigation was not completed
          for want of evidence on most vital aspect of the
          prosecution case and then the bail was allowed to the
          accused under
section 167(2)
of Cr.PC, as modified by
          sub-section (4) of
Section 36A
of the N.D.RS. The
          present case is identical and therefore the ratio laid
          down in the Ranjeet Machrekar (supra) is squarely
          applicable to the present case. In the present case also
          the chargesheet is filed without report of Chemical
          Analyzer."
15.
In
Ravinder v. State of Haryana
: 2015 (4) RCR (Cri) 441, the
Punjab and Haryana High Court set aside an order where charges were
framed by the Trial Court without obtaining a Chemical Examiner's
report. In the aforesaid context, the Court held as under:
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 14 of 47
"11. ..... Thus, it is clear that the trial Court is to accept
          the challan only on completion of investigation and by
          considering that all allegations levelled in the FIR have
          been investigated completely and charge can be framed
          only after considering the complete investigation report.
          Meaning thereby, that in case, any report of Forensic
          Science Laboratory or Narco Analysis or any other
          document, which is necessary for adjudication and the
          same has not been received so far, then the Court is to
          proceed further after receiving said report. One thing is
          clear that the question of framing charge comes only
          when the complete investigation report is with the trial
          Court.
12. In the present case, the charge has been framed
          against the petitioner without obtaining Chemical
          Examiner's Report and in the absence of Chemical
          Examiner's Report in case of
NDPS Act
, it cannot be
          said as to whether the substance found in the bags
          recovered from the petitioner was a narcotic substance
          or not. In the absence of CFSL report, the trial Court
          cannot take cognizance of the offence and in the
          absence of Chemical Analysis Report, the charge
          sheet/challan cannot be said to be completed. Failure to
          file complete charge-sheet within a prescribed period
          confers on the accused right to be released on bail and
          the court is not competent to take cognizance of the
          offence on incomplete charge-sheet. Charge sheet is hot
          complete unless it is accompanied by requisites
          contemplated under Section 173(5) of the Code.
13. In view of the above facts, it is clear that the charge
          cannot be framed on the basis of incomplete report and
          the final report, without having any FSL, narco-analysis
          and Chemical Examiners' Report is incomplete. The
          Court is to proceed for framing of charge only after
          receiving the same."
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 15 of 47
16.
In
Rafael Palafox Garcia v. Union of India and Anr.
: 2008
Vol. 110 (9) Bom. L.R. 3392, a Single Judge of the Hon'ble Bombay
High Court did not accept the view that a final report would be
incomplete if not accompanied by a Chemical Examiner's report in a
case relating to offences under the
NDPS Act
.
The Court distinguished
the decision of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Sunil
Vasantrao Phulbande
's case (supra) on the ground that
in that case
there was no mention of the samples of the seized material being
tested at the spot by using a Field Testing Kit.
The Court also referred
to the decision of the Supreme Court in
Jagdish Budhroji Purohit v.
State of Maharashtra
: (1998) 7 SCC 270, wherein the Court had
upheld the conviction on the reasoning that the evidence on record
was sufficient to convict the appellants even if the Chemical
Examiner's reports were ignored.
17.     This Court is unable to respectfully concur with the view that
statements made to the effect that the seized substance tested on a
Field Testing Kit had yielded positive results indicating the substance
to be a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, are sufficient to take
cognizance of an offence which is premised on recovery of a narcotic
drug or a psychotropic substance. First of all, the results from a Field
Testing Kit are not conclusive and there is considerable scope of error.
Clearly, in such circumstances the oral statements/testimony of
witnesses that the substance had yielded a positive result for a narcotic
drug or a psychotropic substance would not be sufficient to raise a
strong suspicion of commission of an offence under the
NDPS Act
,
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 16 of 47
which is premised on recovery of contraband. Even in the handbook
issued by NCB, the results of the Field Testing Kit are not accepted as
conclusive and the said results are only meant as a guide for the
prosecution agency to proceed further.
18.     The decision of the Supreme Court in
Jagdish Budhroji
Purohit v. State of Maharashtra
(supra) was also rendered in context
of the facts
in that case
. In that case, the Chemical Examiner's reports
were on record and it was the appellant's contention that the same
ought to be ignored since they were not accompanied by any data
regarding the analysis. The Supreme Court did not accept the
aforesaid contention. However, the Court also observed that there was
sufficient evidence on record to convict the appellants even if the
Chemical Examiner's reports were ignored. The observations were
made in the context where two of the witnesses had testified that they
had sufficient training and knowledge and methods of testing them.
The said case is not an authority for the proposition that oral testimony
of witnesses as to the nature and identity of the recovered substance,
without any report as to the chemical analysis of the said substance, is
sufficient to establish the nature and composition of the substance
recovered.
19.
In
Taj Singh
(supra), the Division Bench of this Court held that
even if an investigating officer had not received the report of the
CFSL, so far as his job of collecting the evidence is concerned, the
same was over the moment he had collected the exhibits and
dispatched the same for the opinion of the CFSL. The Court reasoned
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 17 of 47
that in this view, it would not be correct to state that a police report
which did not include the CFSL Report would be an incomplete one.
The Court found support in this view from the decision of the Full
Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Mehal Singh
(supra).
Mr. Nayak had also stressed on this decision and contended that this
view was binding on this Court.
However, it is seen that the decision
in
Taj Singh
's (supra) case was not rendered in the context of the
NDPS Act
.
20.     There is a material difference in other cases relating to offences
under the
IPC
or other statutes and certain cases relating to the
NDPS
Act
, where the allegation of commission of an offence is founded
predominantly on the recovery of an illicit substance. Unless, there is
evidence to establish the identity and nature of the said substance, it
would not be feasible for any court to take cognizance of an offence.
Till recently, it was also necessary to ascertain the purity of the illicit
substance for the purposes of determining the punishment imposable
for the same, that is, whether it was a commercial quantity or a small
quantity. Although, the said view is no longer good law in view of the
decision of the Supreme Court in
Hira Singh v. Union of India
: CRL.
A. 722 of 2017, decided on 22.04.2020, it cannot be disputed that the
very nature and identity of an alleged illicit substance recovered forms
the foundation of certain cases relating to offences under the
NDPS
Act
. In such cases, the Chemical Examiner's report is of primary
importance. In such cases the police report would be insufficient to
take cognizance of the offence if the same is not accompanied with
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 18 of 47
material (an expert's report on the analysis of the substance) to
establish the substance recovered. And, therefore could not be
considered as a complete report.
In
Nitin Nagpal
(supra), a
Coordinate Bench of this Court had pointed out the said distinction in
the following words:
"17. Keeping in mind the provisions of law as well as
          the decisions of the Courts
referred to above
, let me,
          now examine the facts of the present case in the light
          of the above discussions. The first question that is
          emerges is whether the challan filed on 20.9.2005 was
          incomplete. As noted above, the first point taken by
          Mr Andley was that the CFSL report had not been
          obtained and, therefore, investigation had not been
          completed.
There is no doubt that some of the
          decisions referred to by him and particularly that of
          the Bombay High Court in the case of
Sunil Vasantrao
          Phulbande
(supra) seem to be in line with his
          submissions. In the latter case, the Bombay High
          Court observed that the Chemical Analyser's report
          not having been filed, the charge-sheet was
          incomplete. However, if one were to examine that
          decision, it would be apparent that the Chemical
          Analyser's Report
in that case
was crucial to the
          foundation of the case itself and in the absence of such
          a report the Magistrate could not have taken
          cognizance of the offence. The question there was
          whether the substance recovered was Ganja or not. If
          it was Ganja then the provisions of the
NDPS Act
would apply and if it was not a Narcotic Drugs or a
          Psychotropic Substance then the provisions of the
NDPS Act
would not apply. Therefore, the result of
          the Chemical Analysis was crucial to the very
          foundation of the case for the prosecution. Without
          such a report it could not be ascertained whether an
          offence had been committed at all and, therefore, the
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 19 of 47
Magistrate was hindered in taking cognizance of such
          an offence under the
NDPS Act
. It is also material to
          note that
in that case
the Court observed that there
          may be situations where documents of a formal nature
          which did not come in the way of the Magistrate
          taking cognizance are not filed along with the charge-
          sheet yet the charge-sheet would not be construed as
          being incomplete.
In any event, no further debate is
          necessary on this aspect of the matter insofar as this
          Court is concerned inasmuch as the issue stands
          settled by the Division Bench decision in the case
          of
Taj Singh
(supra) wherein the Division Bench
          concluded that a police report which did not include
          the CFSL report would still be a complete report as
          envisaged in Section 173(2) of the Code. The case
          before the Division Bench was also one under
Sections 307
/
302
/
34
IPC and
Section 25
of the Arms
          Act, 1959. Distinct from the case before the Bombay
          High Court, the case before the Division Bench in Taj
          Singh as well as the present case is not one under the
NDPS Act
wherein the CFSL Report would be of vital
          importance for the purposes of the Magistrate taking
          cognizance. Therefore, the absence of the CFSL report
          in the facts of the present case would not mean that
          the challan filed on 20.9.2005 was incomplete."
21.     The reasoning in the case of
Ajit Singh @ Jeeta
(supra);
Sunil
Vasantrao Phulbande
(supra); and
Nitin Nagpal
(supra) are
undoubtedly compelling. It does stand to reason that a report on the
basis of which a Magistrate cannot take cognizance of the offence
under the
NDPS Act
, which is founded on recovery of an illicit
substance, would be an incomplete report and cannot be considered as
a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC. This is particularly so,
because the Chemical Examiner's report in such circumstances would
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 20 of 47
be a vital piece of evidence. An investigation is completed only when
evidence is collected.
22.     However, in
Kishan Lal v State
: 1989 (39) DLT 392, the
Division Bench of this Court took a somewhat different view. The
Division Bench held that the provisions of
Section 173
of the CrPC
must be considered as separate and distinct from
Section 190(1)(b)
of
the Cr.PC. The Court held that the report under
Section 173(2)
of the
Cr.PC would not be incomplete if it is not accompanied by a Chemical
Examiner's report as it would be open for the Magistrate not to take
cognizance on the offence if the same could not be taken on the basis
of the said report. It is relevant to note that
the said decision
was
rendered in the context of the
NDPS Act
. The relevant extract of
the
said decision
is as under:
"15. We respectfully agree with the earlier decision of
          this Court in
Tej Singh
's case (supra).
The decision in
Hari Chand and Raj Pal v. State
(supra) by a Single
          Judge of this Court wherein it has been held that an
          "incomplete challan" is not a police report within the
          ambit of Section 173(2) of the Code does not support
          the case of the petitioners. From the reported
          judgment it is not clear where all the witnesses or
          some of them "acquainted with the circumstances of
          the case" were yet to be examined when the report
          was filed. The reason for calling it incomplete is not
          discernible. But it is safer to assume from the reading
          of the judgment that the investigation was not
          complete. Thus the report as envisaged under Section
          173(2) of the Code could not have been filed.
16. It is unnecessary for us to notice other judgments
          cited by the learned Counsels in support of their plea
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 21 of 47
that the investigation in a case like the present is to be
          held to be incomplete.
In our view the Supreme Court
          decision in
Tara Singh
's case (supra) holding, inter
          alia, that a police report which is not accompanied by
          the expert's opinion, is to be held to be complete
          report as long as the witnesses who are acquainted
          with the circumstances of the case have been
          examined, continues to be law in spite of amendments
          in Section 173 of the Code.
17. Now to advert to the main plea. It is contended
          that for offences under the
NDPS Act
, the report under
          Section 173(2) of the Code, which in law is complete
          (the Investigating Officer having carried out all his
          mandatory duties), is to be considered "incomplete" in
          the absence of the opinion of the expert. In our view
          the submission is entirely misconceived. Apparently
          the power of the Magistrate to take cognizance of
          offences upon police report is being related to the duty
          of the S.H.O. to forward a report on completion of
          investigation. The duty of the Investigating Officer
          under the Code is to complete the investigation
          without unnecessary delay. On its completion which
          necessarily means that the witnesses acquainted with
          the circumstances of the case have been examined, the
          officer incharge of the police station has to forward a
          police report in a prescribed form to a Magistrate
          empowered to take cognizance of the offence.
          However, no duty is cast on the Magistrate to take
          cognizance of the offence on a report which although
          complete except for the expert's opinion, does not
          make out an offence. While exercising his judicial
          discretion it is open to the Magistrate to seek a copy of
          the expert's opinion. There may even be cases under
          the
NDPS Act
where no public witnesses have been
          cited but that fact by itself would not show that till
          such time the Government expert's opinion is
          received, the investigation is incomplete. The police
          report if filed in accordance with the provisions of
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 22 of 47
Section 173(2) of the Code would be complete report
          but the Magistrate in his judicial discretion may not
          take cognizance of the offence. Thus the provisions of
          Section 173(2) of the Code have to be considered
          separate and distinct from Section 190(l)(b) of the
          Code.
18. As far as the expert's report is concerned, we may
          note that by virtue of Sub-section (4) of Section 293 of
          the Code, any document purporting to be report under
          the hand of the Director or a Deputy Director or
          Assistant Director of a Central Forensic Science
          Laboratory or State Forensic Science Laboratory can
          be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other
          proceedings under the Code. It is true that it is open to
          the Court where it thinks fit to summon and examine
          the Government scientific expert. But he is not a
          formal witness and, therefore, no duty is cast upon the
          Investigating Officer to cite him as a witness.
19.We 'thus' hold that under Section 173(2) of the
          Code there is no mandate that a police report must
          enclose the document purporting to be a report under
          the hand of a Government Scientific Expert. In the
          present cases, as cognizance of the offences taken by
          the Magistrate was proper and valid, no order
          releasing the petitioners on bail under Section 167(2)
          of the Code was required to be passed.
23.
In
Babu v. State
: Bail Appln. No. 2075 of 2020, decided on
25.09.2020, a Coordinate Bench of this Court had referred to the
aforesaid decision and observed as under:
"18. Though this Court is of the view that the decision
         of the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High
         Court is an appropriate opinion in relation to cognizance
         of an offence under
NDPS Act
without the FSL report
         being an illegality, however, bound by the Division
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 23 of 47
Bench decision of this Court, judicial discipline
         mandates this Court to follow the same. Consequently,
         in view of the decision of the Division Bench of this
         Court in
Kishan Lal v. State
(supra), it is held that the
         petitioner is not entitled to grant of bail under
Section
         167(2)
CrPC for non-filing of the FSL report along with
         the charge sheet."
24.     This Court concurs with the view expressed by the Coordinate
Bench of this Court in
Babu
(supra).
Thus, the view expressed by the
Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Ajit Singh
@Jeeta
(supra) and the view expressed by the Bombay High Court in
Sunil Vasantrao Phulbande
(supra),convinced this Court that the
view of the Division Bench in
Kishan Lal
(supra) is binding.
25.     In view of the above, the petitioners' contention that the report
submitted on 27.05.2019 could not be construed as a report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC must be rejected. The first question is,
thus, answered in the negative.
Whether the right to avail bail in default is availed of at the time
when the application is filed or when it is considered
26.     In view of the above, the question whether the petitioners were
entitled to bail in default does not arise. However, for the sake of
completeness, this Court considers it apposite to also decide the
question whether the applications filed by the petitioners amounted to
them availing their right to bail prior to the FSL Report being filed.
27.     The Special Court had proceeded on that basis that even though
the petitioners may have filed that application at an earlier point of
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 24 of 47
time than the learned Public Prosecutor placing the Chemical
Examiner's report on record, the same could only be considered as
having been filed when the accused were produced in Court. And, this
according to the Special Court was simultaneous with the Public
Prosecutor filing the Chemical Examiner's report, which terminated
their right to seek a bail in default, if any. At the outset, it is necessary
to bear in mind that there is no inherent power with the Court to
remand an accused to custody. Such power can be exercised only in
terms of the statue expressly conferring such power. (See:
Union of
India v. Thamisharasi And Ors.
: (
1995) 4 SCC 190 and Natabar
Parida and Ors. v. State of Orissa
: (1975) 2 SCC 220).
The power of
the Magistrate to remand a suspect to custody pending investigation
can be traced to Section 167(2) of the Cr.PC.
28.     In terms of sub-section (1) of
Section 167
of the Cr.PC,
whenever a person is arrested and detained in custody and it appears
that the investigation cannot be completed within a period of twenty
four hours as fixed under
Section 57
of the Cr.PC and there are
grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well
founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer
making the investigation is required to forward a report to the nearest
Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries made in his diary and also
produced the accused before such Magistrate. The Magistrate before
whom the accused is produced has the power to remand the accused to
custody in terms of
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC. The said sub-section
is set out below:
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 25 of 47
"167(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused
                person is forwarded under this section may,
                whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the
                case, from time to time, authorise the detention of
                the accused in such custody as such Magistrate
                thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in
                the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the
                case or commit it for trial, and considers further
                detention unnecessary, he may order the accused
                to be forwarded to a Magistrate having such
                jurisdiction: Provided that--
(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of
                the accused person, otherwise than in custody of
                the police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he
                is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing
                so, but no Magistrate shall authorise the detention
                of the accused person in custody under this
                paragraph for a total period exceeding
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to
                an offence punishable with death, imprisonment
                for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than
                ten years; (ii) sixty days, where the investigation
                relates to any other offence, and, on the expiry of
                the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as
                the case may be, the accused person shall be
                released on bail if he is prepared to and does
                furnish bail, and every person released on bail
                under this sub-section shall be deemed to be so
                released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII
                for the purposes of that Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the
                accused in custody of the police under this section
                unless the accused is produced before him in
                person for the first time and subsequently every
                time till the accused remains in the custody of the
                police, but the Magistrate may extend further
                detention in judicial custody on production of the
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 26 of 47
accused either in person or through the medium of
                electronic video linkage;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not
                specially empowered in this behalf by the High
                Court, shall authorise detention in the custody of
                the police."
29.     It is clear from the plain language of the aforesaid provision that
after the period of sixty days or ninety days as the case may be
expires, the Magistrate would have no power to remand him to
custody and he is required to be released on bail, if he is prepared to
and furnishes the bail. It is also expressly provided that every person
released on bail under the said sub-section would be deemed to be
released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the
Cr.PC
for the
purposes of that Chapter. Once the maximum period for completing
the investigation as specified under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC is
expired and once the accused indicates that he is prepared to furnish
bail and does so, he is bound to be released.
30.
In
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra
and Ors.
: (1994) 4 SCC 602, the Supreme Court held that although
the accused would be entitled to bail in default, in case the
investigation is not complete in terms of
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC
read with
Section 20(4)
of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereafter 'TADA') provided such bail cannot
be granted by the court on its own motion without any application
being made by the accused person of his offering to furnish bail. The
Court also clarified that at that stage, that it would only consider
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 27 of 47
whether the challan has been filed within the maximum period as
prescribed or whether the said period has been extended under Clause
(bb) of Sub-section (4) of
Section 20
of the TADA. The court would
not be concerned with any other consideration such as the gravity of
the case, seriousness of the offence or character of the offender.
31.
In a subsequent decision rendered in the case of
Sanjay Dutt v.
State
: (1994) 5 SCC 410, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court further clarified that the right accruing to the accused for
seeking bail in default under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC would only
be enforceable prior to filing of the chargesheet. The same would not
survive or remained enforceable once the chargesheet is filed. The
relevant extract of
the said decision
is set out below:
"48. We have no doubt that the common stance
                before us of the nature of indefeasible right of the
                accused to be released on bail by virtue of
Section
                20(4)(bb)
is based on a correct reading of the
                principle indicated in that decision. The
                indefeasible right accruing to the accused in such a
                situation is enforceable only prior to the filing of
                the challan and it does not survive or remain
                enforceable on the challan being filed, if already
                not availed of. Once the challan has been filed, the
                question of grant of bail has to be considered and
                decided only with reference to the merits of the
                case under the provisions relating to grant of bail to
                an accused after the filing of the challan. The
                custody of the accused after the challan has been
                filed is not governed by Section 167 but different
                provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
. If
                that right had accrued to the accused but it
                remained unenforced till the filing of the challan,
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 28 of 47
then there is no question of its enforcement
                thereafter since it is extinguished the moment
                challan is filed because
Section 167
CrPC ceases to
                apply. The Division Bench also indicated that if
                there be such an application of the accused for
                release on bail and also a prayer for extension of
                time to complete the investigation according to the
                proviso in
Section 20(4)(bb)
, both of them should
                be considered together. It is obvious that no bail
                can be given even in such a case unless the prayer
                for extension of the period is rejected. In short, the
                grant of bail in such a situation is also subject to
                refusal of the prayer for extension of time, if such a
                prayer is made.
If the accused applies for bail
                under this provision on expiry of the period of 180
                days or the extended period, as the case may be,
                then he has to be released on bail forthwith. The
                accused, so released on bail may be arrested and
                committed to custody according to the provisions
                of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
. It is settled by
                Constitution Bench decisions that a petition
                seeking the writ of habeas corpus on the ground of
                absence of a valid order of remand or detention of
                the accused, has to be dismissed, if on the date of
                return of the rule, the custody or detention is on the
                basis of a valid order. (See
Naranjan Singh
                Nathawan v. State of Punjab
[1952 SCR 395 : AIR
                1952 SC 106 : 1952 Cri LJ 656] ;
Ram Narayan
                Singh v. State of Delhi
[1953 SCR 652 : AIR 1953
                SC 277 : 1953 Cri LJ 1113] and A.K. Gopalan v.
                Government of India [(1966) 2 SCR 427 : AIR
                1966 SC 816 : 1966 Cri LJ 602] .)
49. This is the nature and extent of the right of the
                accused to be released on bail under
Section
                20(4)(bb)
of the TADA Act read with
Section 167
CrPC in such a situation. We clarify the decision of
                the Division Bench in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur
                [(1994) 4 SCC 602: 1994 SCC (Cri) 1087: JT
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 29 of 47
(1994) 4 SC 255], accordingly, and if it gives a
                different indication because of the final order made
                therein, we regret our inability to subscribe to that
                view.
****               ****             ****
53. As a result of the above discussion, our
                answers to the three questions of law referred for
                our decision are as under:
(1) In the prosecution for an offence punishable
                under
Section 5
of the TADA Act, the prosecution
                is required to prove that the accused was in
                conscious 'possession', 'unauthorisedly', in 'a
                notified area' of any arms and ammunition
                specified in columns 2 and 3 of Category I or
                Category III(a) of Schedule I to the Arms Rules,
                1962 or bombs, dynamite or other explosive
                substances. No further nexus with any terrorist or
                disruptive activity is required to be proved by the
                prosecution in view of the statutory presumption
                indicated earlier. The accused in his defence is
                entitled to prove the non-existence of a fact
                constituting any of these ingredients. As a part of
                his defence, he can prove by adducing evidence,
                the non-existence of facts constituting the third
                ingredient as indicated earlier to rebut the statutory
                presumption. The accused is entitled to prove by
                adducing evidence, that the purpose of his
                unauthorised possession of any such arms and
                ammunition etc. was wholly unrelated to any
                terrorist or disruptive activity. If the accused
                succeeds in proving the absence of the said third
                ingredient, then his mere unauthorised possession
                of any such arms and ammunition etc. is
                punishable only under the general law. by virtue of
Section 12
of the TADA Act and not under
Section
                5
of the TADA Act.
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 30 of 47
(2)(a)
Section 20(4)(bb)
of the TADA Act only
                requires production of the accused before the court
                in accordance with
Section 167(1)
of the CrPC and
                this is how the requirement of notice to the accused
                before granting extension beyond the prescribed
                period of 180 days in accordance with the further
                proviso to Clause (bb) of Sub-section (4) of
Section 20
of the TADA Act has to be understood
                in the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court
                in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur. The requirement of
                such notice to the accused before granting the
                extension for completing the investigation is not a
                written notice to the accused giving reasons
                therein. Production of the accused at that time in
                the court informing him that the question of
                extension of the period for completing the
                investigation is being considered, is alone
                sufficient for the purpose.
(2)(b) The 'indefeasible right' of the accused to be
                released on bail in accordance with
Section
                20(4)(bb)
of the TADA Act read with
Section
                167(2)
of the CrPC in default of completion of the
                investigation and filing of the challan within the
                time allowed, as held in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur is
                a right which enures to, and is enforceable by the
                accused only from the time of default till the filing
                of the challan and it does not survive or remain
                enforceable on the challan being filed. If the
                accused applies for bail under this provision on
                expiry of the period of 180 days or the extended
                period, as the case may be, then he has to be
                released on bail forthwith. The accused, so released
                on bail may be arrested and committed to custody
                according to the provisions of the
CrPC
. The right
                of the accused to be released on bail after filing of
                the challan, notwithstanding the default in filing it
                within the time allowed, is governed from the time
                of filing of the challan only by the provisions
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 31 of 47
relating to the grant of bail applicable at that
                stage."
32.
In
State of M.P. v. Rustam And Ors.
: (1995) Supp.
3 SCC
221the Court referred to the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Sanjay Dutt
's(supra) case and held that "the court is required to
examine the availability of the right of compulsive bail on the date it is
considering the question of bail and not barely on the date of the
presentation of the petition for bail".
33.      As noted above, the Supreme Court in
Sanjay Dutt
's (supra)
case had held that indefeasible right accruing to the accused would be
only enforceable prior to filing of the chargesheet and would not
survive on the chargesheet being filed "if already not availed of".
34.      Apparently, this was construed by the Supreme Court in
Rustam
's (supra) case to mean that the right of bail should survive on
the date when that question is considered by the Court and not on the
date on which the petition for bail in default is presented. Thus,
according to this decision, the question whether the right to default in
bail would survive would have to be tested on that point of time when
that application was considered by the Court and not when it was
filed.
35.
In
Mohamed Iqbal Madar Sheikh v. State of Maharashtra
:
(1996) 1 SCC 722, the Supreme Court observed as under:
"12. .... If an accused charged with any kind of
                offence, becomes entitled to be released on bail
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 32 of 47
under proviso (a) to Section 167(2), that statutory
                right should not be defeated by keeping the
                applications pending till the chargesheets are
                submitted, so that the right which had accrued is
                extinguished and defeated".
36.     The above observation was made by the Court in the context
that in certain cases, courts had been deferring the consideration of
applications of bail in default till the investigation is completed and
chargesheet are filed. Thus, even though the accused had filed an
application for exercising indefeasible right, the delay in considering
the same was effectively defeating their rights.
In a subsequent case,
in
Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra
: (2001) 5 SCC
453, a Bench of three Judges of the Supreme Court, inter alia,
considered the question as to the import of the expression "if not
already availed of" as used by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court in paragraph 48 of the decision in
Sanjay Dutt
's case.
Paragraph
13 of
the said judgment
(
Uday Mohanlal Achaya
[supra]) is relevant
and is set out below:
"13. ...A conspectus of the aforesaid decisions of
                this Court unequivocally indicates that an
                indefeasible right accrues to the accused on the
                failure of the prosecution to file the challan within
                the period specified under sub-section (2) of
                Section 167 and right can be availed of by the
                accused if he is prepared to offer the bail and abide
                by the terms and conditions of the bail, necessarily,
                therefore, an order of the court has to be passed. It
                is also further clear that that indefeasible right does
                not survive or remain enforceable on the challan
                being filed, if already not availed of, as has been
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters                Page 33 of 47
held by the Constitution Bench in
Sanjay Dutt
case [(1994) 5 SCC 410 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1433] .
                The crucial question that arises for consideration,
                therefore, is what is the true meaning of the
                expression "if already not availed of"? Does it
                mean that an accused files an application for bail
                and offers his willingness for being released on bail
                or does it mean that a bail order must be passed,
                the accused must furnish the bail and get him
                released on bail? In our considered opinion it
                would be more in consonance with the legislative
                mandate to hold that an accused must be held to
                have availed of his indefeasible right, the moment
                he files an application for being released on bail
                and offers to abide by the terms and conditions of
                bail. To interpret the expression "availed of" to
                mean actually being released on bail after
                furnishing the necessary bail required would cause
                great injustice to the accused and would defeat the
                very purpose of the proviso to
Section 167(2)
of
                the Criminal Procedure Code and further would
                make an illegal custody to be legal, inasmuch as
                after the expiry of the stipulated period the
                Magistrate had no further jurisdiction to remand
                and such custody of the accused is without any
                valid order of remand. That apart, when an accused
                files an application for bail indicating his right to
                be released as no challan had been filed within the
                specified period, there is no discretion left in the
                Magistrate and the only thing he is required to find
                out is whether the specified period under the statute
                has elapsed or not, and whether a challan has been
                filed or not. If the expression "availed of" is
                interpreted to mean that the accused must factually
                be released on bail, then in a given case where the
                Magistrate illegally refuses to pass an order
                notwithstanding the maximum period stipulated in
                Section 167 had expired, and yet no challan had
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 34 of 47
been filed then the accused could only move to the
                higher forum and while the matter remains pending
                in the higher forum for consideration, if the
                prosecution files a charge-sheet then also the so-
                called right accruing to the accused because of
                inaction on the part of the investigating agency
                would get frustrated. Since the legislature has
                given its mandate it would be the bounden duty of
                the court to enforce the same and it would not be in
                the interest of justice to negate the same by
                interpreting the expression "if not availed of" in a
                manner which is capable of being abused by the
                prosecution.
A two-Judge Bench decision of this
                Court in State of M.P. v. Rustam [1995 Supp (3)
                SCC 221 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 830] setting aside the
                order of grant of bail by the High Court on a
                conclusion that on the date of the order the
                prosecution had already submitted a police report
                and, therefore, the right stood extinguished, in our
                considered opinion, does not express the correct
                position in law of the expression "if already not
                availed of", used by the Constitution Bench
                in Sanjay Dutt [(1994) 5 SCC 410 : 1994 SCC
                (Cri) 1433]...... In interpreting the expression "if
                not availed of" in the manner in which we have just
                interpreted we are conscious of the fact that
                accused persons in several serious cases would get
                themselves released on bail, but that is what the
                law permits, and that is what the legislature wanted
                and an indefeasible right to an accused flowing
                from any legislative provision ought not to be
                defeated by a court by giving a strained
                interpretation of the provisions of the Act. In the
                aforesaid premises, we are of the considered
                opinion that an accused must be held to have
                availed of his right flowing from the legislative
                mandate engrafted in the proviso to sub-section (2)
                of Section 167 of the Code if he has filed an
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 35 of 47
application after the expiry of the stipulated period
                alleging that no challan has been filed and he is
                prepared to offer the bail that is ordered, and it is
                found as a fact that no challan has been filed within
                the period prescribed from the date of the arrest of
                the accused. In our view, such interpretation would
                subserve the purpose and the object for which the
                provision in question was brought on to the statute-
book. In such a case, therefore, even if the
                application for consideration of an order of being
                released on bail is posted before the court after
                some length of time, or even if the Magistrate
                refuses the application erroneously and the accused
                moves the higher forum for getting a formal order
                of being released on bail in enforcement of his
                indefeasible right, then filing of challan at that
                stage will not take away the right of the accused.
                Personal liberty is one of the cherished objects of
                the Indian Constitution and deprivation of the same
                can only be in accordance with law and in
                conformity with the provisions thereof, as
                stipulated under
Article 21
of the Constitution.
                When the law provides that the Magistrate could
                authorise the detention of the accused in custody
                up to a maximum period as indicated in the proviso
                to sub-section (2) of Section 167, any further
                detention beyond the period without filing of a
                challan by the investigating agency would be a
                subterfuge and would not be in accordance with
                law and in conformity with the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code
, and as such, could be
                violative of
Article 21
of the Constitution. There is
                no provision in the
Criminal Procedure Code
authorising detention of an accused in custody after
                the expiry of the period indicated in proviso to sub-
                section (2) of Section 167 excepting the
                contingency indicated in Explanation I, namely, if
                the accused does not furnish the bail. It is in this
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 36 of 47
sense it can be stated that if after expiry of the
                period, an application for being released on bail is
                filed, and the accused offers to furnish the bail and
                thereby avail of his indefeasible right and then an
                order of bail is passed on certain terms and
                conditions but the accused fails to furnish the bail,
                and at that point of time a challan is filed, then
                possibly it can be said that the right of the accused
                stood extinguished. But so long as the accused files
                an application and indicates in the application to
                offer bail on being released by appropriate orders
                of the court then the right of the accused on being
                released on bail cannot be frustrated on the off
                chance of the Magistrate not being available and
                the matter not being moved, or that the Magistrate
                erroneously refuses to pass an order and the matter
                is moved to the higher forum and a challan is filed
                in interregnum. This is the only way how a balance
                can be struck between the so-called indefeasible
                right of the accused on failure on the part of the
                prosecution to file a challan within the specified
                period and the interest of the society, at large, in
                lawfully preventing an accused from being released
                on bail on account of inaction on the part of the
                prosecuting agency. On the aforesaid premises, we
                would record our conclusions as follows:
1. Under sub-section (2) of Section 167, a
                Magistrate before whom an accused is produced
                while the police is investigating into the offence
                can authorise detention of the accused in such
                custody as the Magistrate thinks fit for a term not
                exceeding 15 days on the whole.
2. Under the proviso to the aforesaid sub-section
                (2) of Section 167, the Magistrate may authorise
                detention of the accused otherwise than in the
                custody of police for a total period not exceeding
                90 days where the investigation relates to offence
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 37 of 47
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
                imprisonment for a term of not less than 10 years,
                and 60 days where the investigation relates to any
                other offence.
3. On the expiry of the said period of 90 days or
                60 days, as the case may be, an indefeasible right
                accrues in favour of the accused for being
                released on bail on account of default by the
                investigating agency in the completion of the
                investigation within the period prescribed and the
                accused is entitled to be released on bail, if he is
                prepared to and furnishes the bail as directed by
                the Magistrate.
4. When an application for bail is filed by an
                accused for enforcement of his indefeasible right
                alleged to have been accrued in his favour on
                account of default on the part of the investigating
                agency in completion of the investigation within
                the specified period, the Magistrate/court must
                dispose of it forthwith, on being satisfied that in
                fact the accused has been in custody for the
                period of 90 days or 60 days, as specified and no
                charge-sheet has been filed by the investigating
                agency. Such prompt action on the part of the
                Magistrate/court will not enable the prosecution
                to frustrate the object of the Act and the
                legislative mandate of an accused being released
                on bail on account of the default on the part of the
                investigating agency in completing the
                investigation within the period stipulated.
5. If the accused is unable to furnish the bail as
                directed by the Magistrate, then on a conjoint
                reading of Explanation I and the proviso to sub-
                section (2) of Section 167, the continued custody
                of the accused even beyond the specified period
                in para (a) will not be unauthorised, and therefore,
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 38 of 47
if during that period the investigation is complete
                and the charge-sheet is filed then the so-called
                indefeasible right of the accused would stand
                extinguished.
6. The expression "if not already availed of" used
                by this Court in
Sanjay Dutt
case [(1994) 5 SCC
                410 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1433] must be understood
                to mean when the accused files an application and
                is prepared to offer bail on being directed. In
                other words, on expiry of the period specified in
                para (a) of the proviso to sub-section (2) of
                Section 167 if the accused files an application for
                bail and offers also to furnish the bail on being
                directed, then it has to be held that the accused
                has availed of his indefeasible right even though
                the court has not considered the said application
                and has not indicated the terms and conditions of
                bail, and the accused has not furnished the same.
With the aforesaid interpretation of the expression
                "availed of" if the charge-sheet is filed
                subsequent to the availing of the indefeasible
                right by the accused then that right would not
                stand frustrated or extinguished, necessarily
                therefore, if an accused entitled to be released on
                bail by application of the proviso to sub-section
                (2) of Section 167, makes the application before
                the Magistrate, but the Magistrate erroneously
                refuses the same and rejects the application and
                then the accused moves the higher forum and
                while the matter remains pending before the
                higher forum for consideration a charge-sheet is
                filed, the so-called indefeasible right of the
                accused would not stand extinguished thereby,
                and on the other hand, the accused has to be
                released on bail. Such an accused, who thus is
                entitled to be released on bail in enforcement of
                his indefeasible right will, however, have to be
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 39 of 47
produced before the Magistrate on a charge-sheet
                being filed in accordance with Section 209 and
                the Magistrate must deal with him in the matter of
                remand to custody subject to the provisions of the
                Code relating to bail and subject to the provisions
                of cancellation of bail, already granted in
                accordance with the law
laid down by
this Court
                in the case of
Mohd. Iqbal v. State of
                Maharashtra
[(1996) 1 SCC 722 : 1996 SCC
                (Cri) 202] ."
[emphasis supplied]
37.
In
Union of India v. Nirala Yadav
: (2014) 9 SCC 457, the
Supreme Court analysed various earlier decisions rendered by it and
after referring to the decision of
Mohanlal Acharya
(supra), held as
under:
"28. ....When the charge-sheet is not filed and the
                right has ripened earning the status of
                indefeasibility, it cannot be frustrated by the
                prosecution on some pretext or the other. The
                accused can avail his liberty only by filing
                application stating that the statutory period for
                filing of the challan has expired, the same has not
                yet been filed and an indefeasible right has
                accrued in his favour and further he is prepared to
                furnish the bail bond. Once such an application is
                filed, it is obligatory on the part of the court to
                verify from the records as well as from the Public
                Prosecutor whether the time has expired and the
                charge-sheet has been filed or not or whether an
                application for extension which is statutorily
                permissible, has been filed. If an application for
                extension is filed, it is to be dealt with as has
                been stated in Sanjay Dutt [(1994) 5 SCC 410 :
1994 SCC (Cri) 1433] . That is the duty of the
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 40 of 47
Court. This is the position of law as has been
                stated in Uday Mohanlal Acharya [(2001) 5 SCC
                453 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 760] ."
38.     The Court also referred to its earlier decision in
Pragyna Singh
Thakur v. State of Maharashtra
: (2011) 10 SCC 445 and, inter alia,
reproduced paragraph nos. 54 and 58 of
the said decision
, which are
set out below:
"54.There is yet another aspect of the matter. The
                right under
Section 167(2)
CrPC to be released
                on bail on default if charge-sheet is not filed
                within 90 days from the date of first remand is
                not an absolute or indefeasible right. The said
                right would be lost if charge-sheet is filed and
                would not survive after the filing of the charge-
                sheet. In other words, even if an application for
                bail is filed on the ground that charge-sheet was
                not filed within 90 days, but before the
                consideration of the same and before being
                released on bail, if charge-sheet is filed, the said
                right to be released on bail would be lost. After
                the filing of the charge-sheet, if the accused is to
                be released on bail, it can be only on merits. This
                is quite evident from the Constitution Bench
                decision of this Court in
Sanjay Dutt
                (2) v. State
[(1994) 5 SCC 410 : 1994 SCC (Cri)
                1433] [paras 48 and 53(2)(b)]. The reasoning is to
                be found in paras 33 to 49.
****                           ****            ****
58. From the discussion made above, it is quite
                clear that even if an application for bail is filed on
                the ground that charge-sheet was not filed within
                90 days, before the consideration of the same and
                before being released on bail if charge-sheet is
                filed, the said right to be released on bail, can be
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters                 Page 41 of 47
only on merits. So far as merits are concerned the
                learned counsel for the appellant has not
                addressed this Court at all and in fact bail is not
                claimed on merits in the present appeal at all."
39.     After referring to the aforesaid paragraphs from the decision in
the case of
Pragyna Singh Thakur
(supra), the Supreme Court held as
under: -
"45. After recording the above conclusions, the High
           Court has ultimately observed that assuming that the
           appellant was not told by an order in writing to attend
           the office of ATS at Kala Chowki, Mumbai, yet it is
           clear that she accompanied the officer of ATS from
           Surat to Mumbai on her own volition. Every single
           act and movement is of her own volition and no force
           was used. The High Court, therefore, did not go into
           the wider question as to whether the non-compliance
           with Section 160(1) including its proviso would
           enable the appellant to apply for release on bail. It
           may be stated that the prosecution has produced and
           relied upon written intimation dated 10-10-2008 and
           entries from the station diary to show that
Section
           160
CrPC was substantially complied with but it is
           not necessary to refer to the same in detail as this
           Court broadly agrees with the view taken by the High
           Court mentioned above."
40.     The Supreme Court further noted that the view expressed by the
Court in
Pragyna Singh Thakur
(supra) was somewhat similar to the
view expressed by B.N. Agrawal J. in his dissenting opinion in
Uday
Mohanlal Acharya
(supra).
After observing the same, the Court, in
Nirala Yadav
(supra) concluded as under:
"46. .... As long as the majority view occupies the
           filed it is a binding precedent. That apart, it has been
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 42 of 47
followed by a three-Judge Bench in
Sayed Mohd.
           Ahmad Kazmi
's case.
Keeping in view the principle
           stated in
Sayed Mohd. Ahmad Kazmi
's case which
           has based on three-Judge Bench decision in
Uday
           Mohanlal Acharys
's case, we are obliged to conclude
           and hold the principle
laid down in
Paragraph 54 and
           58 of Pragyna Singh Thakur
's case (which have been
           underlined by us) do not state the correct principle of
           law. It can clearly be stated that in view of the
           subsequent decision of a larger Bench that cannot be
           treated to be a good law.
Our view finds support from
           the decision in Union of India and others v. Arviva
           Industries India Limited and Others."
41.
In
Alamkhan Umarkhan Jatmalek Jenjari Tal, Dashada Dist.,
Surendranagar and Anr. v. State of Gujarat
: (2015) 3 GLH 737, a
Single Bench of the Gujarat High Court considered a case where the
application for default bail under
Section 167(2)
of Cr.PC was filed at
10:35 on 10.11.2014. The chargesheet was filed on the same date in
the evening and the matter was placed for consideration before the
Court on the next day, that is, on 11.11.2014. The application for bail
in default was rejected by the concerned Judicial Magistrate on
14.11.2014. The Court held that the applicants were entitled to default
bail and the subsequent filing of the chargesheet at 04:00 o'clock in
the evening would not defeat the indefeasible right of the appellants to
be released on bail.
42.     A similar view has also been expressed by the Jharkhand High
Court in
Deepak Mandal @ Deepu Mandal @ Chhootu v. The State
of Jharkhand
: Crl. Rev. No. 1184 of 2014, decided on 05.01.2015. In
that case also, the chargesheet was filed on the same date, albeit, at a
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 43 of 47
later point of time. The Court held that the accused had filed a bail
application and was ready to furnish the bail bonds. In the
circumstances, an indefeasible right for being released on bail had
accrued because till filing of the application, the chargesheet had not
been filed.
It was filed subsequently at 01:00 pm but that could not
defeat the right of the accused under Section 167(2) of Cr.PC.
43.
In a recent decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the case
of
Bikramjit Singh v. State of Punjab
: Crl. A. No. 667 of 2020
decided on 12.10.2020, the Court observed as under:
"A conspectus of the aforesaid decisions would show
            that so long as an application for grant of default bail
            is made on expiry of the period of 90 days (which
            application need not even be in writing) before a
            charge sheet is filed, the right to default bail becomes
            complete. It is of no moment that the Criminal Court
            in question either does not dispose of such application
            before the chargesheet is filed or disposes of such
            application wrongly before such charge sheet is filed.
            So long as an application has been made for default
            bail on expiry of the stated period before time is
            further extended to the maximum period of 180days,
            default bail, being an indefeasible right of the accused
            under the first proviso to Section 167(2), kicks in and
            must be granted."
44.
In
M. Ravindran v. Intelligence Officer
: Criminal Appeal No.
699 of 2020, decided on 26.10.2020, the accused filed an application
for seeking default bail at 10:30 am of the 181st day of his arrest (that
is immediately after the court opened). The Public Prosecutor filed an
additional complaint on the same date at 4:25 pm. The Supreme Court
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters              Page 44 of 47
held that the accused had availed of his indefeasible right to a default
bail before the charge sheet was filed and therefore was entitled to the
same.
45.       In view of the above, the impugned order, which is premised on
the basis that the court would have to consider the question of default
bail at the point when the application is taken up for consideration is
unsustainable. As explained by the Supreme Court in
Nirala Yadav
(supra), "the accused can avail his liberty only by filing an application
stating that the statutory period for filing of the challan has expired,
the same has not yet been filed, and an indefeasible right has accrued
in his favour and further he is prepared to furnish the bail bond. Once
such an application is filed, it is obligatory on the part of the court to
verify from the records as well as the public prosecutor whether the
time has expired and the charge-sheet is filed or not". The question
whether an accused has exercised his indefeasible right for seeking
bail in default is not contingent upon the time when the said
application is heard and decided. So long as the said application has
been preferred in the manner as is required - that is, by filing it in the
prescribed manner with the court - the accused has done whatever is
expected of him for indicating that he is exercising his right. Once
having done so, the court is only required to examine whether at that
point the petitioner is entitled to bail in default. Any subsequent acts
done on behalf of the prosecution would not be relevant for the
purposes of determining whether the accused had validly exercised his
rights.
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters             Page 45 of 47
46.     As noted above, this is also clearly discernable from the plain
language of
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC. It is relevant to note that the
said provision circumscribes the power of the court to remand an
accused to custody if a chargesheet has not been filed within the
prescribed time and the accused indicates that he is prepared to furnish
bail. The accused indicates so only by making an application. The said
application can be made in writing and filing it in the manner as
prescribed or even orally before Court. (See:
Rakesh Kumar Paul v.
State of Assam
: (2017) 15 SCC 67).
47.     The moment the accused makes such an application, the court is
required to only examine whether the conditions as prescribed under
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC have been met when the application is
made. If they are, then the power of the court to remand is lost and the
accused has to be granted bail. In this view, this Court is unable to
concur with the reasoning of the Special Court in the impugned order.
The Special Court has proceeded on an erroneous premise that the
applications filed by the accused could be considered as having been
moved only at the time when they were produced before the court and
not before. The implicit assumption that the relevant point of time for
considering whether the accused have availed of their indefeasible
right would be the point at which the applications are considered and
not when it is filed, as stated earlier, not sustainable.
48.     Although, the decision of the Special Court is found to be
erroneous, no relief can be granted to the petitioners. This is because
the contention that an indefeasible right for a default bail had accrued
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters               Page 46 of 47
to the petitioners is based on an erroneous assumption that a final
report under
Section 173(2)
of the Cr.PC had not been filed within the
stipulated period.
49.     In view of the above, the impugned order is set aside. However,
the applications moved by the petitioners before the said court seeking
bail in default under the provisions of
Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC are
dismissed.
50.     All pending applications are also disposed of.
VIBHU BAKHRU, J
NOVEMBER 03, 2020
RK
CRL.REV.P.1219/2019 & Other Connected Matters            Page 47 of 47
