Title: Search
Court: High Court or the Session s Court has power to grant anticipatory bail to a person after the competent criminal court has taken cognizance of the case  and has issued process, viz., warrant for arrest of that  person.
Date: 63 of 1985
Citation: citations: AIR1986AP345, AIR 1986 ANDHRA PRADESH 345, (1986) 1 APLJ 297, (1986) 2 CRI LC 234, (1986) 1 ANDHLT 286, (1986) 2 RECCRIR 357
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1587163/

[Cites
4
, Cited by
27
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sheik Khasim Bi vs The State on 7 February, 1986
Equivalent citations: AIR1986AP345, AIR 1986 ANDHRA PRADESH 345, (1986) 1 APLJ 297, (1986) 2 CRI LC 234, (1986) 1 ANDHLT 286, (1986) 2 RECCRIR 357
JUDGMENT
 

 Jayachandra Reddy, J.
1.   The  short question, which is of general importance that arises for our consideration is whether under S. 438 of the Cr. P. C. 1973 the High Court or the Session s Court has power to grant anticipatory bail to a person after the competent criminal court has taken cognizance of the case  and has issued process, viz., warrant for arrest of that  person.
2.   A Division Bench  consisting of Jeevan Reddy J., and  Upendralal Waghray, J. Disagreed  with the view  taken by an earlier Division Bench of this court consisting of Chennakesav Reddy J., as he then was  and Rama Rao J., in
Kamalakara Rao v. State of A. P.
(1983) 1 APLJ 97 : (1983 Cri LJ 872) and consequently referred the question to the Full Bench.
Before we proceed to consider the scope of S. 438, Cr. P. C., and several points urged, it is necessary to set out a few more details as to how this  matter has come up before us.  To start with, Madhusudan Rao,  J., in N. Dasaratha Reddy v. State, (1975) 2 APLJ (HC) 214 held that S. 438, Cr. P. C., applies only to arrests where the court's process has  not been issued.
Ramachandra Raju, J., in  Criminal M. P. No. 884 of 1981 agreed with the view taken by Madhusudhan Rao J. Later, punnayya J., doubting the correctness of the view taken by Madhusudhan Rao J., and Ramachandra Raju J., referred the matter in
Kamalakara Rao v. State of A. P.
(supra),   to a Bench.  The Division Bench however upheld the view  taken  by Madhusudhan Rao, J., in the present case crime No. 63 of 1985  was registered at narasaraopet police station against two accused on the basis of a report made by P. W. 1. A. 2 was granted anticipatory bail by the Ist additional Sessions Judge Guntur.  By the time a similar application by A. 1 came  up before  the same Judge, the charge sheet i.e., the police report, was filed by the police before the  Magistrate.  The learned Ist Addl.
Sessions Judge rejected the application because of that circumstances, obviously following the decision of the Division Bench in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (supra).  Then an application was filed before  this court under S. 438, Cr. P. C., on behalf of A. 1.
The petition came  up before Seetharam Reddy J., who felt that the decision in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (supra) requires reconsideration,  and accordingly referred the matter to the Division Bench.
The Division Bench  as mentioned above  disagreed with the view taken in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (supra), and therefore on a reference the matter has come  up before this Full Bench.  It can, therefore, be seen that the difference of judicial opinion, to put it in other words, is on the short question whether the power to grant anticipatory bail under S. 438, Cr. P. C., comes  to an end after the Magistrate has taken cognizance of an  offence and issued process against the accused.
3.   Section 438, Cr. P. C., was introduced for the first time in the new Cr. P. C. 1973 and provides for the issuance of a direction for the grant of bail to a person who apprehends arrest.  The Section reads thus :-
438. Direction  for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest :-
(1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session  for a direction under this section and that  court may, if it thinks  fit, direct that  in the  event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2)   When the High Court  or the court of session makes a direction under  sub-sec. (1) it  may include such conditions in  such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may  think  fit, including.
(i)  a condition that the person shall make himself  available for  interrogation by a police officer as and when required.
(ii)   a condition that the person shall not,  directly  or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer.
(iii)   a condition that the person shall  not leave India without  the previous permission of the court.
(iv)   such other  condition as may be  imposed under sub-sec.  (3) of S. 437 as if the bail were granted under that section.
(3) if such  person is thereafter  arrested without warrant by an officer-in-charge of a police station on such accusation, and is  prepared either at the time of arrest or at any  time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he  shall be released on bail, and if a Magistrate  taking cognizance of  such offence decides that  a warrant should issue in the first instance against that person, he shall  issue a bailable warrant in conformity  with the direction of the court under sub-sec.(1)"
4.   The Cr. P. C., of 1898 did not contain any  specific provision corresponding to the present S. 438.  There was sharp difference of opinion  amongst the various  High Courts on the question as to whether courts had inherent power to pass an order of bail in anticipation of arrest.  While carrying out extensive amendments to the Cr. P. C., the  Law Commission of India felt  the necessity of  introducing a provision enabling   the High Court and the Court of Session to grant "anticipatory bail".  In para 39.9 of its report the Law Commission observed thus :
"39.9.  The suggestion for directing the release of a person on bail prior to his arrest (commonly known as "anticipatory bail") was carefully considered by us.  Though there is a conflict of judicial opinion about the power of a court to grant anticipatory bail, the majority view is that there is no such power under the existing provisions of the Code.  The necessity for granting  anticipatory bail arises mainly because sometimes  influential persons try to implicate their rivals in false case for the purpose of disgracing them or for other purposes by getting them detained in jail for some days.  In recent times, with the accentuation of political rivalry, this tendency is  showing signs of steady increase.   Apart from false cases, where there are  reasonable grounds  for holding that a person accused of an offence is not likely to abscond, or otherwise misuse his liberty while on bail, there seems no justification  to require him first to submit to custody, remain in prison for some days and them apply for bail.  We recommend the acceptance of this  suggestion.  We are further of the view that this special power should be conferred only on the High Court and the Court of Session, and that the order should  take effect at the time of arrest or thereafter.
In order to settle the details of this suggestion, the following drafts of a new section is placed for consideration.
"497 A. (1) When any person  has a  reasonable apprehension that he  would be arrested on an accusation of having committed  a non-bailable offence, he may  apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section.  That court may, in its discretion, direct that in the even t of his arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2)  A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence against  that person shall, while taking steps under S. 204(1),  either issue summons or a bailable warrant as indicated in the direction of the court under sub-sec.  (1).
(3)  If any person in respect of whom such a direction is made is arrested without warrant b an officer-in-charge of a police station on an accusation of having committed that offence, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to  give   bail, such person shall be released on bail".
We  considered carefully the question of laying down in the statute certain conditions under which alone  anticipatory bail could be granted.  But we found that it may not be practicable to exhaustively enumerate those conditions and, moreover, the laying down of such conditions may be  construed as prejudging (partially at any rate) the whole case.  Hence we would leave it to the discretion of the  Court and prefer not to fetter such  discretion in the statutory provision itself  Superior courts will, undoubtedly, exercise their discretion properly,  and not  make and  observation  in the order granting anticipatory bail which will have a tendency to  prejudice the  fair trial of the accused".
Accepting these recommendations, C. 447 of the draft bill was enacted with modifications which became S. 438 of the Cr. P. C.
5.   The Scope of S. 438, Cr. P. C., was considered by the Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh  Singh v. State of Punjab
.  The Supreme Court observed thus :
"Advisedly, at least in part, because of the  31st  Report of the Law  Commission which while pointing out the necessity of introducing  a  provision in the Code enabling the High Court  and the Court of Session to grant  anticipatory bail, said in para 39.9 that it had "considered carefully  the question of laying  down in the statute certain conditions under which alone anticipatory bail could be granted but had come to the conclusion that the question of granting such bail should be left "to  the discretion of the court"  and ought not to be fettered by the statutory provision itself,  since the discretion was being conferred upon superior courts which were expected to exercise it judicially,  the legislature conferred a wide discretion on the High Court and the Court of  Session to grant anticipatory bail because it evidently felt, firstly, that it would be difficult to enumerate the conditions under which anticipatory bail should  or should not be granted and secondly because the intention was to allow the higher courts in the echelon a somewhat free hand in the grant of relief in the nature of anticipatory bail.  That is why, departing from the terms of Ss. 437 and 439, S. 438(1) uses the language that the High Court or the  Court of Session "may if it thinks fit" direct that the  applicant be released on bail........  It  has to be borne in mind that anticipatory bail is sought when there is a mere apprehension of arrest on the accusation that the applicant has committed a non-bailable offence.  A person who has yet to lose his  freedom by  being arrested asks for freedom in the even of arrest.  That  is the stage at which  it is imperative to potect his freedom in so far as one may, and to give full play to the presumption that he is innocent.   In fact the stage  at which  anticipatory bail is generally sought brings about its striking dissimilarity  with the situation in which a person who is arrested for the commission of a non-bailable offence asks for bail.   In the  latter situation, adequate data is available to the court, or can be called for by it,  in the light of which it can grant   or refuse relief and while granting it, modify it by the  imposition of all or any  of  the conditions  mentioned in S. 437".
In particular the Supreme Court has held that the legislature conferred a wide  discretion on the High Court and the Court of Session to grant anticipator bail, but also  observed that the power of granting anticipatory bail is somewhat extraordinary in character and is to be exercised only in exceptional cases.  But the present controversy did not arise and was not considered by the Supreme Court.  We shall now examine the various decision cited before us, both for and against.
6.    In Dasaratha Reddy v. State (1975-2 APLJ (HC) 214) (supra) Madhusudhan Rao J. Held.
"The court's process must  be respected first  before any one can seek the aid of  a court.  If there is a warrant for the arrest of a person,  such person may submit himself to arrest or may himself appear before the court and seek bail under S. 437.  Section 438 applies only to arrests while the Court's process has not been  issued.  That is clear if S. 438(3) is read along with S. 438(1)".
As mentioned above,  Ramachandra Raju, J Criminal M. P.  No. 884 of 1981 agreed with this view, In
Kamalakara Rao
's Case (1983 Cri LJ 872) (Andh Pra) (supra) the Division Bench agreed with the view taken by Madhusudhan Rao J., and held thus :-
"When the process, Ramachandra Raju, J. In Criminal M. P. No. 884 of 1981 agreed with this view, In
Kamalakara Rao
's case (1983 Cri LJ 872) (Andh Pra) (supra) the Division Bench agreed   with the view taken by Madhusudhan Rao J., and held thus :-
"When  the process of court is set  in  motion by filing the charge-sheet and issue of non-bailable warrant, the  applicant is precluded from having recourse to S. 438 Cr. P. C., for  anticipatory bail.  Sec. 438(3) is concerned with a the Magistrate.  S. 438(3) is concerned with a situation of taking cognizance of the offence and issuance of warrant subsequent to or during the subsistence of the order under S. 438(1) Cr. P. C. The question of passing the order under S. 439(1)  is not visualised when the proceedings commence before the Magistrate.  S. 438(3) is  confined to vary the warrant in the  event  of the order under S. 438 and there is absolutely no indication of cancellation or withdrawal of  warrant.  Therefore, the power under S. 438 does not survive the initiation of proceedings by filing charge-sheet and issue of arrest warrant.  In the absence of provision of cancellation or withdrawal  of warrant the situation  of parallel exercise of power arises when the order under S. 438 is passed subsequent to  issue of warrant.  The essence of S. 438(3) is that the Magistrate has to vary the warrant if the proceedings commence after the order is passed under S. 438(1) and the terminal of the exercise of power under S. 438 is the initiation of proceedings under Cr. P. C., by the Magistrate".
7.   It can thus be seen that both Madhusudhan Rao, J., as well as the Division Bench in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (supra), laid  considerable  stress on sub-sec.  (3) of S. 438.
After  a careful consideration of the scope and object of S. 438, we are unable to agree with the view taken by the Division Bench  in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (1983) 1 APLJ 97 : (1983 Cri LJ 872) cited.  Under S. 438(1)  a person who reasonably believes that he may be arrested moves the court for anticipatory bail and if the court being satisfied grants bail to him, may also impose some conditions as mentioned in sub-sec (2).  Then in the case of his  arrest by an officer-in-charge of a police station  sub-sec.  (3) comes into operation and provides for the necessary procedure.  It lays  down that if such a person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer and if he is  prepared to give bail, he shall be released on bail and if the Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in the first instance, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the directions of the court   under sub-sec. (1).  Sub-sec. (3) therefore  does not in  effect curtail the powers under sub-sec. (1) of S. 438 and it makes only a provision for a situation where anticipatory bail is granted under S. 438 (1) and where an arrest is  made thereafter by the police officer without warrant prior to the Magistrate taking cognizance but before the issue of process.
IN
Gurbaksh Singh
's case  (1980 Cri LJ 1125) (SC) (supra) the Supreme Court held that  an anticipatory bail can be granted even after the F. I. R., is filed so long as the applicant has not been  arrested.
That being so, filing of a charge-sheet buy itself, in our view, does not put an end to the power to grant anticipatory bail under S. 438(1), Cr. P. C.
8.
In
Ramsewak v. State of Madhya Pradesh
1979 Cri LJ 1485 a Division Bench  of the Madhya Pradesh High Court considered this question and held that mere filing of a chargesheet cannot circumvent the benefit conferred by the provision of S. 438.  In  para 22 of the judgment it is held thus :-
"Again there is nothing in S. 438 of  the Code to suggest that the order of anticipatory bail shall be effective up to a particular stage or till the filing of challan"
The Division Bench also proceeded to consider the question whether  sub-sec. (3) of S. 438 in any manner restricts the power under-sub-sec. (1) of S. 438 and held 
  "In  our opinion, there is nothing in the latter part of Sub-sec.  (3) of S. 438 of the Code indicating that the  Legislature did not intend the issue of direction under S. 438(1) of the Code after filing of charge-sheet.  The words of sub-secs. (1) and (3) of S. 438 of the Code are clear and unambiguous.  That being so, according to the elementary rule of interpretation of statutes, the grammatical and natural meaning must be given to the words.  Moreover the view we take also accords with the scheme and intention of S. 438 of the Code.  The object and intention of the section is to prevent the mischief which is sometimes played by false implication of innocent persons.  Therefore, merely filing  of challan cannot circumvent  the extraordinary powers and the  benefit conferred by the provisions of S. 438 of the Code.  According to us the provision as contained in sub-sec. (3) of S. 438 of the Code relates to the working of the order of  anticipatory bail passed under sub-sec.   (1) of  S. 438 and the manner in which  it would be given  effect to, by the police or the Magistrate as the  case may be".
To the  same effect is the view taken by a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Puran Singh v. Ajit Singh
1985 Cri LJ 897 : The Division  Bench  held thus :
"The main governing factor for the exercise of jurisdiction under S. 438 Cr. P. C., is the apprehension of arrest by a person accused of the commission of a non-bailable offence.   The section makes no distinction whether the arrest is apprehended at the hands of the police or at the instance of the Magistrate.  The issuance of a warrant by the Magistrate against a person,   to  my mind, justifiably gives rise to such an apprehension and well entitles a person to make a prayer for his anticipatory bail.  The High Court or the Court of Session may, however,   decline to exercise its powers under S. 438(1), Cr. P. C. Keeping in view the fact that the Magistrate has summoned  the accused through bailable warrant i.e., a relief almost  similar to what can be granted by the court under S. 438(1) Cr. P. C., yet  that does not mean that the court has no  jurisdiction to grant anticipatory bail to such an accused person.  The grant of bail under S. 438(1) by the High Court  or the Court of Session is, to my  mind,  dependent on the merits of a particular case and not to the order of the Magistrate choosing to summon an accused through bailable or non-bailable warrant".
9.    It can, therefore, be seen that sub-sec. (3) of S. 438, Cr. P. C., does not in any manner restrict the power of the court to grant anticipatory bail,  but on the other hand it only contains the procedural aspect that is necessary to give effect to the order of anticipatory bail passed under sub-sec. (1) of S. 438 and the manner in which it would be given effect to.  Maybe the High Court or the Court of Session (would) not (be) inclined to grant bail keeping in view the fact that the Magistrate has taken cognizance and issued process, but the  mere non-exercise of such power does not mean lack of jurisdiction.
10.   Even in a case where cognizance is taken there may be justifiable grounds to grant anticipatory bail to a person who apprehends arrest and against whom a warrant of arrest is pending.
11.    The learned Public Prosecutor however laying stress on the words "reason to believe"   submitted that when once the charge-sheet is filed  and a warrant is issued, that means the matter has  reached a stage that arrest is a certainty  and there is  no question of the person still having only "reason to believe".  We are  unable to read the words in the manner the learned Public Prosecutor intends to.  The words "reason to believe"  have  been used in a wider sense.
In
Gurbaksh Singh
's case  (supra) it is observed as follows :-
"The  applicant must  show that the has "reason to believe"  that he may be arrested for a non-bailable offence.  The use of the expression "reason to believe" shows that the belief that the applicant may be so arrested must be founded on  reasonable grounds.   Mere 'fear'; is not 'belief' for which reason it is not enough  for the applicant to show that he has some sort of a vague apprehension that some one is going to make an accusation against him, in pursuance  of which he may be arrested. The grounds on which the  belief of the applicant is based  that he may be arrested for a non-bailable offence, must be capable of  being examined by the court objectively, because it is then alone that the court can determine whether the applicant   has reason to believe that he may be so arrested.  S. 438(1), therefore, cannot be invoked on the basis of vague and general allegations, as if to  arm oneself in perpetuity against a possible arrest.  Otherwise, the number of applications for anticipatory bail will be as large as, at any rate, the adult populace".
Filing  of a charge-sheet and issuance of warrant are certainly the grounds which make the person not only to believe that he would be arrested but also to move the courts under S. 438(1).
12.   One other aspect which is highlighted by the learned Public Prosecutor is that if anticipatory bail under S. 438(1), Cr. P. C., is granted in a case where cognizance is already taken and a warrant is issued, then, the officer arresting will be in a predicament and he may also be guilty of contempt of court if he does not execute the warrant issued by the magistrate and since there is no provision under S. 438, Cr. P. C., for  such a situation it must be presumed that the powers under S. 438, Cr. P. C., come to an end  after the Magistrate takes cognizance and issues  the process. We see no force  in this submission.  Even in a case where anticipatory bail is granted before the Magistrate takes cognizance, the accused has to be arrested and released, and sub-sec. (3) of S. 438 provides for the same.  Likewise, in a case where cognizance  ins taken and process is issued, if the Court grant anticipatory bail under S. 438 (1) the police officer shall execute  the process, viz., the warrant, by arresting the accused and produce him  before the Magistrate who shall  release him  on bail pursuant to the order of anticipatory bail granted by the High Court or the Court of Session.  There  may also be cases where anticipatory bail is granted under S. 438(1)  without knowing that cognizance has been taken and process has been issued but  that does not mean the order passed by the  superior court under a statutory  provision becomes redundant.  We are aware that S. 70 Cr. P. C.,  lays down that every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under  the Cr. P. C., shall  remain in force until it is cancelled   by the court  which issued it, or until it is executed.  IN such a situation also in cases of arrest  pursuant to the warrant, the order under S. 438(1) has to be obeyed and can be given effect to by following the  necessary procedure in the matters of releasing the persons on bail.  However this difficulty does not arise even in a case where cognizance is taken because the court will have knowledge about the fact that  the Magistrate has taken cognizance.  Therefore,  even in such  a case if the court intends to grant anticipatory bail,  it can lay down the necessary  conditions and directions which are generally given  while releasing a person under S. 437 or S. 439.
In
Gurbaksh Singh
's  case  (supra) the Supreme Court in para 26 observed thus :-
"We find a great deal of substance in Mr.  Tarkunde's submission that since denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the court should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the  scope of S. 438 especially when no such restrictions have been imposed by the legislature in the terms of  that  section.  S. 438 is a procedural provision  which  is concerned with the personal liberty of the individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence since he is not, on the date of his application for anticipatory bail convicted of the offence in respect of which he seeks bail.  An over-generous infusion of  constraints and conditions  which are not to be found in S. 438 can make its provisions constitutionally vulnerable since the right to personal freedom cannot be made to depend on compliance with unreasonable restrictions.  The  beneficent provision contained in S. 438 must be saved,  not jettisoned".
Therefore, imposition of certain stringent  restrictions on the scope of S. 438 Cr. P. C., is not warranted in the absence of any provision providing for the same.  However granting of anticipatory bail is of extraordinary nature.  The Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh Singh
's case   (supra),  while agreeing that the power to grant anticipatory bail should be exercised with due care and circumspection, however, concluded that the exercise of the power should be left to the discretion of the concerned court.   The Supreme Court held thus :
"We would, therefore, prefer to leave the High Court and the Court of Session to exercise their jurisdiction under S. 438 by a wise and careful use of their discretion which, by their long training and experience, they are ideally suited to do.  The ends of justice will be better served by trusting these courts to act objectively and in consonance with principles governing the grant of bail which are recognised over the years, than by divesting them  of their discretion which the legislature has conferred upon them,  as laying down inflexible rules of general application".
Then coming to the modalities regarding the passing of bail orders under S. 438(1) Cr. P. C.,  the Supreme Court held as follows :-
"But notice  should issue to the Public Prosecutor or the government Advocate forthwith  and the question of  bail should be reexamined in the light of the respective contention of the parties.  The ad interim order too must conform to the requirements of the section and suitable conditions should be imposed on the applicant even at that stage.  Should  the operation  of an  order passed under S. 438(1)  be limited in point of time? Not  necessarily.  The court may, if there are reasons  for doing so, limit the operation of the order to a short  period until after the filing of an FIR in respect of the matter covered by the order.  The applicant may in such cases  be directed to obtain an order of  bail under S. 437 or 439 of the Code within a reasonably short period after the filing of the FIR as aforesaid.  But this need not be followed as an invariable rule.  The normal rule should be not  to limit the operation of the order in relation to a period of time"
Similar modalities can also be applied  in the case of granting of anticipatory bail under S. 438(1) even in a case where the criminal court takes cognizance and issues the warrant, depending upon the circumstances.  A notice to the Public Prosecutor can be issued after  the application is filed, and after hearing both sides the court will have the necessary  information particularly regarding the fact of charge-sheet having been  filed  and the warrant having been issued, and if the High Court or the Session Court is satisfied that there  are certain exceptional  circumstances, then it may in its discretion, instead of directing the applicant to obtain   bail under S. 437 or S. 439 Cr. P. C., grant anticipatory bail under S. 438  Cr. P. C., with suitable  directions and impose necessary  conditions.  Of course, as pointed by the Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh Singh
's case  (supra), it is purely within the discretion of the court, but the fact that the charge-sheet is filed and  warrant is issued is yet another strong circumstance which the court should keep in  view while exercising this  extraordinary power.  However, the non-exercise of this extraordinary power ordinarily is not due to lack of jurisdiction.  The discretion to exercise such power is always there, but it always depends upon various facts and circumstances of each case.
13.   For all  the aforesaid reasons we hold that the filing of a charge-sheet by the police  and  issuing of a warrant by the Magistrate do not pub an end to the power to grant bail under S. 438(1), Cr. P. C., and on the other hand we are of the view that the High Court or the Court of Session has power to grant anticipatory  bail under S. 438(1) to a person after the criminal court has taken cognizance of the case and has issued process viz.,  the warrant of arrest of that accused person.  Therefore,  the decision of the Division Bench in
Kamalakara Rao
's case (1983) 1 APLJ 97 : (1983 Cri LJ 872) (supra), upholding the view taken by Madhusudhan Rao J., in N. Dasaratha Reddy's  case (1975) 2 APLJ (HC) 214 (supra),  and by Ramachandra Raju J,  in Crl. M. P. 884 of 1981 does not lay down the correct legal position and consequently all these rulings are  overruled.
14.   The reference is ordered accordingly.  The  matter may be posted before a single Judge for disposal.
Ramanujulu Naidu, J.
(3-3-1986)
15.   This  is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail to the petitioner.  The petition is dismissed.
16.   It is however open  to the petitioner to surrender herself before Police and move this court  for bail.
17. Order accordingly.
