Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 667,
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/162763828/

[Cites
13
, Cited by
1
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Sh. Dharmender vs State Of Himachal Pradesh on 3 September, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1




    IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AT SHIMLA


                  ON THE 3rd DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2021




                                                         .

                               BEFORE

               HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANOOP CHITKARA





         CRIMINAL MISC. PETITON (MAIN) U/S 482 CRPC No.335 of
                               2021





            Between:-
    1.      SH. DHARMENDER, SON OF
            SHRI LAL SINGH, OCCUPATION
            SERVING IN INDIAN ARMY,

            RESIDENT OF VILLAGE BAGH,

            P.O. CHAILCHOWK, TEHSIL
            CHACHYOIT & DISTRICT
            MANDI, H.P. AGED 29 YEARS.
    2.      SH. LAL SINGH, S/O LATE SH. LAJJE


            RAM, OCCUPATION EX-SERVICEMAN,
            RESIDENT OF VILLAGE BAGH,
            P.O. CHAILCHOWK, TEHSIL
            CHACHYOIT & DISTRICT




            MANDI, H.P. AGED 62 YEARS.
    3.      SMT. DULARI DEVI, W/O SHRI





            LAL SINGH, OCCUPATION HOUSE
            WIFE, RESIDENT OF VILLAGE BAGH,
            P.O. CHAILCHOWK, TEHSIL





            CHACHYOIT & DISTRICT
            MANDI, H.P. AGED 29 YEARS.
                                                    .... PETITIONER

            (BY SHRI LOVNEESH THAKUR,
            ADVOCATE)

            AND




                                        ::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
                                          2




    1.      STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH
            THROUGH PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
            (HOME) TO THE GOVERNMENT OF
            HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA-2.




                                                                  .
    2.      NAMRATA, W/O SH. DHARMENDER,





            RESIDENT OF VILLAGE BAGH, P.O.
            CHAILCHOWK, TEHSIL CHACHYOIT
            & DISTRICT MANDI, H.P.





                                           .... RESPONDENTS.
    1.      SHRI NAND LAL THAKUR,
            ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL,
            SHRI KUNAL THAKUR,
            DEPUTY ADVOCATE GENERAL,




            SHRI RAM LAL THAKUR
            AND SHRI SUNNY DHATWALIA,
            ASSISTANT ADVOCATE GENERALS,
            FOR THE STATE.
    2.

            MS. LEENA GULERIA, ADVOCATE,

            FOR RESPONDENT NO.2.)


            This petition coming on for admission this day, the Court passed

    the following:




                               ORDER
FIR No.      Dated        Police Station         Sections
     59       of 18.6.2019     Gohar,        District 498-A, 323, 506, 201





     2019                      Mandi, H.P.            & 34 of the
IPC
.
The petitioner, who stands arraigned as accused persons in the FIR
    mentioned above, have come up before this Court, under
Section 482
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, to quash the proceedings given the
    compromise between the estranged wife and her in-laws.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
3
2.    Ld. Counsel for the parties submitted that the parties have
    resolved the criminal dispute between them and seek quashing of the FIR
    mentioned above and closure of all consequential proceedings.
.
ANALYSIS:
3.    The following aspects would be relevant to conclude this petition:-
a)   The incident relates to matrimonial discord.
b)   Today, on 3.9.2021, this Court recorded joint statement of
         husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law (petitioners), and wife-
respondent No.2, wherein they testified about compromise and
         prayed for quashing of FIR.
c)   The parties have amicably settled the matter between them in

         terms of the compromise deed (Annexure P-3). The complainant
         does not dispute this compromise deed.
d)   In the given facts, the occurrence was limited and confined



         between relatives and does not affect public peace or tranquility.
e)   The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will, and the




         purpose of criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to





         work for bringing peace in family and society.
f)   The pendency of trial affects career and happiness.
g)   Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to
         maintain the stand they have taken in this compromise, which is
         expected to result in the accused's acquittal.
h)   The accused persons are the first offenders.
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
4
i)   The accused are facing prosecution for the last more than two
              years.
.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING UNDER SECTION





    498-A
IPC
:
4.
In
Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand
, (2010) 7 SCC 667,





    Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that [30]"It is a matter of common
    experience that most of these complaints under
Section 498A
Indian
    Penal Code are filed in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without





    proper deliberations. We come across a large number of such complaints
    which are not even bonafide and are filed with oblique motive. At the
    same time, rapid increase in the number of genuine cases of dowry

    harassment are also a matter of serious concern.[32] Unfortunately, at

    the time of filing of the complaint the implications and consequences are
    not properly visualised by the complainant that such complaint can lead
    to insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the complainant,



    accused and his close relations.[33]. The ultimate object of justice is to
    find out the truth and punish the guilty and protect the innocent. To find




    out the truth is a herculean task in majority of these complaints. The





    tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate relations is also
    not uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is





    difficult to ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely
    careful and cautious in dealing with these complaints and must take
    pragmatic realities into consideration while dealing with matrimonial
    cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's close relations who
    had been living in different cities and never visited or rarely visited the
    place where the complainant resided would have an entirely different
    complexion. The allegations of the complaint are required to be
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
5
scrutinised with great care and circumspection. Experience reveals that
    long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour, acrimony and
    bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is also a matter of




                                                                 .
common knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband





    or the husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it
    would ruin the chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of





    suffering is extremely long and painful."
5.
In
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P.
, 2012(10) SCC 741, Para 28,
    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that "We, therefore, deem it just and





    legally appropriate to quash the proceedings initiated against the
    appellants Geeta Mehrotra and Ramji Mehrotra as the FIR does not
    disclose any material which could be held to be constituting any offence

    against these two appellants. Merely by making a general allegation that

    they were also involved in physical and mental torture of the
    complainant-respondent No. 2 without mentioning even a single incident
    against them as also the fact as to how they could be motivated to



    demand dowry when they are only related as brother and sister of the
    complainant's husband, we are pleased to quash and set aside the




    criminal proceedings in so far as these appellants are concerned and





    consequently the order passed by the High Court shall stand overruled."
    STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
6.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi v Shitul H. Chanchani
, 1998(7) SCC 698,
    Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question as
    regards the propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance
    and issuing process need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the
    charge. The Court holds, "...This argument, however, does not appeal to
    us inasmuch as merely because an accused has a right to plead at the
    time of framing of charges that there is no sufficient material for such
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
6
framing of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure
    Code, he is debarred from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic
    earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the




                                                                .
offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that the very





    issuance of the order of taking cognizance is invalid on the ground that
    no offence can be said to have been made out on the allegations made in





    the complaint petition. It has been held in a number of cases that power
    under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the interest of
    justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue even where the





    allegations in the complaint petition do not make out any offence would
    be tantamount to an abuse of the process of court, and therefore, there
    cannot be any dispute that in such case power under
section 482
of the

    Code can be exercised.
7.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal)
    758, the Full Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court observed that the
    High Court need not wait for completion of investigation and taking



    cognizance by the Magistrate




    NON-COMPOUNDABLE OFFENCES CAN BE QUASHED:
8.    In the present case, the offence under
Section 498-A
IPC is not
    compoundable under
Section 320
CrPC. However, in
Saloni Rupam





    Bhartiya v Rupam Prahlad Bhartiya
, 2015(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 172, a
    three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, while dealing with
Section 498-A
of IPC, which was non-compoundable offence, holds "It
    was submitted by learned counsel for the parties that in the light of the
    above subsequent developments especially the fact that the marriage
    between the parties itself stands dissolved by a decree passed by a
    competent court, nothing really remained between the parties to be
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
7
addressed and that the conviction of the respondent-husband under
Section 498A
of the Indian Penal Code could be set aside. We see no
    reason to decline that prayer. In the circumstances, therefore, and in the




                                                                 .
light of the fact that the parties have successfully negotiated an amicable





    settlement sinking and resolving all their differences and disputes and
    finding a lasting solution on all the outstanding issues between





    themselves, we see no reason why the conviction recorded by the courts
    below and the sentence of imprisonment till the rising of the Court,
    which the respondent has already undergone should continue to blemish





    the respondent-husband. We accordingly set aside the judgment and
    order of conviction of the respondent under
Section 498A
of the Indian
    Penal Code."
CONCLUSION:
9.    Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District
    Magistrate as a routine procedure, yet the High Court has inherent



    jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the CRPC, to intervene in such kind of
    matter. It is not the requirement of law that the cancellation has to be




    approved only through the District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of





    the High Court under
section 482
CrPC can always be exercised,
    depending upon the facts and circumstances. The parties are likely to
    live together for a lifetime, and intervention would create a cordial





    environment for peaceful relations between them. Given the entirety of
    the case and judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the
    continuation of these proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose
    whatsoever.
10.   In the present case, the offenses are not compoundable under
section 320
CrPC. Be that as it may, this Court is inclined to invoke the
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
8
inherent jurisdiction under
section 482
CrPC to quash the FIR and all
    subsequent proceedings in the peculiar facts and circumstances.
11.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal
.
Pradesh, 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds "[47]. As





    far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the
    appellants came to this Court challenging the order of cognizance only





    because of the reason that matter was already pending as the appellants
    had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the order of the High Court
    rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having





    regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In
    any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of
    cognizance would automatically stands vitiated."
12.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR

    639, at p 642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of
    Justice arises propitiously when parties, who fell apart, bury the hatchet
    and weave a sense of fellowship or reunion.
13.   Given above, because of the compromise, this is a fit case where
    the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code




    of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the proceedings mentioned





    above. The FIR mentioned above is quashed, and all the consequential
    proceedings are also quashed and set aside. The bail bonds are





    accordingly discharged. All pending application(s), if any, stand closed.
In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is
    allowed in the aforementioned terms.
Anoop Chitkara,
                                                           Judge.
September 3, 2021 (ks).
::: Downloaded on - 31/01/2022 23:00:09 :::CIS
