Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/164696860/

[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Kritika Padode And Anr vs Union Of India & Anr. on 5 August, 2016
Author:
Jayant Nath
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Jayant Nath
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                Pronounced on: 5th August, 2016
+      W.P.(C) 2399/2015


       KRITIKA PADODE AND ANR                                ..... Petitioners
                             Versus
       UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                 ..... Respondents


+      W.P.(C) 5602/2015


       RAJNI GEORGE & ANR                                    ..... Petitioners
                             Versus
       UNION OF INDIA & ORS                                  ..... Respondents


+      W.P.(C) 2400/2015
       VIBHOR ANAND                                          ..... Petitioner
                             Versus
       UNION OF INDIA & ORS                                  ..... Respondents
       Counsel for the petitioners:        Mr.Naman Joshi, Adv. for petitioners
       in W.P.(C) No.2399/2015.

       Mr.Siddharth Aggarwal, Mr.Sukumar & Mr.Ambar Bhushan, Advs.
       for petitioners in W.P.(C) No.5602/2015.
       Counsel for the respondents: Ms.Monika Arora, CGSC with
       Mr.Kushal Kumar, Adv. for Union of India.

       Mr.Sanjoy Ghose, ASC with Ms.Pratishtha Vij, Adv. for GNCTD.




W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                   Page 1 of 7
        CORAM:
       HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAYANT NATH

                                 JUDGMENT
Ms. G. ROHINI, CHIEF JUSTICE:
1.     These three petitions have been filed by way of Public Interest
Litigation with a prayer to declare the action of the Central Government and
Delhi Police in banning the telecast of the documentary titled "India's
Daughter" as illegal and without jurisdiction. The petitioner in W.P.(C)
No.5602/2015 has also prayed for quashing the orders dated 3rd and 4th
March, 2015 of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House Courts
exercising the jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
2.     We have heard the learned counsel for both the parties.
3.     "India's Daughter" is a documentary film about the gang rape and
brutal assault of a young woman on 16th December, 2012 in a moving bus in
New Delhi.
4.     The four accused in the said case, known as "Nirbhaya case", were
convicted and were awarded death sentence by the Special Fast Track Court,
Saket, New Delhi holding that it is a case falling under the category of
"rarest of rare" and the same was confirmed by the High Court of Delhi.
The appeal against the conviction and sentence is pending before the
Supreme Court and the accused/convicts are presently detained in Tihar Jail.
5.     On 28.02.2015, it was announced by BBC that the documentary film
"India's Daughter" would be aired on the International Women's Day on
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                 Page 2 of 7
08.03.2015 and that the same would also include the interview of one of the
convicts.     On 03.03.2015, FIR No.29/2015, P.S. Cyber Crime Cell,
Economic Offences Wing, Delhi came to be registered for the offences
punishable under
Sections 504
,
505
,
505(1)(b)
and
509
of Indian Penal
Code, 1860 read with
Section 66A
of Information Technology Act, 2000 on
the basis of the newspaper and internet reports that the convict in his
interview had made highly objectionable, grossly offensive, malicious and
derogatory remarks hurting the feelings of women and that the publication
and telecast of the same in print and electronic media may provoke breach of
peace and may cause public mischief.
6.     On 03.03.2015 itself, an application was moved by the Delhi Police
through the Inspector Cyber Crime Cell, Economic Offences Wing, Delhi in
the Court of the Duty Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House Courts, New
Delhi seeking a direction to the competent authority in the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting not to allow telecast of the said interview of
the convict in India stating that in case the interview is telecasted, it may
lead to widespread public outcry and serious law and order problem.
Having entertained the said application, the learned MM passed a restraint
order until further orders which reads as under:
"An application has been moved by the IO requesting for
       blocking of interview of one of the convicts of Nirbhaya Gang
       Rape case from telecasting and broadcasting on the internet and
       other print media. It has been stated that if the said interview is
       allowed to be aired, it may cause huge public outcry and may
       create law and order problem. Heard. Since an FIR has already
       been lodged against the said interview and also there is a
       possibility of law and order problem being caused, it is hereby
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                  Page 3 of 7
directed that said interview shall not be uploaded/ transmitted/
       published through any web portal or print or any other media
       till further orders. The application and this order be put up
       before the concerned Court on 04.03.2015 at 2 PM."
7.     The said application was put up before the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Patiala House Courts on 04.03.2015 and has been placed on
record. The said order may also be reproduced hereunder:
"IO of the case has moved an application for intimation
       submitting that on 3.3.2015 an application for preventing the
       media/internet from publishing/ transmitting/ telecasting/
       uploading the interview of one of the convicts in Nirbhaya
       gangrape case, was made before the learned Duty MM who has
       already been pleased to pass a restraint order till further orders.
Order dated 3.3.2015 of Sh.Puneet Pahwa, learned MM,
       PHC, New Delhi perused. Be kept on record."
8.     On 03.03.2015, the Government of India, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting has also issued an "advisory" advising all the private satellite
TV channels not to telecast the documentary "India's Daughter" or any
excerpts from it or any programmes based on the said excerpts. It was also
stated that any violation of the programme code shall invite such action as
provided for in the Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the
Rules made thereunder as well as the terms and conditions stipulated in the
uplinking/downlinking guidelines. The said "advisory" dated 03.03.2015
reads as under:
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                  Page 4 of 7
"Government of India
                   Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
                          'A' Wing, Shastri Bhawan,
                                  New Delhi.
3rd March, 2015
                                      Advisory
       Whereas a number of private TV channels have been showing
       certain excerpts of a programme titled 'India's Daughter',
       proposed to be telecast by the BBC and the NDTV. The
       excerpts contain an interview with one of the convicted rapists
       of the Delhi gangrape victim of December, 2012. These
       excerpts were telecast on various channels throughout the day,
       with visuals of the convict, who was showing no remorse
       whatsoever for the heinous act. Further, the excerpts also
       contained his chauvinistic and derogatory views regarding
       women in general and the victim in particular. These
       programmes also provided a platform for the convict to use the
       media to further his own case, especially when his appeal
       against his conviction, is sub-judice.
Whereas the telecast of these excerpts appear to encourage and
       incite violence against women, thus compromising women's
       public safety. They also provide encouragement to anti-social
       elements to indulge in violent acts compromising law and
       order.
Whereas the telecast of these excerpts appear to compromise
       the role of the media as the upholder of constitutional values as
       the fourth pillar of our democracy. The media is likely to be
       seen as a voice for the perpetrator of such crimes by providing
       him a medium to communicate his views on the matter
       repeatedly. Further, his appeal being sub-judice, this is also
       liable to be construed as interference with the due process of
       law.
Whereas the telecast of these excerpts are liable to attract
       provisions of Rule 6(1) (d, e, f, i, k and o) of the Cable
       Television Networks Rules, 194.
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                Page 5 of 7
All the private satellite TV channels are accordingly advised to
       not telecast the documentary 'India's daughter' or any excerpts
       from therein or any programmes based on these excerpts.
       Any violation of the Programme Code shall invite such action
       as provided for in the Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act,
       1995 and Rules framed thereunder as well as the terms and
       conditions stipulated in the uplinking/downlinking guidelines."
9.     Challenging the validity of the said "advisory" issued by the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, the present writ petitions have been filed
contending inter alia that the ban on broadcasting imposed under the said
"advisory" violates the fundamental rights of freedom of speech and
expression guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution of India.
It is also contended that the prohibitory order issued on a mere apprehension
that the documentary may lead to serious law and order problem is wholly
unwarranted apart from being without jurisdiction since the same is not
authorized by any law. The further contention is that since the documentary
in question being a mirror reflection of the ground reality of the mindset of
one of the convicts, the same needs to be appreciated and accepted so as to
enable correction of the societal mindset of gender bias and social norms
and to bring out the systemic changes in societal behaviour.
10.    A status report has been filed on behalf of the Delhi Police stating that
the investigation of the case in FIR No.29/2015 is in progress and upon
completion of the investigation the final report would be filed before the
learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.
11.    It is no doubt true that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
had issued the "advisory" dated 03.03.2015, however, on the same day a
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                  Page 6 of 7
judicial order came to be passed by the jurisdictional court preventing the
media / internet from publishing / transmitting / telecasting / uploading the
interview of the convict. The said order is still in operation.
12.    It is apparent from the facts borne out of record that the "advisory"
dated 03.03.2015 was a mere advice to the private satellite TV channels.
13.    However, there is a judicial order prohibiting telecasting and the
matter is still pending before the competent court of law.
14.    Therefore, the contentions advanced by the petitioners regarding the
validity of the "advisory" issued by the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting deserve no consideration at this stage.
15.    So far as the judicial orders dated 3rd and 4th March, 2015 are
concerned, since the matter is pending before the competent court of law and
more particularly the investigation is still in progress, the interference by
this Court either under
Article 226
or under
Article 227
of the Constitution
is not warranted.
16.    Accordingly, leaving it open to the learned Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate to proceed with the matter pending on his file following due
process of law and granting liberty to the petitioners or any aggrieved party
to work out the other remedies available under law, the writ petitions are
disposed of.
CHIEF JUSTICE


                                               JAYANT NATH, J
AUGUST 05, 2016/kks
W.P.(C) No.2399/2015 & connected matters                  Page 7 of 7
