Title: Search
Court: High Court. The
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1649269/

[Cites
0
, Cited by
12
]
Constituent Assembly Debates
Constituent Assembly Debates On 14 June, 1949 Part I
CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY OF INDIA - Volume VIII 

 Tuesday, the 14th June, 1949
 


The Constituent Assembly of India met in the Constituent Hall, New Delhi at 
Eight of the Clock, Mr. President (The Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad) in the 
Chair.
DRAFT CONSTITUTION - (Contd.)

 


*Article 111-A-(Contd.)

 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed (West Bengal : Muslim) : Mr. President, Sir, yesterday, I 
drew the attention of the House to article 112 which we have already accepted. 
I submit that the acceptance of that article has involved us into a commitment 
to a policy.
Article 112 enables the Supreme Court to permit an appeal in a criminal case 
by special leave. This involves the acceptance of the formula that appeals in 
criminal cases should also lie on a certificate given by the High Court. The 
House will be pleased to consider the situation. At present appeals to the 
Privy Council in criminal matters lie first of all on a certificate given by 
the High Court concerned. If that is refused, then, the Privy Council may 
allow an appeal by special leave. Special leave is a residuary provision to 
guard against the High Court improperly refusing to grant the requisite 
certificate. I submit that article 112 has committed us to the acceptance of 
the principle that appeals must lie also on a certificate by the High Court 
concerned in criminal cases. In fact, it is highly convenient as a preliminary 
step to allow the High Court to grant or refuse a certificate. The convenience 
is obvious. The High Court has, where it is asked to give a certificate, 
already considered the matter more or less fully in an appellate or revisional 
capacity, since it is against a judgment or order of the High Court that an 
appeal is sought to the Supreme Court. The High Court is thus already in 
possession of the facts relating or relevant to an appeal to the Supreme 
Court. There are many High Courts already in the provinces and there will be 
many more in the integrated States. There will be more than a dozen High 
Courts in the territory of India. It would be very convenient for these High 
Courts to be in a position to grant or refuse the certificate in the first 
instance. Therefore, this obvious and convenient course should be adopted. In 
case the certificate is refused, it can be taken for granted in most cases 
that it has been properly refused. If thereafter any application for special 
leave is made to the Supreme Court, in nine cases out of ten, that application 
will be refused because the question of law, or the suitability, otherwise, 
for purposes of appeal has already been fully considered by the High Court in 
refusing the certificate. In such a case, it will reduce the number of 
application tot he Supreme Court for special leave as it has already reduced 
the number of applications for special leave to the Privy Council. I 
therefore, submit that the provision for a certificate by the High Court is 
not only a very logical measure, but at the same time, a convenient one and it 
will prove in the long run to be economical. It sometimes happens, however, 
that the High Court refuses to grant the certificate even in a suitable case. 
In those limited cases, it should be the privilege of the highest Court to 
grant special leave. The question of possible congestion of work in the 
Supreme Court has included many honourable Members to oppose the provisions of 
these amendments. It is said that we do not know how many appeals in criminal 
cases there would be in the Supreme Court. The fear of creating a serious 
congestion in that Court and also the fear that we will have to employ more 
Judges to deal with those cases is behind this opposition. I submit, however, 
that this fear is unjustified. So far as the question of law is concerned, it 
is only a 'substantial question of law' which will enable a party successfully 
to obtain a certificate or special leave. A substantial question of law must 
be clearly appreciated. In fact in it is not any question of law but a 
substantial question of law and I submit that a substantial question of law is 
very restricted in its scope. It is a

 


very high standard of error or irregularity in law and it is already well 
established that an error as to the procedural law such as, error in framing a 
charge or similar other matters prescribed by the Code or Criminal Procedure 
or other procedural law relating to criminal matters, and a violation of these 
laws does not as a matter of law create a sufficient grievance in law even in 
the High Court or other Appellate Courts and will not be ground for the 
Supreme Court, for under section 537 of Criminal Procedure Code, any error of 
procedure would not be a material ground for interference in a criminal case 
unless it has in fact also resulted in prejudice to the party. So a 
substantial question of law is reduced to a very short compass that if it is 
an error of procedural law, it must be sufficiently serious in its 
consequences upon the case which must have caused real and substantial 
prejudice to the party. Therefore the condition as to a "substantial 
question of law" will eliminate all question of errors of procedure which 
do not go to the root of the mater, which really do not affect the merits of 
the case, and therefore, there is no fear of congestion of cases on this 
ground. Then there are other procedural errors, namely, in a Session trial 
there may be misdirections to the Jury. It has also been held that this is not 
a sufficient ground to interfere unless it has on facts led to failure of 
justice. Therefore the fear that there would be congestion of cases if we 
allow substantial question of law to justify appeals to the Supreme Court is 
unjustified. Then with regard to references by Session Judges under section 
307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure against the verdict of a Jury, in the 
latest Privy Council case of Ram Anugrah Singh, it was held in 1946 that 
unless the verdict of the Jury is clearly unreasonable so that no reasonable 
body of men could come to that conclusion, unless this ground is made out, 
even serious misdirection of even mis-reception of material evidence, contrary 
to Evidence Act, will not be a sufficient ground even for High Court to 
interfere, and I submit would also be no ground for interference before the 
Supreme Court. I therefore submit that the condition of substantial question 
of law is a sufficient safeguard against frivolous appeals being taken to 
Supreme Court. It is only when very substantial injustice has resulted from 
any errors of procedure or any mis-reception even of material evidence there 
would be an appeal and there would be a certificate or special leave. But any 
question relating to composition of the crime is really a serious matter. We 
have recently a case decided by the Privy Council in 1945 saying that under 
section 34 of the Penal Code which was supposed to be applicable to all cases 
where several persons acted or purported to have acted with similar intention 
does not constitute an offence. In fact a clarification of this matter in this 
case has ruled out a large number of offences centering round section 34 of 
the Penal Code. Another important principle has been decide by Privy Council 
in 1947 in Srinivas Mall's case, that criminal intention and knowledge is a 
necessary condition although it may not be mentioned in the penal law 
concerned. Unless criminal knowledge or criminal intention, commonly called 
mens rea is clearly or necessarily rules out by the penal law, it is a 
necessary ingredient of the offence. It must be proved that the accused had

 


some criminal knowledge or intention. On these matters the Privy Council has 
laid stress on the real elements of crime and the materials that go to 
constitute the crime. This is highly important, and substantial grounds of law 
will mostly centre round errors as to the elements of a crime or serious 
errors as to the law of procedure or evidence. I therefore submit that there 
is no fear of any serious congestion of cases. The Privy Council has always 
summarily rejected applications for special leave which did not raise very 
substantial errors or actual prejudice. It is only two or three cases in the 
year-at any rate not more

 


than half-a-dozen cases in a year, that they have interfered. I have no doubt 
that in granting a certificate the High Court will exercise the greatest 
caution and will confine itself to granting certificate in cases only where 
the penal laws have been misinterpreted or that there has been any gross 
violation of the rules of procedure or evidence to the prejudice of a party 
that a certificate will be given and I have no doubt whatsoever that under 
article 112 the Supreme Court will also exercise a restraining influence on 
indiscriminate appeals. Then there is a condition that Advocates appearing in 
the High Court and also before the Privy Council are required to certify that 
there are substantial grounds for the appeal and in case any frivolous 
application is made for a certificate or special leave, that is always a 
matter for serious comment and that will again act as a restraining influence 
on frivolous application is made for a certificate or special leave, that is 
always a matter for serious comment and that will again act as a restraining 
influences on frivolous application. This wholesome practice will no doubt 
also be observed in the Supreme Court but these matters must be left to the 
Supreme Court to deal with. The Federal Court has already shown that they do 
not like appeals made without sufficient or without at least arguable grounds. 
Considering the matter from this point of view, the fear of congestion of 
criminal cases in Supreme Court is to my mind merely conjectural. I do not 
think more than a few dozens of cases will come to Supreme Court and that 
should not terrorise us into complete inactivity and taking no decision 
whatsoever on this matter. Considering the matter from every conceivable point 
of view, we must allow appeals in serious cases where injustice has as a 
matter of fact been done by the High Court and by other Courts, and appeals 
should only be allowed on substantial questions of law which is a very 
difficult condition-it is not a frivolous appeal that has any chance of 
success and we must allow appeals to the Supreme Court on substantial grounds 
of law. I have however in my amendment stressed two other matters which 
require consideration. I have said that appeals must also lie from the final 
decision of any tribunal other than High Court from which no appeals for 
revision lies to High Court. It is open to the Legislature to set up a special 
tribunal and it is quite competent to so provide that its decision will be 
inviolate and no appeal will lie to High Court or any other Court. In such 
cases, appeal should also lie on the certificate of the tribunal on the usual 
grounds. In such a case the High Court will have no power to grant certificate 
because we are ensuring a certificate from High Court from its own decision. 
It is therefore also necessary to provide for appeals from the decisions of 
tribunals from which no appeal or motion lies to the High Court. In such cases 
a certificate for appeal from such tribunal would be needed; and the residuary 
article 112 is already there. So, such tribunals from which no appeal or 
motion lies to the High Court in criminal cases, may also be authorised. 
Otherwise there will be a lacuna.
Then there are matters which are neither civil nor criminal. Civil matters are 
provided for in article 111, and we want to provide for appeals in criminal 
cases in article 111-A. But there are anomalous cases which neither civil nor 
criminal, e.g., contempt of court cases, when a party or witness or advocate 
or any one else brings the Court into contempt or disrepute. In such cases the 
High Court has summary power to deal with the recalcitrant party by fine or 
even imprisonment. In such cases there should be an appeal in important cases 
where a substantial question of law is involved. In two recent contempt of 
court cases that went up to the Privy Council-one from the colonies and one 
from the Allahabad High Court-it was found that parties had been wrongly 
punished on a misconception of law. And Lord Atkins delivering the judgment of 
the Privy Council pointed out gross

 


inaccuracies in the conception of contempt of court. Important questions of 
law and principle arise in these cases and provision should be made for an 
appeal, provided a substantial question of law is involved or the matter is a 
fit one for appeal. So these two classes of cases-that is, appeals from 
tribunals from which no motion or appeal lies to the High Court, and contempt 
of Court cases-should be included to prevent any lacuna. We are framing the 
Constitution for a long time and should leave no loopholes which will call for 
early amendments. In civil cases we have limited the valuation to Rs. 20,000; 
but in criminal cases we cannot limit the value of a man's life and liberty. 
We cannot hang or imprison an innocent man without giving him a right of 
appeal. Even if one innocent man dies or is imprisoned, the sighs of his widow 
or orphan children will cry for justice. The House, I submit, should rise to 
the occasion and give justice to a poor man whose life may be considered by 
cynics to be below Rs. 20,000.
Mr. President : Dr. Ambedkar will now move his amendment.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (Bombay :General) : Sir, I move :
"That with reference to amendments Nos. 23 and 24 of List I (Fifth Week) 
for the new article 111-A, the following be substituted :-
111-A. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court with regard to criminal 
matters.
The Supreme Court shall have power to entertain and hear appeals from any 
judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in 
the territory of India-
(a) if the High Court has on appeal reversed the order of acquittal of an 
accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) if the High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any 
court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused 
person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) if the High Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the 
Supreme Court :
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) of this clause shall lie subject 
to such rules as may from time to time be made by the Supreme Court and to 
such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to 
entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a 
criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such 
conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law."
I do not wish to say anything at this stage but I shall reserve my remarks 
towards the end after hearing the course of debate on my new amendment.
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General) : Mr. President, Sir, the 
amendment which has been moved by Dr. Ambedkar just now is one which I hope 
will find acceptance from all Members of this House. This amendment is in 
effect the same of which I gave notice (No. 17) except in regard to revisional 
powers of enhancement. In regard to all other matters it is substantially the 
same and I have no hesitation in congratulating Dr. Ambedkar and those who 
have brought about this compromise on this issue.
Coming to the article of the question I beg to submit the amendment, though 
satisfactory from the practical point of view, is certainly neither logical 
nor theoretically right. In the first instance, if it be accepted as an axiom 
in criminal jurisprudence that at least one appeal should be provided to every 
person who has been convinced in a court of law, this amendment fails to 
achieve the object. Under part (a) of this amendment the only occasion where 
an appeal is allowed in respect of an order against the order of acquittal is 
when a person has been sentenced to death. May I humbly ask if, for a person 
who after he has been acquitted and in the appeal against him has been 
sentenced to transportation for life, or even to five years or a single day or 
even fine, is there occasion for appeal for him in the High Court or any other 
Court? Are we to understand Are we to understand that person who are sentenced 
to death are the only

 


persons who are aggrieved and who require the right of appeal? In my humble 
judgment every person who after acquittal has been sentenced in appeal should 
possess the inherent right to appeal. I agree that if there are thousands of 
such appeals our Supreme Court will be flooded with cases and in practice 
there will be great difficulty. All the same, I must submit to this House that 
it must take care to see that some provision is made somewhere-either in the 
High Courts or in the Supreme Court-that every such convicted person has got a 
chance to appeal.
This new article 111-A here is practically on a par with article 111 on the 
civil side. I complained last time when I was speaking on article 110 that as 
a matter of fact the provision of article 111 also are not satisfactory in so 
far that they proceed on a basis which is not acceptable to me or which should 
not be acceptable to the House. We passed the Objectives Resolution. We passed 
the Fundamental Rights in article 8, and under article 15, that there shall be 
equality before law and equal opportunity for every person. Now, the 
provisions contained in article 111 and those proposed in article 111-A go 
against the very grain of our Objectives Resolution as well as the Fundamental 
Rights, because in the matter of justice, in the matter of securing equality 
of treatment we cannot differentiate between a person who has been convicted 
to death and a person who has been fined or given one day's imprisonment-as we 
cannot distinguish between a person who is rich enough and can afford to have 
a dispute with regard to Rs. 20,000 and a person who is very poor and has a 
dispute only for Rs. 200. There is absolutely no difference in principle 
between the two. I must submit that this is not be right way of looking at 
things. In so far as equality of treatment and opportunities is concerned, our 
law must be based upon an ideal in which every person has got an equal right 
to go before the law and have his case decided. As I submitted, this is not 
logical and not theoretically right.
The proviso with regard to (c) is a thing which should not have been put in 
here. In regard to article 111 on the civil side the only requirement is that 
the High Court has to certify that the case is a fit one for appeal to the 
Supreme Court. But in regard to the criminal side these 
restrictions-unnecessary restrictions in my opinion-have been placed in regard 
to part (c) which say that the Supreme Court shall make certain rules and the 
High Court shall attach certain conditions. On the civil side there are no 
such restrictions and it passes my understanding why there should be these 
restrictions on the criminal side. When the High Court itself certifies that 
the case is a fit case for appeal, it is an absolute case for appeal. Who are 
we do say anything further? Can we not trust our own High Court, instead of 
restricting it by certain rules made by the Supreme Court and certain 
conditions attached by the High Court itself? It is not a question of giving 
the right to the private citizen. I can understand the logic of those who say 
that a private person as such should not be given the right to go to the 
Supreme Court. I can understand that the High Court, so far as provincial 
autonomy is concerned, must be the last word in regard to the liberties as 
well as the properties of a citizen. And if a person wants to go to the 
Supreme Court, it must be in the fewest of cases. I can understand that ideal. 
All the same, when in regard to civil appeals we are giving certain rights it 
is but natural that in regard to criminal side also you must give equal 
rights, if not more. After all we are not interested in seeing that provision 
is made for a large number of appeals, but in seeing that justice is done and 
justice is rightly administered.
I have one word to say and that is in regard to the powers of the Supreme 
Court. As we have seen, article 109, 110, 111, 111-A and 112 are the five 
articles under which the machinery is provided by which appeals can go to the 
Supreme Court. We have seen under article 25 of the

 


Constitution that every citizen has been guaranteed Fundamental Rights and the 
Supreme Court has been made the custodian of those rights. But I do not find 
any provision in our Constitution which lays down in what manner and under 
what method the Supreme Court shall exercise those powers and secure those 
rights to the citizens. Much has been said about article 112 and I will not 
dilate on it because we have already passed it. All the same I must submit one 
aspect of the case and that too very humbly and in my own way. If the Supreme 
Court has jurisdiction and if people can go to it and their rights are to be 
secured through it we have to arm the Supreme Court with full powers. I am not 
talking of powers to the citizen but of giving powers to the Supreme Court 
itself so that it may do justice. In article 118 we have stated that the 
Supreme Court shall be able to pass orders necessary for doing complete 
justice. But all the same I know that in regard to procedural matters even now 
the Supreme Court is not really supreme. It is true that the Supreme Court has 
been given jurisdiction over some cases where the supreme penalty of law is 
provided. But in many cases the procedure is so defective that a person 
sentenced to transportation for life e.g., by conviction in High Court when 
appeal against acquittal has been accepted, has not got any right of appeal.
If you refer to article 15 which we have already passed you will see that so 
far as the question of procedure is concerned it is still within the purview 
of the Legislature to make this or that procedure and the Supreme Court has no 
hand whatsoever in checking that procedure. Unless and until we make it clear 
that so far as the ultimate destiny of a person is concerned, so far as the 
ultimate arbitrament of the rights of a citizen is concerned the Supreme Court 
has got powers even over the Legislature we will not secure the rights to the 
citizen. So far as the liberty of a citizen is concerned it should be secured 
even against the Legislature.
I have been given notice of amendments to article 109-A, 113-A and 114-A also 
and they must also be considered in this connection because ultimately on the 
powers that we give to the Supreme Court depend the rights of the people. When 
the Privy Council has so far been enjoying these powers under section 112 
under the principles of natural justice, the same powers under section 112 
under the principles of natural justice, the same powers may be given to our 
Supreme Court in regard to natural justice so that it can do complete justice, 
not according to a particular law or a particular provision or a particular 
regulation but according to those principles which are known, which are 
established and which are fundamental in their importance. We will be securing 
our full rights only if the House agrees to see that the powers of the Supreme 
Court are enlarged to the fullest possible extent. So far as the present 
amendment goes I have nothing more to submit except to say that I am very glad 
that the efforts of all of us have succeeded in producing a compromise 
acceptable to all.
Prof. Shibban Lal Saksena : (United Provisions : General) : Mr. President, the 
amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar really makes criminal appeals to be on a par 
with civil appeals. I argues the other day that every man who is sentenced to 
death should have the right to have his case reviewed by the Supreme Court 
before the sentence is carried out. I remember the difficulties of the poor 
men under sentence of death. I have lived in cells with condemned men and I 
know their feelings. Hardly one among a score of such people could afford to 
take their appeal to the Privy Council. It is stated here that if the High 
Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court, 
the Supreme Court shall have power to hear it. It will not go to the Supreme 
Court automatically. I feel that a man who is condemned to death but who may 
not have the means to file an appeal or to get the necessary certificate 
should also have his appeal heard by the Supreme Court

 


as of right. Nobody should be hanged unless his case is reviewed by the 
Supreme Court. According to the present amendment of Dr. Ambedkar, only about 
100 out of 1000 murder appeals, i.e. about 10 per cent. will have the right to 
be heard by the Supreme Court if all the accused are able to bear the expenses 
thereof. so the richest men alone will get the right of appeal to the Supreme 
Court and poor men will be hanged without any hearing by the Supreme Court. 
Poor men cannot thus get justice even after this amendment is passed. I 
therefore think that thought the amendment is a compromise, the poor condemned 
prisoners will not get justice even under it.
The second part of the amendment provides : "Parliament may by law confer 
on the Supreme Court any further powers," I hope the working of this 
article will soon convince the Parliament that everybody who is under sentence 
of death should have a right to go to the Supreme Court in appeal 
automatically without any expense. Unless the Supreme Court has finally 
rejected his appeal, he should not be hanged. I have nothing more to say on 
this question.
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal : General) : Sir, at long last we now 
see the protest of termination of the very long-drawn debate that has gone on 
the question of investing the Supreme Court with powers of appeal in criminal 
matters. You were pleased to point out that the matter had been debated at 
sufficient length and that no further time should be spent in repetition of 
the arguments already advanced. I will keep that observation in view in the 
few remarks that I propose to make in connection with the amendment which has 
been moved by Dr. Ambedkar.
The House will realise that a considerable section of it is greatly exercised 
over the question as to whether or not the right of appeal in criminal cases 
should be embodied in the Constitution itself. There are two clear-cut sets of 
differences of opinion with regard to this. It has been held by one section 
that this right need not be conferred by the Constitution itself, but that 
Parliament should be left in future to legislate and confer such powers as it 
may think necessary in criminal matters. But Members like us are firmly of the 
view that, whereas provision was being made in the Constitution itself for 
appeals in civil matters, there was absolutely no justification for not 
embodying the same right of appeal in criminal matters. We feel that we should 
not give the country the impression that we allow to property more sanctity 
than to human life.
Now, after all these discussions, I think what has been crystallised it to be 
found in the amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar. The main demand of a 
considerable section of the House was that in cases involving capital 
punishment there should be a right of appeal provided in the Constitution 
itself. I firmly held that view, but the objection was that there would be 
such a plethora of criminal cases involving death sentences that a very large 
number of judges would have to be appointed to decide them. I particularly 
drew attention to two categories of cases in which death sentence was imposed; 
a person is

 


[Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra]

 


acquitted by the Sessions Court of a charge of murder, the Government prefers 
an appeal against the acquittal and the High Court reverses the judgment of 
the Lower Court and sentences the man of death. Such a man should have the 
right of appeal, where the judgment of the High Court reversing the judgment 
of the lower court may be contested.
I am very glad that in the amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar to this article 
this has been specifically provided. I would particularly ask my friends to 
scan the expressions used in this connection which if properly understood will 
eliminate all chances of further debate on this article. New article 111-A 
proposed, says :
"(1) The Supreme Court shall have power to entertain and hear appeals 
from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a 
Supreme Court in the territory of India-
(a) if the High Court has on appeal

 


reversed the order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him do 
death...."
"That covers that category of cases on which we laid great stress. Clause 
(1) (b) covers another class of cases where the High Court has got inherent 
power to withdraw to its own file and try any case pending in Lower Court.
This is inherent in the High Court; the High Court, as a court of record, has 
got this power. In such a trial, if the accused is sentenced to death, that 
virtually becomes the first sentence and rightly therefore appeal has been 
provided for such a contingency. The third paragraph deals with criminal 
matters provided that the cases which come up are amenable to the rules made 
by the Supreme Court or by the High Court. If these rules are complied with, 
then these will be fit cases for intervention by or for appeal to the Supreme 
Court. Now, this generally disposes of the matters which require to be 
embodied. Again, clause (2) provides for additional powers to the Supreme 
Court, that is to say, the future Parliament of this country may by law confer 
upon the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals from 
any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High 
Court, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such 
law. This is expected to cover cases for instance, of revisional jurisdiction 
just as is exercised by the High Courts now. I therefore am inclined to think 
that this is a comprehensive amendment, and I am satisfied that this brings 
about a compromise between the opposing views, and the legal profession to 
which I have the honour to belong will be grateful to Dr. Ambedkar for his 
spirit of accommodation shown in this respect. I think, Sir, that the form in 
which this amendment has ultimately emerged meets the requirements of our case 
and deserves the fullest support of this House.
Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (United Provinces : General) : Mr. President, Sir, 
as I said the other day, in view of the provisions viz. articles 110 and 112 
already passed by the House, I do not see the necessity for further provisions 
for appeals from the High Court to the Supreme Court. Sir, much has been said 
about the life and liberty of the person. I think there is a misunderstanding 
with regard to the procedure in criminal cases as against the procedure in 
civil cases. In a criminal case the serious cases come first before the 
committing Magistrate. The committing Magistrate takes evidence : the defence 
can take the statements of the witnesses in the Police diaries and can get the 
witnesses confronted with the statements before the Police. That is one stage 
in which the prosecuting witnesses are cross-examined, their veracity tested, 
their bona fides questioned, and there is a good chance for the defence to 
plead that the case is a bogus case, without any foundation, is based on 
something which is not truth and there being no prima facie case, plead for 
discharge. And then, Sir, from the committing Magistrate the case goes to the 
Sessions Judge. Again the defence has got the right to cross-examine

 


witnesses. The defence can again call for the witnesses' statement made before 
the Police and also the statements made before the committing Magistrate, and 
then confront the prosecuting witnesses with those statements and produce 
defence. The fullest opportunity is given to the defence to place its case. 
The trial is by jury, or with the aid of assessors.
Mr. President : The honourable Member's argument comes to this that there 
should be no appeal. As there is no amendment that there should be no appeal, 
I do not think this argument will help the House at all.
Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : My submission is that I do not support subclause
(a) and (b), though I support sub-clause(c) and clause (2) of the amendment. 
What I beg to submit is that there is enough chance, enough opportunity, for 
the accused to cross-examine and to test the evidence and then to put the 
whole case before the Session Court, and after the Sessions Court, and after 
the Sessions Court, he has

 


got the right of appeal to the High Court. Sub clause (a) says that if the 
High Court has on appeal reversed the order of acquittal of an accused, the 
accused should have at least one right of appeal. My submission is that it is 
not the accused alone who is the aggrieved party. In the case of a child 
murdered in the street, the mother of the child is also an aggrieved party. If 
the accused has a right of appeal on conviction, the mother of the child 
murdered in the street has equal right to go before the Court and say, 
"the man has murdered my child. I have a grievance against the follow. 
The stability of the State demands, the cause of prevention of crime demands 
that the man must be hanged." It is wrong to say that the accused alone 
is an aggrieved party and as such on conviction must have the right of appeal. 
With equal force, with equal reason it can be pleaded that the aggrieved party 
is the women whose child has been murdered and as such she has got as much 
right to go to the superior court and say that the accused must be changed.
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : That right is exercised by the High Court when 
there is an acquittal.
Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : The right of the deceased's mother to approach 
the State for appeal is equally sound as the right of appeal of the accused to 
the High Court against his conviction. So it is not right to hold that the 
accused must have at least one right of appeal on conviction, and if convicted 
for the first time for murder, under sub-clause (a) he must have the right of 
appeal to the Supreme Court. I see no soundness in this argument. Another 
thing I would submit and that is this : There is a lot of talk about the life 
and liberty of the person. When the question of the Parliament conferring 
jurisdiction on the Supreme Court was discussed, Mr. Lari said, 
"Parliament is a question of the party; it is a question of the Cabinet 
and it is a question of the Prime Minister." I beg to submit that it does 
not look very nice to talk of finer things in a country where women are raped 
on the road or a child is murdered for a two rupee worth necklace, or a mochi 
is killed in the street of a city because he refuses to accept six pies 
instead of his demand of one anna or murder is usual in a quarrel over water 
in the field. You have to take notice of facts as they are. After all justice 
is related to conditions of life. Justice is only the will of the people, and 
the will of the people is represented by the Parliament. I beg again to submit 
that the people who are too wise and the people who are actually too foolish 
would never make a stable society. It is the people who talk of these finer 
things who never care for the stability of the society, for the stability of 
the State. Take for instance the case of Austria. There are too many 
scientists; there have been too many lawyers, too many philosophers, too many 
men of letters, men of genius and they will all differ and would never agree. 
The net result was that Australia was one country in the whole history of 
human

 


organization which never got a stabilised State, which never got peace and 
order, despite the fact that some of the persons born in Australia were the 
greatest men in the world, in the field of science, in the field of 
philosophy; and there is the case of the other people who are too foolish to 
understand the urgency of the situation.
Mr. President : I am afraid the honourable Member is going much beyond his 
point.
Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : So my submission is that the question of 
justice, the question of personal liberty, the question of life is a question 
related to facts, related to conditions and you cannot run away from the 
conditions as they prevail in the development of society.
As regards clause (b) in most of the cases is withdrawn from the subordinate 
court on the application of the accused. And in rare instances, it is 
withdrawn at the instance of the prosecution. It is always pleaded that there 
is a reasonable apprehension that justice would not be done in the case at the 
place where the case

 


is being tried. The case is withdrawn from the subordinate court to the High 
Court; it is withdrawn with the condition prevailing in that area or the 
conditions in the court are such that there is reasonable apprehension that 
justice would not be done there. So, Sir, for the better condition and the 
sense of confidence, the High Court takes up the case. I say that if the 
reason underlying is to create a sense of security, a sense of confidence and 
the High Court judge looks into every aspect of the question, discusses the 
fact-the evidence has already been discussed, crossexamined and tested I-do 
not see any reason that there is any cause to reopen the case again before the 
Supreme Court. For, after all, what would the Supreme Court do? The Supreme 
Court would discuss the abstract questions of justice. As I already said, life 
is too much a living thing and differs from the abstract principle and justice 
need not only be done to the accused, but justice must needs be done to the 
aggrieved party, to the State, because the State wants stability, the 
aggrieved party wants revenge and society wants the prevention of crime. All 
these factors are important and have to be considered and taking all these 
factors in conjunction with the state of society such as is in this country, I 
beg to submit that we need not go any further than the High Court and the High 
Court should be the final forum in criminal cases.
I would support sub-clause (c) and if in any case it is so important, there 
are any legal points and from the point of view of justice it covers so many 
other questions, so many other cases or it is a general question of law that 
there should be uniformity on the principle of law or interpretation thereof, 
I would submit that sub-clause (c) of the amendment has a case, and may be 
supported and so also clause (2). I am fortified by a provision in the 
American Constitution with regard to the Supreme Court. The provision runs :
"Sub-section (2) of article 3.-In all cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers and consuls and those in which a State shall be a party, the 
Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before 
mentioned, the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction both as to law 
and fact with such exception under such application as the courts shall 
make."
Sir. in the American Constitution, it is said that the judiciary is supreme 
and it dominates, as against the English Constitution where the Parliament is 
supreme or against the present Indian Constitution where the executive 
dominate. So if in America where the judiciary dominates, there is a provision 
that the power of the Supreme Court would be conditioned or subject

 


to the law of Parliament, I see reason why we should go further than the 
American Constitution. As to what sort of appellate jurisdiction exists in 
America at present, I beg to read from a book on American Constitution by 
Prof. Zink :
"At different periods in the history of the United States the exact 
extent of appellate jurisdiction has varied, but there has been a general 
trend in the direction of cutting it down. When W.H. Taft become Chief 
Justice, he found that the Supreme Court was distinctly behind in its docket 
and devised means for a more prompt disposal of its work. Acting on such 
recommendations Congress further limited the cases that could be appealed to 
the court as a matter of right, much to the consequence ought to be permitted 
a hearing in the highest court of the land. At present only two varieties of 
cases may be carried as a matter of right beyond the highest state court or 
the circuit court of appeales in the federal system (1) where it is asserted 
that a right or provision of the national Constitution, treaties, or statutes 
has been denied or ignored, and (2) where a state law or a provision of a 
State constitution is alleged to conflict with the national Constitution, 
treaties made under the authority thereof, or laws passed in pursuance 
thereof."
This is the position of the American Supreme Court. As I submitted before,

 


it is accepted that in the American Constitution the judiciary is supreme. 
Where the judiciary is supreme, the state of affairs are as I quoted from the 
book. So, Sir, in our country where conditions prevail which require speedy 
justice and prevention of crime, I do not see any reason for the power being 
given to the appellate court as in sub-clauses (a) and (b); I would, of 
course, gladly support the provision in sub-clause (c) and the provision in 
clause (2).
Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar (Madras : General) : Sir, amongst the chorus of 
praise which this amendment has received from all sections of the House, I am 
extremely reluctant to make any observations which may sound a note of 
dissent. It must be taken on the whole that the speeches indicate that the 
amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar has the general support of the House, but 
at the same time I feel it my duty to refer to one or two points as it may 
serve to indicate what exactly is the scope of this article 111-A.

 


The latter part of it, the proviso, is a reproduction of section 411-A of the 
Criminal Procedure Code relating to appeal from the sentences of the High 
Court. Under this clause, an appeal shall lie subject to such rules as may 
from time to time be made by the Supreme Court and to such conditions as the 
High Court may establish or require. Under clause (c) it is open to the 
Supreme Court to lay down any restrictions, any conditions as to the right of 
appeal. Similarly, the High Court may also lay down any conditions as it 
choose in regard to the right of appeal. I feel some difficulty, Sir, in 
finding how this clause, the Supreme Court has an unfettered discretion to 
grant special leave in any criminal case. The terms of article 112 are in no 
way restricted or conditioned by any such clauses. Supposing for example, in 
the exercise of its power, the Supreme Court lays down certain conditions, and 
certain restrictions for the exercise of the power of certification by the 
High Court, is it intended so far as the High Court is concerned, it will be 
subject to such conditions as may be laid down by the Supreme Court? Though 
the conditions themselves will be laid down by the Supreme Court, it is the 
High Court that is invested with the power to grant a certificate. We will 
take it that the Supreme Court lays down a rule that a High Court can certify 
only cases where there is a particular kind of miscarriage of justice, 
misdirection to the jury or admission of inadmissible evidence or some other 
thing. Are we to take it that in the exercise of its jurisdiction under 
article 112. the Supreme Court is not fettered by these rules which are laid 
down for the benefit of the High Court under clause (c)? That is a point on 
which I have no doubt Dr. Ambedkar will enlighten the House : that is, 
sub-clause (c) taken along with article 112 of the Constitution. If the 
distinction is between certification by the High Court and grant to leave by 
the Supreme Court, I should think it is meaningless. It is inconceivable that 
the Supreme Court should say that so far as the High Court is concerned, it 
may not certify unless certain conditions are satisfied, but so far as the 
Supreme Court is concerned, it continues to have an unfettered discretion 
under article 112. That is the point on which I feel some difficulty.
Then, again, with regard to sub-clause (a) and (b), the position is this. 
Sub-Clause (a) says : "if the High Court has on appeal reversed the order 
of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death;". That 
clause will apply to a case where a Full Bench of the High Court has reversed 
the judgment of the Session Court in a jury trial. An exactly similar case 
arose recently in Madras wherein a Full Bench of the Madras High Court refused 
to interfere, and the Privy Council reversed the decision, and the case came 
back to the High Court and ultimately, the party was acquitted. That is a case 
where conceivably there has already been an appeal provided within the 
precincts of the High Court. So far as sub-clause (b) is concerned, that is a 
case which

 


the High Court has withdrawn for trial before itself from any court 
subordinate to itself. So far as cases covered by clause (b) are concerned, an 
appeal will lie directly to the Supreme Court from a decision of a single 
judge, whereas in the other case, presumably, an appeal will have to be tried 
in the High Court before an appeal is launched in the Supreme Court.
These are some of the consideration which have included me in leaning more in 
favour of, and supporting the amendment which was tabled by Dr. Ambedkar 
yesterday. It is not that I am hard upon the criminals or that I do not 
sympathise with the lot of people who may be convicted for murder. Whereas all 
these considerations can be dealt with in a general revision of criminal law 
by Parliament they cannot be adequately dealt with in a single article of the 
Constitution. That is the only reason for which I contended some time ago in 
connection with the discussion under another article that the matter may 
conceivably be taken by Parliament. Anyhow, I do not want to sound a note of 
dissent from what is conceived to be in the larger interests of the criminals 
of this country. We have also no data exactly as to in how many cases the High 
Court has interfered with cases of acquittal by the court of first instance. 
These are the considerations which could be legitimately taken into account in 
Parliament legislating; anyhow, I wanted to place these observations before 
the House for what they are worth.
Shri Raj Bahadur (United State of Matsya) : Mr. President, I am afraid I may 
perhaps surprise and disappoint some of my Friends by giving expression to 
certain doubts and misgivings, about the desirability and wisdom of 
incorporating this provision in our Constitution at the present juncture and 
in the present state of our society.
I know that there is ample justification for the view what an accused person 
must be given the fullest opportunity for defence in a court of law. His right 
of appeal must not be impaired or restricted in any shape or form. I also 
recognise the soundness of the healthy principle that the innocence of an 
accused person must be taken for granted as a presumption unless it is 
rebutted by solid evidence. Nevertheless, there is another side of the case 
also. Viewed from the side of the complaint, from the side of the family which 
has been deprived of one of its near and dear one by the foul hand of a 
murderer, is it not simply shocking that under the grab of an appeal, an 
accused person is provided with an opportunity to postpone or procrastinate 
the hand of justice? It is very well known what the feeling of the common man 
in the country is, about the delay in the trial of the Gandhi murder case. 
Without offering any

 


remarks on the merits of the case which is still sub-judice, I am simply 
voicing the feeling of the man in the street when I say that in a case where 
the murder took place in broad day light, in the presence of hundreds of 
persons, the trial has been hanging fire for over an year. We have got to see 
that justice is not only done, but it appears also to be done, and done 
speedily.
I may submit that the object of criminal justice is three-fold it is punitive, 
preventive, and reformative. I submit that so far as the right of appeal is 
concerned there is a view-point that this right of appeal also constitutes the 
right to delay justice. It is a sort of thing which is very much like the 
right of "filibustering" enjoyed by the Parliamentarians. I may 
point out that while this right of appeal may not detract ultimately from the 
punitive aspect of justice but it may, in a certain measure, detract from its 
preventive and aspect of justice but it may, in a certain measure, detract 
from its preventive and reformative purposes. It is therefore only meet and 
proper that this aspect of the case must not be lost sight of by us. We know 
that the system of administration of justice that we have inherited was 
foisted on the country by the British, and although much can be said in favour 
or against it, it cannot be denied that it suffers

 


essentially from three fundamental defects, namely, it is very expensive, it 
involves a lot of delay and at the same time it gives scope for perjury and 
fabrication of evidence. So the basic question, and the fundamental issue that 
is before us is not merely giving the right of appeal to a person convicted 
and sentenced to death here or there before the Supreme Court, but that is 
before us is not merely giving the right of appeal to a person convicted and 
sentenced to death here or there before the Supreme Court, but that at some 
stage-whether the stage has come now or will come in the future is itself 
another debatable question-we have to take in hand the question and grapple 
with the problem of the reform of our laws and the entire system of 
administration of justice. It is a crucial question. Now if we analyse the 
official amendment-as I would like to call it-we may see that clauses (a) and
(b) of the new article give a very limited scope for appeals we know that it 
is only once in a blue-moon that an order or acquittal is reversed by the High 
Court, and that it is also very rare that a High Court takes over a case and 
decides it itself. So the only right of appeal which may be granted in a 
substantial number of cases would be the one falling under the purview of 
sub-clause (c). The very application of this article would, thus, depend upon 
the rules which have to be made under the proviso attached to the said 
sub-clause. So everything depends upon the rules; but there is another point 
also. My honourable and learned Friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava happened to 
observe during the course of his speech to-day that there is justification not 
only for appeals in cases of sentences of death but in other cases also and 
that we should take that question also in hand. With all respect to the 
erudition and experience of my learned Friend Pandit Bhargava I submit that 
this is bound to involve the same problem, the problem of-to use the rather 
state phrase-"Justice delayed is Justice denied". Obviously also if 
every criminal case is allowed to go in appeal to the Supreme Court it is 
bound to result in a considerable amount of delay in the disposal of cases. 
This would not inspire much confidence in the system of administration of 
justice. Law's delays have been proverbial ever since Shakespeare wrote 
Hamlet. We have to make some such provision in our laws that at least in our 
country we find out or evolve some method by which we may eliminate those 
delays. I submit that we should also not lose sight of the fact that recently 
there has been an appreciable rise in the incidence of crime in our country. 
Everybody we have reports from provinces and we read reports of crimes in the 
newspapers. We see that there is almost a sort of crime wave in some parts of 
the country at least-we cannot lose sight of the happenings that are taking 
place on our Eastern and Western borders. We cannot lose sight of these facts 
as also of the incidents that are taking place in Calcutta and around it. We 
have to take into account the fact that there is bloodshed and turmoil in out 
neighbouring countries. Only this morning papers showed that while there were 
wars and battles raging already in the countries on our eastern borders, there 
has been bombing in a neighbouring country on our western side also. At such a 
critical juncture it is only proper that we must see that three are no 
inordinate delays in the disposal of cases and in the administration of 
justice in our country. I submit that, as the guardians of the freedom and 
liberty that we have won for the country, we must see that this is not lost in 
a chaos of crime and lawlessness. I would request that in my humble opinion 
the question of right of appeals in these cases may better be left over to the 
Parliament to deal with.
Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand (East Punjab : General) : Mr. President, Sir I have only 
a few words to say on article 111-A in the form in which it has now emerged in 
the last amendment which Dr. Ambedkar has moved this morning. This amendment, 
if I may say with respect, is substantially

 


the same which I had moved yesterday in supersession of the other amendments 
Nos. 26 and 27 of which notice had been given by me earlier. The only 
difference between my amendment and the present amendment of Dr. Ambedkar is 
that clause (b) has been added to meet a certain type of cases-very rare, 
indeed-which was not covered by my amendment, viz., when a High Court has 
withdrawn a case from a subordinate Court for trial by itself and at the 
conclusion of the trial has convicted the accused and sentenced him to death. 
I think cases of this kind will not be more than two or three in the whole of 
India in the course of a year. Still this was an omission in the amendment 
which I had moved and, I agree that the proposed clause (b) be incorporated in 
the article.
On the amended article, different viewpoints have been presented to the House 
today by honourable Members who have taken part in the debate. On the one hand 
some Members have said that the right of appeal, given by this amendment, is 
very limited and it should be enlarged so as to include all cases in which the 
High Court has on reversal of the order of acquittal passed a sentence on the 
accused person whether of transportation for life or a lesser sentence. This 
is the view which Pandit Bhargava strongly urged the other day and has also 
repeated today. With great respect, I submit that this would be enlarging the 
scope of the article to unreasonable limits. It will be admitted that it is 
not desirable to convert the Supreme Court into a Court of criminal appeal for 
all cases. If that were so, then having regard to the volume of criminal 
litigation in this country, even in cases of murder or other serious crimes, 
the Supreme Court will be flooded with criminal appeals. It has been said that 
expense and enlargement of personnel of the Supreme Court should be not stand 
in the way of giving relief to persons convicted in criminal matters, as life 
and liberty of human beings is more important than property, with regard to 
which Civil appeals have been provided for in article 111. But that is hardly 
a correct view of the case. Life and liberty is certainly more important than 
property but an unrestricted right of appeal either in civil or criminal 
matters will no incalculable harm to society. Take an ordinary murder case. In 
the Presidency towns the trial is held in the High Court sessions assisted by 
a jury, and the mofussil and in provinces where the High Court has not 
original jurisdiction, the accused is tried by a Sessions Judge with the aid 
of a jury or assessors. In most cases the decision turns on a pure question of 
fact, and the Session Judge after hearing the evidence has convicted the 
accused and passed a sentence which may be one of death. An appeal is allowed 
to the High Court as of right; even if three is no appeal by the accused the 
sentence of death passed by the Sessions Judge has to be confirmed by the High 
Court. In either case the High Court goes through the whole evidence over 
again and if it finds that the man has been rightly convicted on the evidence, 
there are concurrent findings on facts. In such a case it will be undesirable 
to allow a second appeal to the SupremeCourt. It is not permitted in any 
country in the world. After all, there must be some limit to appeals and 
further appeals. It would be wrong in cases where the High Court has agreed 
with the trial court on questions of fact even if the case is of murder, and 
the sentence is of death, to allow a further appeal as of right to the Supreme 
Court. The number of such cases in India including the States under the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court will certainly exceed one thousand a year. 
And it would be dangerous to allow unrestricted appeals in every such case. It 
will be remembered that in civil cases the Privy Council has made it a rule of 
practice not to disturb concurrent findings on facts. If the same rule is 
applied to criminal cases, in most cases it will be sheer waste of time and 
money to allow further appeals. The Supreme Court is not likely to differ on 
pure questions of fact,

 


where on an examination of the evidence, both the trial court and the High 
Court have concurred. Appeals should be allowed in exceptional cases only and 
that is what the amendment of Dr. Ambedkar contemplates. Sub-clause (a) 
confers an important right and remedies an existing lacuna in the law. This 
relates to cases where a man acquitted by the Sessions Court in the mofussil 
or at the High Court Sessions in the Presidency towns is, on appeal against 
such acquittal by the provincial Government, convicted by the Appellate Bench. 
Here in the first place there is the initial presumption of law that every 
person is presumed to be innocent until he is proved to be guilty. This 
presumption is further strengthened by the fact that the trial judge has found 
him innocent. If against this double presumption, the Appellate Bench finds 
him guilty and sentences him to death, it is certainly a matter which requires 
further investigation and the amendment seeks to give a right of appeal to the 
Supreme Court in such cases. It really is analogous to article 111 dealing 
with appeals in civil cases where the value of property is Rs. 20,000 or more 
and the judgment of the Appellate Court is one of reversal of that of the 
trial court.
Sub-clause (b) relates as I have said already, to a more limited class of 
cases and really is a corollary to sub-clause (a).
With regard to sub-clause (c) certain apprehensions have been expressed by 
honourable Members. Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar thinks that it will come in 
conflict with article 112, which gives the Supreme Court power to grant 
special leave to appeal in criminal cases. With regard respect I fail to see 
any conflict between the two. The power of the Supreme Court to grant special 
leave to appeal is of a peculiar nature. This is at present done in exercise 
of the Royal prerogative which His Majesty the King exercises through the 
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. In the Constitution, the Supreme 
Court will be invested with the same power by article 112. As I submitted the 
other day in regard to article 112, it is very much restricted in its scope. 
The Supreme Court has discretion, which it may exercise in any way it likes 
and in any kind of case civil, criminal or any other proceeding decided by any 
court subordinate to it. At present the Privy Council grants leave only in 
rare cases, where it is of opinion that some principles of natural justice 
have been departed from,--a phrase which is vague and undefined. It does not 
cover substantial and serious errors of law or even miscarriage of justice. It 
is, therefore necessary to provide appeals in such cases in which the High 
Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court. 
This is sought to be done in clause (c) and its proviso which have been taken 
verbatim from sub-section (iv) of section -A, which was introduced in the 
Criminal Procedure Code by Act XXVI of 1943. That sub-section however, is 
limited to cases in which a person has been tried in the original side of a 
Presidency High Court and has been convicted. Before 1943 there was no right 
of appeal in such cases, unless the Advocate-General certified that it was a 
fit case for further appeal; and the matter ended there. It was felt in many 
cases that thought there had been gross miscarriage of justice, yet there was 
not even one appeal. In 1943 by the amending Actan appeal was allowed to a 
convicted person on questions of law, or even on questions of fact it the 
trial judge certified that the case was a fit one for appeal or it the 
Appellate Bench found that the case was one requiring further consideration 
even on facts.
Then there is the further provision in sub-section (iv) that it the Appellate 
Bench is satisfied that the case is a fit one for further appeal to the Privy 
Council, it may give the certificate and the appeal will lie to the Privy 
Council. This provision, however, is limited only to those cases in which the 
trial has been on the original side of the High Court. Take for instance the 
province of Madras. If the crime has been

 


committed within the limits of the presidency town of Madras then the section 
411-A applies. But if the crime is committed, say, ten miles beyond or in 
another place like Trichinopoly or Tanjore, then there is no right of appeal 
at all to the Appellate Bench nor can the case go to the Privy Council even on 
certificate by the High Court. What clause (c) of the proposed article 111-A 
seeks to do is to extend the same provision and the same privilege to persons 
outside the Presidency 'owns, that is to say, to the mofussil, in the there 
Presidencies of Bengal, Bombay and Madras, as well as to other provinces. I 
submit that is a provision to which no reasonable objection can be taken.
My learned Friend Mr. Raj Bahadur thinks that this article will open the 
flood-gates of litigation and that every case, regardless of the nature of the 
crime or of the sentence passed, would be open to appeal to the Supreme Court. 
With great respect I submit that that is not so. It is only in a very limited 
class of cases that the High Court is likely to certify that the case is a fit 
one for appeal. Judges who have themselves decided a particular case are not 
likely to grant a certificate lightly. They will do in so very very rare cases 
only. So far as I am aware, after 1943 when section 411-A was enacted, there 
have not been more than three or four cases in which appeals have gone to the 
Privy Council. I do not think, that there will be more than eight or ten such 
cases throughout the year from the whole country. It will only be in a few 
cases, in which the question involved is of such great and general importance 
that the High Court will ask the Supreme Court to pronounce an authoritative 
judgment upon it. I submit, that these provisions are very very salutary and 
they should be incorporated in the Constitutions.
I have only one word to say as regards what my Friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
said about contempt of court cases. He thought an appeal should be allowed in 
those cases as of right. Much as one would like cases in which a person has 
been convicted for contempt of court to be further reviewed, I am afraid, to 
allow an appeal to the Supreme Court in every such cases would be going too 
far. If there is an important question involved in a case, resort can be had 
to sub-clause (c) of article 111-A.

 


The provisions of the article in the form in which it has been moved by Dr. 
Ambedkar in amendment No. 198 meet all the requirements of the case and I 
would ask the honourable Members to accept it. The apprehensions of those who 
think that it will encourage crime, I submit, are wholly groundless. Equally 
groundless are the apprehensions of those who think that it is unduly limited 
in scope. It is a well- balanced and salutary provision which should find a 
place in the Constitution.
Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras: General): Sir, the question may now be 
put.
Mr. President: The question is:
"That the question be now put."
The motion was adopted.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Mr. President, Sir, I rise to make just a 
few observations in order to give the House the correct idea of what is 
proposed to be done by the introduction of this new article 111-A. The first 
thing which I should make clear is that it is not the intention of article 
111-A to confer general criminal appellate jurisdiction upon the Supreme 
Court. The jurisdiction sought to be conferred is of a very limited character.
In showing the necessary why it is desirable in my judgment to confer 
appellate criminal jurisdiction upon the Supreme Court as specified the 
sub-clause of article 111-A. I proposed to separate sub-clause (a) and (b) 
from sub-clause (c) because they stand on a different footing. As the House 
knows, (a) and (b) confine the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
only to those cases where there has been a sentence of death: in no other case 
the Supreme Court is to have criminal appellate jurisdiction. That is the 
first point that has to be borne in mind.
I shall state briefly why it is necessary to confer upon the Supreme Court 
this

 


limited appellate jurisdiction in cases where has been a sentence of death 
passed upon an accused person. The House should note that so far as our 
criminal jurisprudence, as it is enshrined in the Criminal Procedure Code, is 
concerned, there is one general principle which has been accepted without 
question and that principle is this that where a man has been condemned to 
death he should have at least one right of appeal, if not more.
Mr. President: May I just point out one thing? Your amendment does not cover 
the case of a person whose sentence has been enhanced to a sentence of death.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: We do not propose to give such a thing. 
That is the point. With regard to enhancement of the sentence we do not 
propose to confer criminal jurisdiction of an appellate nature on the Supreme 
Court. We do it with open eyes and I think everybody ought to know it. That is 
not the intention. It must be generally accepted that where a man has been 
condemned to death he should have at least one right of appeal. Starting with 
that premise and examining the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code it 
will be found that there are three cases where this principle is, so to say, 
violated or not carried into effect. The first case in the case where, for 
instance, the District Judge acting as a Sessions Judge acquits an accused, 
person; the Government which has been invested with a right of appeal against 
the acquittal appeals to the High Court , and the High Court in its appellate 
jurisdiction condemns the man to death. In a case like this no appeal is 
provided. That is one exception to the premise.
The second case is the case of the Sessions Judge in the High Courts of 
Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, where sitting in a sessions court he acquits a 
criminal; then the Government takes an appeal to the High Court on its 
appellate side and the appellate side on hearing the appeal condemns the man 
to death. There again there is no appeal. Then there is the third case, which 
is worse, namely, that under section 526 of the Criminal Procedure Code a High 
Court, in exercising the powers conferred upon it by that section, withdraws a 
case to itself and passes a sentence of death. There again there is no appeal.
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: There is a right of appeal in such cases.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No. No appeal from the High Court.
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Under section 411-A of the Criminal Procedure Code.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Section 411-A applies only to the High 
Court of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. Even there it does not apply to all 
cases or to cases where such High Court have acted under section 506. Section 
411-A is confined to appeals from the judgment of High Court sitting on the 
original side, in sessions. Therefore, Sir....
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Section 526 generally refers to transfer of 
cases.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: When a case is transferred and tried by the 
High Court is no right of appeal. It has extraordinary jurisdiction. Therefore 
these are three flagrant cases where the general principle that a man who has 
been condemned to death ought to have at least one appeal is not observed. I 
think, having regard to the enlightened conscience of the modern world and of 
the Indian people, such a provision ought to be made. The object of sub-clause
(a) and (b) therefore is to provide a right of appeal to a person who has been 
acquitted in the first instance and has been condemned to death finally by the 
high Court. I do not think that on grounds of conscience or of humanity there 
would be anybody who would raise objection to the provisions contained in 
sub-clause (a) and (b).
Now I come to sub-clause (c). With regard to this the House will remember that 
it has today an operative force under the Criminal Procedure Code, section so, 
far as the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay are concerned. This 
right of appeal to the Privy Council on a certificate from the High Court that 
it is a fit case was con erred by the Legislative Assembly in the year

 


1943, and very deliberately. We have therefore before us two questions with 
regard to the provision contained in section 411 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code. There are two courses upon to this House: either to take away this 
provision altogether or to extend this provision to all the High Courts. It 
seems to me that if you take away the provisions contained in section 411 
which permit an appeal on a certificate from the High Court, you will be 
deliberately taking away an existing right which has been exercised and 
enjoyed by people, at any rate, in three different provinces. That seems to me 
an unnatural proceeding--to take away a judicial right which has already 
become, so to they, a vested right. The only alternative course therefore is 
to enlarge the provisions in such a manner that it will apple to all the High 
Court. And the course that has been adopted in my amendment is the second 
course, namely, to extend it to all the High Court. My Friends who are 
agitated that this night open the flood-gates of criminal appeals to the 
Supreme Court have, I think, forgotten two important considerations. One 
important consideration is that the power of hearing appeals which is proposed 
to be conferred on the Supreme Court under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause 
(1) of the new article may vanish any moment that the legislature abolishes 
the death penalty. There will be no such necessity left for appeals to the 
Supreme Court if the legislature, thinking of what is being said in other 
parts of the world with regard to death penalty, and taking into consideration 
the traditions of this country, abolishes the death penalty: in that case 
sub-clauses (a) and (b) would ultimately fall into desuetude and the work of 
the Supreme Court so far as criminal side is concerned will if not vanish.
With regard to sub-clause (c) it will be noticed that it has been confined in 
very rigid limits by the proviso which goes along with it, namely 'Provided 
that an appeal under sub-clause (c) of this clause shall lie subject to such 
rules as may from time to time be made by the Supreme Court and to such 
conditions as the High Court may establish or require." Therefore, the 
certificate is not going to be an open process available merely for the 
asking. It will be subject at both ends to the conditions and limitations laid 
down by the High Court and the rules made by the Supreme Court. Therefore it 
will be realised that sub-clause (c) is a very rigid provision. It is not 
flexible and not as wide as people may think.
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Modified by the proviso.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, as modified by the proviso.
Now, I come to clause (2) of my amendment. There you have got the general 
power given to Parliament to enlarge the criminal jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court beyond the three cases laid down in my amendment. There was a point of 
view that the three cases mentioned in clause (1) of my amendment ought to be 
enough and that there ought not to be a door kept open for Parliament for 
enlarging the criminal jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and that sub-clause
(a), (b) and (c) ought to be the final limit of criminal jurisdiction of the 
High Court. Well, the only answer I could give is this: It is difficult to 
imagine what circumstances may arise i future. I think it would be better to 
believe it if a man said that there would he no circumstances arising at all 
requiring Parliament to confer some kind of criminal appellate jurisdiction 
upon the Supreme Court. Supposing such a contingency did arise and if the 
provisions of clause (2) of my new article were not there, what would be the 
position? The position would be that the Constitution would have to be amended 
by the procedure we are proposing to lay down in a subsequent part of this 
Constitution. The question therefore is this: should we make it as hard as 
that, that the Parliament should also not have the power unless the 
Constitution is amended, or should we leave the position flexible by enabling 
Parliament to enact such law, leave the time, the circumstances and the

 


choice to the Parliament of the day?
The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Madras: General): May I point out that under 
article 114 Parliament will still have the power to invest the Supreme Court 
with jurisdiction.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am afraid 114 does not deal with that 
matter. I have not got the copy with me; otherwise I would have replied. It is 
only with regard to the Union List.
The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam: It deals with the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court in relation to matters contained in the Union List.
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, but supposing they want to enlarge the 
jurisdiction with regard, for instance, to the Concurrent List, List III, they 
cannot use article 114.
Now, Sir, I come to some of the observations which were made by my Friend, Mr. 
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar. His observations related mostly to sub-clause (c). 
His first question was, what is the use of having sub-clause (c) if the 
provisions of sub-clause (3) are hedged round by the provisions contained in 
the proviso which goes with it, viz., rules to be made by the Supreme Court.
