Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 45 of 1860
Citation: SCC 793 and submitted
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/179310422/

[Cites
30
, Cited by
0
]
Patna High Court
Luko Thakur @ Awadh Kishore Thakur @ Luko ... vs The State Of Bihar on 9 October, 2023
Author:
Chandra Shekhar Jha
Bench:
Chandra Shekhar Jha
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
                 CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No.257 of 2021
    Arising Out of PS. Case No.-482 Year-2019 Thana- KHAGARIA District- Khagaria
======================================================
Luko Thakur @ Awadh Kishore Thakur @ Luko Babaji, Son of Late Jaiku
Thakur, Resident of Village- Vidyarthi Tola, P.S.- Muffasil, District-
Khagaria.

                                                                 ... ... Appellant/s
                                      Versus

The State of Bihar.


                                            ... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
                          with
           CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No. 396 of 2021
    Arising Out of PS. Case No.-482 Year-2019 Thana- KHAGARIA District- Khagaria
======================================================
Wakil Mandal, S/o Vindeshwari Mandal @ Vinda Mandal, R/O Village-
Vidyarthi Tola, Police Station-Muffasil, District Khagaria.

                                                                 ... ... Appellant/S


                                      Versus

The State of Bihar.
                                          ... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :

(In CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No. 257 of 2021)
For the Appellant/s     :        Mr. Sumeet Kumar Singh, Advocate
                                 Mr. Amrendra Kumar Singh, Advocate
                                 Mr. Binod Kumar Singh, Advocate
                                 Mrs. Alka Singh, Advocate
                                 Mr. Kumar Avinash, Advocate
For the Respondent/s    :        Mr. Sujeet Kumar Singh, APP
(In CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No. 396 of 2021)
For the Appellant/s     :        Mr. Anil Kumar Choudhary, Advocate
For the Respondent/s    :        Mr. Sujeet Kumar Singh, APP
======================================================
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
                                           2/48




       CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE VIPUL M. PANCHOLI
               and
               HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHANDRA SHEKHAR JHA
       CAV JUDGMENT
       (Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHANDRA SHEKHAR JHA)

         Date : 09.10.2023

                         At the outset, it is important to mention that both

         above named appeals are disposed herewith through this

         common judgment, as same arises out of Special POCSO Case

         No. 23/2019, Net No. 23/2019, G.R. Case No. 1882/2019

         (Arising out of Sadar Khagaria, P.S. Case No. 482/2019,

         disposed by learned Exclusive Special Judge, POCSO,

         Khagaria.

                         2. Heard Mr. Sumeet Kumar Singh, assisted by Mr.

         Amrendra Kumar Singh, Mr. Binod Kumar Singh, Mrs. Alka

         Singh, Mr. Kumar Avinash for the applicants/appellants as well

         as learned APP Mr. Sujit Kumar Singh appearing for the State in

         Cr. APP (DB) No. 257 of 2021 and Mr. Anil Kumar Choudhary

         appearing for the appellants and learned APP Mr. Sujit Kumar

         Singh appearing for the State in Cr. APP (DB) No. 396 of 2021.

                         3. Both above mentioned appeals preferred under
Section 374 (2)
of the Criminal Procedure Code (in short
Cr.P.C
.) challenging the judgment of conviction dated

         11.02.2021
and order of sentence dated 18.02.2021 rendered by

         Exclusive Special Judge, POCSO, Khagaria, in Special POCSO
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
3/48
Case No. 23/2019, Net No. 23/2019, G.R. Case No. 1882/2019,

         arising out of Sadar Khagaria P.S. Case No. 482/2019 for the

         offence punishable under
Section 376-D
of the Indian Penal

         Code and
Section 6
of the POCSO Act, and, is ordered to

         undergo rigorous imprisonment for 20 (twenty) year/s and a fine

         of Rs. 10,000/- (ten thousand) only, and in default of payment of

         fine, they shall have to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a

         period of three months.
4. Keeping in view the mandate of law, the name

         and identities of victim girl is not being disclosed and she is

         being described in present judgment and order as VG who

         examined before the learned trial court as PW-2.
5.      The crux of prosecution case as springs

         through written information of informant namely, Ram Bilash

         Mandal (PW-3-B) that he happens to be the father of victim

         used to reside outside of the district for his livelihood. Prior to

         the occurrence, the informant arrived his home and continued

         residing with his son and daughter, wife of the informant was

         died prior to seven years ago. On 29.06.2019 at about 12 o'

         clock at day time, in the north direction of Bahiyar of one Ajit

         Thakur, containing grass and "Manejra" crops, brother of

         informant, namely Mahavir Kumar saw his daughter aged about
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
4/48
12 yrs, alongwith co-villager Luko Thakur (appellant/accused)

         in an objectionable condition. Thereafter, accused Luko Thakur

         succeeded in fleeing away from there and daughter of informant

         was brought to the home. On queries, she stated to her family

         members in presence of informant/PW-3 that Luko Thakur and

         Wakil Mandal (both appellants/accused) have been doing bad

         work (sexual exploitation) with her for last six months and

         whenever she objected, she was threatened to face dire

         consequences, as to kill her. When his daughter was examined,

         she was found pregnant.
6. On the basis of aforesaid written application,

         Special POCSO Case No. 23/2019, Net No. 23/2019, G.R. Case

         No. 1882/2019, arising out of Sadar Khagaria P.S. Case No.

         482/2019       was     lodged      against      appellants/accused. After

         completing investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted

         first charge-sheet bearing no. 25/19 dated 29.08.2019 against

         FIR named accused persons under
Sections 376 (g)
and
506
of

         the Indian Penal Code and also under
Section 4
/
6
of POCSO

         Act, showing appellant/accused Luko Thakur as absconder.

         Subsequently, supplementary charge sheet no. 98/19 dated

         25.10.19 against appellant/accused Luko Thakur was also

         submitted under Section 376(g) and 506 of the Indian Penal
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
5/48
Code and 4/6 of
POCSO Act
.
7. Learned A.S.J. 1st Cum Special Judge, POCSO

         Act, Khagaria, took cognizance of aforesaid case on the basis of

         materials available on records collected during investigation on

         04.09.2019 against both appellants/accused persons under
Sections 363
,
376
,
376D
and
506
of the Indian Penal Code and

         also under
Section 4
of the POCSO Act, whereas charges were

         framed against both appellants/accused on 14.10.2019 under
Sections 363
,
376
,
376D
and
506
of the Indian Penal Code and

         under
Section 4
of the POCSO Act, which they pleaded "not

         guilty" and claimed trial.
8. To establish its case before the learned trial

         court, the prosecution altogether examined total of seven

         witnesses, namely, PW-A Grand mother of VG, PW-2 is VG

         herself, PW-3 Father of VG and informant of this case, PW-4

         Ranjeet Kumar (I.O.), PW-5 Dr. Kumar Deovrat, PW-6 Dr.

         Jyotsna Kumari Sinha, PW-7 Simmi Kujur, J.M.-1st Class Cum

         Munsiff, Khagaria, who recorded statement of victim under

         Section 164 of Cr.P.C.
9.     The prosecution also exhibited following

         documents during the trial to substantiate its case which are as:-
Exhibit 1 - Signature of victim on the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
6/48
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
Exhibit 1/1- Signature of victim on the first

                                 page of Medical Report.
Exhibit 1/2 - Signature of victim on the

                                 second page of Medical Report.
Exhibit 2 - Formal F.I.R.
Exhibit 3- Endorsement over the written

                                 application.
Exhibit 4 - Age determination report of

                                 victim by the Medical Board.
Exhibit 5 - Medical report of victim.
Exhibit 6 - Statement of victim U/s 164

                                 Cr.P.C.
10. No witness was examined in defence during

         trial as well as no document was exhibited in defence. Statement

         of convicts/appellants were recorded under
Section 313
of the

         Criminal Procedure Code (
Cr.P.C
.), where they shows their

         complete innocence by denying the incriminating evidence

         appears against them during the trial.
11. Learned Trial Court, after completion of trial,

         convicted both appellants/accused under
Section 376 D
of

         Indian Penal Code and also under
Section 6
of POCSO Act.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
7/48
Appellants/accused also convicted under
Section 506
of the

         Indian Penal Code and acquitted from charge of 363 of the
Indian      Penal       Code
.       Upon       such   conviction,   both

         appellants/accused were sentenced for 20 years of rigorous

         imprisonment alongwith fine. Aggrieved thereof present appeal

         preferred by appellants/accused under Section 372(2) of Cr.P.C.
12. Hence, the present appeal;
ARGUMENT ON BEHALF OF THE LEARNED                             COUNSEL
         APPEARING FOR THE APPELLANTS/ACCUSED
13. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of

         appellants/accused, while opening his argument submitted that

         by taking note of statement/deposition of prosecutrix/victim

         (PW-2) during trial it cannot be said that she is a "sterling

         witness" on the basis of her exclusive testimony, conviction can

         be upheld or can be said that prosecution established its case

         beyond reasonable doubt. In support of his submission, it is

         pointed out that there is lot of contradictions while narrating the

         story of occurrence by victim, as it was stated in her statement

         recorded under
Section 164
of the Cr.P.C. and while she

         deposed before the learned Trial Court as PW-2. It is pointed out

         that the present FIR was lodged when victim was found in

         compromising position with appellant/accused Loku Thakur,
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
8/48
whereas, in her statement, victim stated that it was

         appellants/accused Wakil Mandal and Loku Thakur, who were

         taken her to his house and committed rape upon her, where on

         her shouting, her uncle rescued her and, thereafter, she narrated

         the occurrence to her aunty. Learned counsel further submitted

         that there are material contradictions regarding the place of

         occurrence,       whether      it     took    place      in   the    house   of

         appellant/accused         Wakil       Mandal        or   in   the    house   of

         appellant/accused Loku Thakur or in the agricultural field of

         Shatrughan Mandal or Ajay Baba. It is pointed out that the place

         of occurrence were not verified during the course of

         investigation by Investigating Officer of this case as to

         established      accusation         raised   against      both      abovenamed

         appellants/accused. While travelling over the argument, learned

         counsel submitted that date, time and month of occurrence are

         also missing and as such material contradictions surfaced during

         the trial regarding date and time of occurrence. It is pointed out

         that as per FIR, the date of occurrence is 29.06.2019, which was

         lodged with an unexplained delay of three days, wherein it has

         been stated that VG was raped during last six months by

         appellants/accused on several occasions and if this version be

         accepted, then certainly, the first occurrence of rape was
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
9/48
committed somewhere in the month of December, 2018, which

         falsified the statement of victim on face as when she was raped

         first time in the field of Shatrughan Mandal, there was

         "Manejra" Crops and said "Manejra" Crop generally grown up

         in Kharif season which grown up generally from the month of

         June to October. It is also pointed out that the commission of

         crime were seen by Mahavir Mandal, who is none but the uncle

         of victim and Babita Kumari, who is the none but own sister but

         both of them were not examined which appears fatal to the case

         of prosecution. It is further submitted that medical report as

         appears from Exhibit-5, does not shows any mark of injuries

         upon the body of victim, which further falsify the allegation. It

         is submitted that as per case of prosecution, VG was pregnant

         out of alleged rape, when the last such occurrence came into

         knowledge of informant which is the basis of FIR, but

         investigating agency, knowing the fact as VG is pregnant about

         15-20 weeks, no DNA test was conducted. It is also pointed out

         that appellants/accused were not examined in terms of
Section

         53-A
of the Criminal Procedure Code. It is also pointed out by

         learned counsel that age of victim is doubtful as PW-2 herself

         said that she is 13 years of old, whereas, the father of victim as

         PW-3 disclosed the age of victim as 12 years, whereas as per
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
10/48
medical report, victim found between the age of 14-16 years. By

         taking a margin of two years, the victim appears major where

         fact of the case suggest consensual physical relation, which

         alleged to be established by appellants/accused on several

         occasions at different places. Learned counsel also submitted

         that victim herself deposed in her cross-examination that she

         studied up to "class Vth" and in such circumstance, it was the

         duty of Investigating Agency to collect her birth certificate from

         her first attending school as to established her age in terms of
Section 94 (2)
of Juvenile Justice Act. Learned counsel

         submitted that prosecution failed to establish the victim as

         'Child' under
Section 2(1)(d)
of POCSO Act, and thus,

         conviction under the
POCSO Act
is also not sustainable under

         the eyes of law. Learned counsel further pointed out that charges

         were framed under
Section 4
of the POCSO Act, but conviction

         was made under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act, which prejudice

         and sentence the accused as minimum sentence under
Section 4
of POCSO Act is 10 years but minimum sentence under
Section

         6
of POCSO Act is 20 years.
ARGUMENT ON BEHALF OF THE LEARNED APP
         APPEARING FOR THE STATE
14.     Learned APP appearing on behalf of the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
11/48
State submitted that the victim girl (VG) is a minor girl as per

         her medical/radiological examination because her age was

         found between 14-16 years. It is submitted that victim is a girl

         of rural background and appears illiterate, whose mother died

         much prior to this occurrence and father remains outside village

         in connection of his professional engagement. She appears

         vulnerable to the society, where appellants/accused appears her

         cousin and co-villager. It is submitted that from the deposition

         of victim, it is clear that at first instance, she was raped and

         thereafter, under influence of threat, she was raped by

         appellants/accused on several occasions and out of said rape,

         she became pregnant, give birth of a male child during the trial.

         It is submitted that as occurrence took place on several

         occasions at different places, in last six months prior to the

         occurrence, which is the basis of FIR, as such, contradictions

         regarding place of occurrence, time and manner of rape are very

         natural and cannot be said as a material contradictions to

         disbelieve the version of prosecutrix/victim girl. It is further

         submitted by learned APP that submission of learned defence

         counsel qua consent of victim is not appearing convincing in

         present fact as "sexual intercourse" is proved which is a

         condition precedent to attract presumption as available under
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
12/48
Section 114-A
of Indian Evidence Act, which appears

         unrebutted during trial.
In support of submission, learned APP

         relied upon the report of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter

         of
Shivaji        Sahebrao         Bobade & Anr.          v.   State    of

         Maharashtra
reported as (1973) 2 SCC 793 and submitted

         that Hon'ble Supreme Court observed in said case that evidence

         of rural witness should not be just by same standard as of urban

         witness.
Learned APP also relied upon the report of Hon'ble

         Supreme Court in the matter of
Bharwada Bhoginbhai

         Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat
reported as AIR (1983) SC 753

         regarding      non-consideration          of    minor   discrepancies   of

         evidences.
15. Learned APP also submitted that the delay in FIR

         is very natural, as it appears explained from available set of

         facts, as father of victim remains outside village and when he

         returned to his village only after that the occurrence was

         reported to police. The learned APP also submitted that the rape

         was committed on VG on several occasions, where pregnancy is

         the result and, as such, non-finding of any visible injury is very

         natural. Unwanted pregnancy, out of rape in itself a big injury,

         physical as well as mental, which appears duly corroborated

         from medical evidence. There is no motive for false implication.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
13/48
It is also submitted that taking in totality of the present

         occurrence, it can be said that the victim's deposition appears

         trustworthy and inspire confidence as to gathered safely that she

         qualified the test of "sterling witness".
16.     We have perused the record and proceedings

         of the learned Trial Court and also paid our thoughtful

         consideration to submissions as advanced by learned counsel

         appearing on behalf of the parties.
17. No doubt this case rest upon the sole witness

         of prosecutrix/rape victim i.e., PW - 2. The core issues which

         are required to be established, while deciding present appeal are

         as:-
(i) Whether, the prosecution established
                                 Victim/VG/PW-2              as   a   "child"   within
                                 meaning of
Section 2(1) (d)
of the POCSO
                                 Act.
(ii) Whether, Victim/VG/PW-2, can be
                                 accepted as "sterling witness", inspire such
                                 level of confidence, that on sole basis of her
                                 evidence, conviction can be recorded.
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE
18. PW-1 is Leela Devi, who is the grandmother
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
14/48
of VG, she stated before the court that she came to know about

         the occurrence from the both of her grand daughters as

         appellants/accused Loku Babaji and Vakil Mandal ruined her

         chastity and was also informed that occurrence took place in

         agricultural field near to railway line. Occurrence also takes

         place in the field of one Ajit Baba.
18.1 In her cross-examination, PW-1, stated that

         the appellant/accused Vakil Mandal is her cousin, whereas, the

         house of appellant/accused Loku Thakur is at a distance of half

         kosh (equivalent to ½ Km). She has ten goats. The agricultural

         filed of appellant/accused Loku Thakur is near to Ajit. She

         denied the suggestion that the present case is falsely lodged

         against appellant/accused Loku Thakur, as he not permitted her

         she-goat in his field for grazing. She also stated that

         appellant/accused Loku Thakur is a T.V. patient and having

         childrens. It is further stated that the house of appellant/accused

         of Wakil Mandal is just near to her house and denied suggestion

         that there is partition dispute between the father of

         accused/appellant Wakil Mandal and her husband. She denied

         any pending land dispute with appellant/accused Wakil Mandal.

         It was also deposed by her that she is mother of six sons but not

         remembering the name of all his six son for the present and
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
15/48
stated that what she stated before the Court was on the

         instruction of his learned advocate. She denied suggestion that

         what she stated in examination-in-chief is not correct and also

         denied that her grand daughter is a girl of easy virtue.
19. PW-2 is VG (victim girl, name is hidden as

         per mandate of law, as to protect the identity of victim), who

         stated in her examination-in-chief that occurrence took place

         prior to one year, where appellants/accused Wakil Mandal and

         Loku Thakur committed rape upon her. The occurrence took

         place in agricultural filed, which was of his cousin having

         "Manejra"         crops.     It   is      further   stated   by   her   that

         appellant/accused Wakil Mandal also committed rape upon her

         in his house, in night. She stated that she has no mother and her

         father is staying in Delhi. It was also deposed by her that

         appellant/accused Wakil Mandal is her uncle. She deposed that

         she is living together with her grandmother and whenever she

         tried to explain the occurrence to her grandmother, she was

         threatened by appellant/accused Wakil Mandal by showing her

         pistol, whereas appellant/accused Loku Thakur usually threats

         her that if she will disclose the occurrence will hang her. It            is

         deposed by her that both appellants/accused committed rape

         upon her together and also separately. It is also deposed by her
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
16/48
that occurrence was continued for a year and when she disclosed

         the occurrence to her grandmother then occurrence came to the

         knowledge of others. It was deposed that her grandmother saw

         the occurrence at the house of appellant/accused Wakil, as on

         her alarm, they were followed by her grandmother. Occurrence

         of field was seen by her uncle when appellants/accused Wakil

         Mandal and Loku Thakur were committed rape upon her. She

         deposed that out of said rape occurrences, she became pregnant

         and delivered, a male baby, just before one month. It was further

         deposed by her that medical examination was conducted upon

         her and her statement was also recorded under
Section 164
of

         Criminal Procedure Code, where she identified her signature

         which has been exhibited as Exhibit-1. She also identified her

         signature on her medical reports, which were exhibited as

         Exhibit-1/1         and      Exhibit-1/2.           She   identified   both

         appellants/accused before the learned Trial Court.
19.1     On     cross-examination,       VG/PW-2/victim

         stated before the court that she has six brothers and sisters, out

         of which one Shobha Kumari is eldest, aged about 19 years,

         thereafter, Sunti Kumari, aged about 17 years, thereafter,

         VG/PW-2,         herself aged about 13 years, thereafter, brother

         Jitendra Kumar, aged about 10 years, thereafter, sister Babita
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
17/48
Kumari, aged about 6 years and thereafter, brother Dharmendra

         Kumar, aged about 5 years. It is also stated by her that her father

         is a labourer and working outside since last three years. It is

         further stated that present case was lodged by her father, who

         came to village prior to lodging this case. She deposed that she

         also narrated the occurrence to her father, who remains in

         village for 15 days. It was also deposed by her that she did not

         explain about occurrence to her father immediately after

         arriving village as she was threatened by appellant/accused

         Wakil Mandal, when she went outside for grazing her she-goat.

         It was also deposed that threat was given two days before, when

         the occurrence was narrated to her father in presence of her

         grandmother. She did not disclose the occurrence to her sisters

         and brothers. She also narrated the occurrence to her aunty after

         disclosing the same to her father. She also stated that the house

         of appellant/accused Wakil Mandal is about 25 steps north to her

         house, whereas the house of appellant/accused Loku Thakur is

         at distance of three "Lagga" from her house. It is stated that as

         her grandfather using "Lagga" for measurement, therefore, she

         knows about "Lagga", where one "Lagga" is equivalent to

         twelve human hands. It was also stated by her that

         appellant/accused Wakil Mandal carried her in Lap to his house,
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
18/48
but she never visited the house of appellant/accused Loku

         Babaji (Loku Thakur). It was stated that when she was carried

         from her home, at that time her grandmother, all brothers and

         sisters were present in house but they were sleeping. It was

         deposed that she also raised alarm when appellant/accused

         Wakil Mandal hold her and was carrying her forcibly. It was

         deposed that on her cry, her uncle wake up but did not made any

         attempt to save her. It was also deposed by her that she informed

         her father on telephone through phone of her uncle Mahavir

         Mandal. She failed to disclose the mobile number of her father

         and uncle. It is also deposed by her that she not narrated the

         occurrence to anyone in village including Sarpanch and

         Mukhiya. It is categorically deposed by her in para -7 of cross-

         examination that she dropped her study after Class-V. She

         deposed that her menstruation started before one and half years

         ago but she is not remembering exact month, when it was

         started. She failed to depose first date of occurrence but stated

         that same was committed in agricultural field, subsequently, she

         deposed that the first time occurrence took place in the field of

         uncle Shatrughan Mandal having "Manejra" Crops, grown up to

         height of a human waist. It was deposed that when first time

         rape was committed upon her, she went there to bring grass
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
19/48
along with her younger sister, namely, Babita Kumari, where it

         was deposed that appellant/accused Loku Thakur brought her to

         said "Manejra" field from field of her grandfather Vishundeo

         Mandal. She went for grass at 1:00 P.M. but failed to disclose

         the time when she came back to home, but, subsequently,

         deposed that she returned in day time itself before sunset with

         her sister. It was deposed by her that occurrence was not noticed

         by her sister as her eyes were closed by clothes, whereas her eye

         was opened. It was also deposed by her that when first time

         occurrence took place with her, the blood was oozes which

         spread over her clothes. She not shown this blood to her sister. It

         was deposed by her that she is not remembering that as how

         many times appellants/accused were established physical

         relations with her. It was deposed by her that she could not even

         say the exact number of occurrence, even on the basis of rough

         counting, as whether it was 10 times, 20 times or 50 times. She

         denied suggestion of learned defence counsel that as she was in

         love affairs with some unknown and out of said relation, she

         became mother and to conceal the said fact, falsely implicated

         appellants/accused. She also denied land dispute with her father

         with appellant/accused Wakil Mandal. She also denied that she

         deposed falsely before the court in her examination-in-chief.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
20/48
She denied the suggestion of any tutoring. She failed to disclose

         the age of appellant/accused Loku Thakur. It was deposed by

         her that appellant/accused Loku Thakur (Loku Babaji) is aged

         person and appellant/accused Wakil Mandal living with wife

         and childrens. She denied to lodge false case against

         appellants/accused.
20. PW-3, is Ram Bilash Mandal, who is the

         informant of this case and deposed before the learned Trial

         Court in his examination-in-chief that victim i.e. VG/PW-2 is

         his daughter, aged about 12 years. It was also deposed that the

         present case was lodged by him, where occurrence took place

         before ten (10) months. It was deposed by him that

         appellants/accused Wakil Mandal and Loku Thakur committed

         rape upon her daughter in agricultural field having "Manejra"

         crops. It was further stated that rape was also committed in

         bamboo clumps. It was deposed that out of said rape, his

         daughter became pregnant and delivered a male baby which is

         now one month old. He identified appellants/accused before the

         learned Trial Court and stated that what he deposed before the

         learned trial court as above was also stated before the police.
20.1 On cross-examination, PW-3, deposed that

         that the application which was given in police station was
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
21/48
written by police inspector (Bada Babu), where he given his

         thumb impression. It was deposed that the contents of said

         written application was neither read by him nor it was read over

         to him by anyone. It was deposed by him that he lives outside

         village and when he was told by her Bhabhi (sister-in-law) to

         lodge case, he went police station and lodged present case. He

         failed to remember the name of wife of brother's wife. It was

         deposed by him that he has six brothers, all are alive but living

         separately. He deposed that the name of husband of his Bhabhi

         is Shatrughan Mandal. He came to know about the occurrence

         after 15 days when he came to his house. It was stated that his

         wife already died and he has two sons, namely, Jitendra Kumar,

         aged about 7 years and second one is Dharmendra Kumar, aged

         about 5 years, having four daughters also and they are living

         together. It was stated by him that the name of his elder

         daughter is Shobha Kumari, who is married and living with her

         in-laws. Rest are living together. It was stated that at present his

         only daughter, namely, Babita, aged about six years is going to

         school. One daughter is married and rest two daughters are not

         going to school (including victim). He also stated that after

         lodging this case, he never met with police. He denied the

         suggestion that no such occurrence took place as he deposed in
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
22/48
his examination-in-chief. He denied the suggestion that his

         deposition is tutored.
21. PW-4, is Ranjeet Kumar, who is Investigating

         Officer of this case, who was posted in Muffasil P.S. of

         Khagaria as A.S.I. on 01.07.2019 and received the charge of

         investigation from Station In-charge, recorded re-statement of

         informant/PW-3. He also recorded the statement of Mahavir

         Kumar and visited place of occurrence which is a agricultural

         filed having "Manejra" crops located north to Vidyarthi Tola at

         a distance of one kilometer, where it was stated that

         appellant/accused Loku Thakur committed rape upon minor

         daughter of informant. During investigation of place of

         occurrence, he found 6-7 broken plants of "Manejra". He

         described the place of occurrence showing the field of Ajit

         Thakur in north, field of Sanjay Rai in South, Kamshil Rai in

         east having "Manejra" crops. It was deposed by him that

         statement of VG/victim was recorded under
Section 161
of the

         Cr.P.C. by lady inspector, Mani Kumari and sent victim to Sadar

         Hospital for her medical examination, and thereafter, her

         statement under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. was also recorded. He

         also deposed that another statement of victim was recorded

         under
Section 161
of Cr.P.C., where she stated that the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
23/48
occurrence took place at both place, in field and in house. He

         deposed to record statement of Champa Devi, wife of Kailash

         Mandal, Leela Devi, wife of Vishundeo Mandal and Seema

         Devi, wife of Mahavir Mandal and after investigation submitted

         the charge sheet no. 25/2019 dated 29.08.2019 under
Section

         376 D
of Indian Penal Code and
Section 4
/
6
of POCSO Act.

         Supplementary charge sheet was submitted through charge sheet

         no. 98/2019 dated 25.10.2019 under Section 376 G/506 of the
Indian Penal Code
and 4/6 of
POCSO Act
against

         appellant/accused Loku Thakur, son of Late Jaiku Thakur. He

         proved formal FIR and written application which were exhibited

         as Exhibit-2 and Exhibit-3 before the learned Trial Court.
21.1 On Cross-examination, it was stated by PW-4

         that he cannot said as who is author of this original written

         application, as same is neither bearing any signature nor any

         date. It was deposed by him that thumb impression of

         informant/PW-3, Ram Bilash Mandal was not obtained before

         him. It was stated by him that he found broken plant of

         "Manejra" at place of occurrence which was 6-7 in numbers but

         did not find there any foot marks or any marks of human

         activities as of sleeping and sitting postures. It was stated by

         him that the field was with grass and "Manejra" and it was
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
24/48
month of June. He also deposed to record the statement of

         Mahavir Kumar. It was stated by him that he did not examined,

         whether victim is literate or not, but deposed that she knows to

         do     her     signature.       He     also         deposed   that   whether

         appellant/accused Loku Thakur is aged persons or young

         person, healthy or ill was not investigated by him as he was not

         available during investigation. It was deposed by him that

         clothes which was wearing by victim during the occurrence was

         not collected by him. It was deposed by him that

         appellant/accused Wakil Mandal is a man of clean antecedent,

         and while he was crossed by appellant/accused Loku Thakur it

         was deposed by him that informant is not the eye-witness of the

         occurrence and also deposed that none of the prosecution

         witnesses are the eye-witness of this occurrence. It was deposed

         that appellant/accused Loku Thakur is also a man of clean

         antecedent. It was deposed by him that no investigation was

         carried on point, whether victim having illicit relation with male

         of her age group or with her brother-in-law or with any

         relatives. It was deposed by him that to ascertain paternity of

         child, no "DNA test" was conducted during investigation. He

         denied the suggestion that to save the real lover of victim,

         appellants/accused were falsely implicated.
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
25/48
22. PW-5, is Dr. Kumar Deovrat, who is a doctor,

         deposed that he had examined the Victim girl on 02.07.2019 at

         02.30 P.M. in Sadar Hospital, Khagaria and found the following

         findings:
Height- 5 feet
                          Weight- 38 Kg
                          M.I. - Till mark on neck below right ear.
                          Total number of teeth- 28
                          Radiological Examination-
X-ray of wrist AP lateral view-lower end of radius and
                         ulna not fused.
X-ray of Pelvis AP view- iliac crest not fused.
                         X-ray elbow AP and lateral view- upper end of radius
                         and ulna fused.
PAN OPG- coronal and root apex of all second molar
                         formed. Coronal portion of all third molar just appear.
                         All X-ray done at Sadar Hospital, Khagaria on
                         02.07.2019 plate number 9736 except PAN OPG.
PAN OPG done at Khagaria Digital X-ray, Khagaria on
                         dated 02.07.2019 plate number 12400.
Inference- On the basis of above radiological finding,
                         the age of victim is between fourteen to sixteen years.


                         The report of Medical Board is prepared by Dr.
                         Gulshanobar and the same is marked as Exhibit-4.


                          22.1 Cross-examination on behalf of Wakil

         Mandal:-
Ossification test is required to ascertain the age of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
26/48
victim. Signature of victim is available on medical report. All

         the members of medical board are available at Khagaria at that

         time. I cannot say that no external injury was found on the

         person of victim. It is not a fact that my report is not

         scientifically correct.
22.2 Cross-examination on behalf of Loku

         Thakur:-
On cross-examination, it is deposed by him that he

         is not a radiologist. He is not even a MBBS. He is a B.D.S.

         doctor. It is not a fact that my age determination report is

         incorrect or not based on technical and scientific evidence.
23. PW-6, is Dr. Jyotsna Kumari Sinha, who is

         also a doctor, deposed that she had examined the Victim girl on

         02.07.2019 at 01.35 P.M. in Sadar Hospital, Khagaria and found

         the following findings:
Height- 5 feet
                          Weight- 38 Kg
                          M.I. - Till mark on neck below right ear.
General Examination- Thin body built. No
                      mark of violence anywhere over the body. Axillary hair
                      absent. Breast developed. Per abdomen examination
                      reveals uterus eighteen to twenty weeks. External
                      Genitalia developed. Public hair present. Hymen old
                      ruptured. Suggestive of habitual intercourse. Vaginal swab
                      taken     and     sent    for    microscopical   examination.
                      Investigation- USG abdomen + pelvis shows single live
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
27/48
foetus of twenty weeks and one day and the report has
                      been marked as Exhibit-5.
No specific question has been asked regarding rebuttal

         of the evidence adduced on behalf of this witness. Although

         some question has been asked about the age of menstruation and

         also about the age of attraction for the opposite sex. One another

         question have been asked on behalf of Luko Thakur that it is

         difficult for attraction of girl for the age group of father and

         grandfather. Although it is admitted that on the basis of above

         report it is difficult to say that who is the father of the foetus

         developing inside womb of victim.
24. PW-7,         is Simmi Kujur, learned Judicial

         Magistrate, who recorded statement of victim under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. It was deposed by learned Magistrate in her

         examination-in-chief that she was posted on 03.07.2019 as

         Judicial Magistrate at Khagaria and recorded the statement of

         VG/PW-2 under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C. She identified her

         signature over statement before the learned trial court and on her

         identification, same was exhibited as Exhibit-6. It was deposed

         in cross-examination that while she was recording statement of

         victim, she was healthy. She failed to depose to state whether

         victim was under depression. She also failed to depose as to
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
28/48
notice any mark of injury upon VG/victim. It was deposed by

         her that at the time of recording statement, the victim was

         looking apparently minor, and therefore, she recorded her age as

         13 years. While she was crossed on behalf of appellant/accused

         Loku Thakur, deposed before the learned trial court that the

         victim girl did not disclosed any specific date and time

         regarding occurrence. Victim also not specified any place of

         occurrence. She denied suggestion that victim concealed truth

         while recording her statement. She denied any tutoring of

         victim/VG/PW-2 while recording her statement under Section

         164 of Cr.P.C.
CONCLUSION
25. To answer the first issue, as discussed above,

         whether victim girl i.e. VG is a "child" within meaning of
Section 2(1)(d)
of POCSO Act, 2012, it appears to us to take a

         guiding note from the legal report of Hon'ble Supreme Court as

         reported in the matter of
Jarnail Singh Vs. State of Haryana
,

         reported in (2013) 7 SCC 263, where the Hon'ble Supreme

         Court had occasion to deal with the procedure for determination

         of age of rape victim for the purpose of application of the

         provisions of the
POCSO Act
. The Hon'ble Supreme Court

         held, while dealing with the Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
29/48
(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 ('Rules of 2007'

         for short), framed under the provisions of
Juvenile Justice (Care

         and Protection of Children) Act, 2007
('Act of 2007' for short)

         that the aforesaid provision should be the basis for

         determination of age even of a child, who is victim of crime.

         The Supreme Court has remarked that there was hardly any

         difference so far as the issue of minority was concerned between

         a child in conflict with law and a child who is a victim of crime

         Paragraphs 22 and 23 of
the said decision
, being relevant, is

         therefore, reproduced herein below:-
"22. On the issue of determination of age of a
                                 minor, one only needs to make a reference to
                                 Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
                                 Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 (hereinafter
                                 referred to as the 2007 Rules). The aforestated
                                 2007 Rules have been framed under
Section
                                 68(1)
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
                                 Protection of Children) Act, 2000. Rule 12
                                 referred to hereinabove reads as under :
"12. Procedure to be followed in
                                 determination of age.- (1) In every case
                                 concerning a child or a juvenile in conflict with
                                 law, the court or the Board or as the case may
                                 be the Committee referred to in rule 19 of these
                                 rules shall determine the age of such juvenile or
                                 child or a juvenile in conflict with law within a
                                 period of thirty days from the date of making of
                                 the application for that purpose.
(2) The court or the Board or as the case
                                 may be the Committee shall decide the juvenility
                                 or otherwise of the juvenile or the child or as
                                 the case may be the juvenile in conflict with law,
                                 prima facie on the basis of physical appearance
                                 or documents, if available, and send him to the
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
30/48
observation home or in jail.
(3) In every case concerning a child or
                                 juvenile in conflict with law, the age
                                 determination inquiry shall be conducted by the
                                 court or the Board or, as the case may be, the
                                 Committee by seeking evidence by obtaining -
(a) (i) the matriculation or equivalent
                                 certificates, if available; and in the absence
                                 whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the
                                 school (other than a play school) first attended;
and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a
                                 corporation or a municipal authority or a
                                 panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i),
(ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above, the medical
                                 opinion will be sought from a duly constituted
                                 Medical Board, which will declare the age of the
                                 juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of the
                                 age cannot be done, the Court or the Board or,
                                 as the case may be, the Committee, for the
                                 reasons to be recorded by them, may, if
                                 considered necessary, give benefit to the child
                                 or juvenile by considering his/her age on lower
                                 side within the margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case
                                 shall, after taking into consideration such
                                 evidence as may be available, or the medical
                                 opinion, as the case may be, record a finding in
                                 respect of his age and either of the evidence
                                 specified in any of the clauses (a)(i),(ii), (iii) or
                                 in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the
                                 conclusive proof of the age as regards such
                                 child or the juvenile in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the
                                 juvenile in conflict with law is found to be below
                                 18 years on the date of offence, on the basis of
                                 any of the conclusive proof specified in sub-rule
                                 (3), the court or the Board or as the case may be
                                 the Committee shall in writing pass an order
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
31/48
stating the age and declaring the status of
                                 juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose of the
                                 Act and these rules and a copy of the order shall
                                 be given to such juvenile or the person
                                 concerned.
(5) Save and except where, further
                                 inquiry or otherwise is required, inter alia, in
                                 terms of Section 7A,
section 64
of the Act and
                                 these rules, no further inquiry shall be
                                 conducted by the court or the Board after
                                 examining and obtaining the certificate or any
                                 other documentary proof referred to in sub-rule
                                 (3) of this rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this rule
                                 shall also apply to those disposed off cases,
                                 where the status of juvenility has not been
                                 determined in accordance with the provisions
                                 contained in sub-rule(3) and the Act, requiring
                                 dispensation of the sentence under the Act for
                                 passing appropriate order in the interest of the
                                 juvenile in conflict with law."
"23. Even though Rule 12 is strictly
                                 applicable only to determine the age of a child
                                 in conflict with law, we are of the view that the
                                 aforesaid statutory provision should be the basis
                                 for determining age, even for a child who is a
                                 victim of crime. For, in our view, there is hardly
                                 any difference in so far as the issue of minority
                                 is concerned, between a child in conflict with
                                 law, and a child who is a victim of crime.
                                 Therefore, in our considered opinion, it would
                                 be just and appropriate to apply Rule 12 of the
                                 2007 Rules, to determine the age of the
                                 prosecutrix VW-PW6. The manner of
                                 determining age conclusively, has been
                                 expressed in sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 extracted
                                 above. Under the aforesaid provision, the age of
                                 a child is ascertained, by adopting the first
                                 available basis, out of a number of options
                                 postulated in Rule 12(3). If, in the scheme of
                                 options under Rule 12(3), an option is expressed
                                 in a preceding clause, it has overriding effect
                                 over an option expressed in a subsequent
                                 clause. The highest rated option available,
                                 would conclusively determine the age of a
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
32/48
minor. In the scheme of Rule 12(3),
                                 matriculation (or equivalent) certificate of the
                                 concerned child, is the highest rated option. In
                                 case, the said certificate is available, no other
                                 evidence can be relied upon. Only in the
                                 absence of the said certificate, Rule 12(3),
                                 envisages consideration of the date of birth
                                 entered, in the school first attended by the child.
                                 In case such an entry of date of birth is
                                 available, the date of birth depicted therein is
                                 liable to be treated as final and conclusive, and
                                 no other material is to be relied upon. Only in
                                 the absence of such entry, Rule 12(3) postulates
                                 reliance on a birth certificate issued by a
                                 corporation or a municipal authority or a
                                 panchayat. Yet again, if such a certificate is
                                 available, then no other material whatsoever is
                                 to be taken into consideration, for determining
                                 the age of the child concerned, as the said
                                 certificate would conclusively determine the age
                                 of the child. It is only in the absence of any of
                                 the aforesaid, that Rule 12(3) postulates the
                                 determination of age of the concerned child, on
                                 the basis of medical opinion."
26.      It is also important to note that the Act of

         2007 has been repealed by the
Juvenile Justice (Care and

         Protection of Children) Act, 2015
('Act of 2015' for short),

         where Sub-Section (2) of
Section 94
of the Act of 2015 provides

         a mandate for determining the age of a person in conflict with

         law. Procedure regarding determination of age, is now available

         under
Section 94
of the Act of 2015, which is substantially the

         same as it was prescribed under 2007 Rules, which read as

         under:-
"94. Presumption and determination of
                                 age - (1) Where, it is obvious to the Committee or
                                 the Board, based on the appearance of the person
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
33/48
brought before it under any of the provisions of this
                                 Act (other than for the purpose of giving evidence)
                                 that the said person is a child, the Committee or the
                                 Board shall record such observation stating the age
                                 of the child as nearly as may be and proceed with
                                 the inquiry under
Section 14
or
Section 36
, as the
                                 case    may     be,   without        waiting    for   further
                                 confirmation of the age.
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board
                                 has reasonable grounds for doubt regarding whether
                                 the person brought before it is a child or not, the
                                 Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall
                                 undertake the process of age determination, by
                                 seeking       evidence        by       obtaining       -
(i) the date of birth certificate from
                                 the school, or the matriculation or equivalent
                                 certificate from the concerned examination Board, if
                                 available;     and       in    the      absence       thereof;
(ii) the birth certificate given by a
                                 corporation or a municipal authority or a
                                 panchayat;
(iii) and only in the absence of (i) and
(ii) above, age shall be determined by an
                                 ossification test or any other latest medical age
                                 determination test conducted on the orders of the
                                 Committee or the Board:
Provided           such        age
                                 determination test conducted on the order of the
                                 Committee or the Board shall be completed within
                                 fifteen days from the date of such order.
(3) The age recorded by the Committee
                                 or the Board to be the age of person so brought
                                 before it shall, for the purpose of this Act, be
                                 deemed to be the true age of that person".
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
34/48
27.      Importing guiding note of
Jarnail Singh
(supra), in the present case, it can be gathered safely from the

         deposition of PW-4, namely, Ranjeet Kumar, who is the

         Investigating Officer of this case that no steps were taken during

         investigation to establish the age of victim i.e. V.G/PW-2, that at

         the time of occurrence, she was under the age of 18 years by

         following the procedure prescribed under the Act of 2015 as

         discussed above and further in the light of reasoning put forth

         by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of
Jarnail Singh
(Supra). It appears that medical board opined the age of the

         victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2 between 14-16 years, based on

         radiological examination.
The Supreme Court in the case of
Rajak Mohammad Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh
, reported in

         (2018) 9 SCC 248 has held that the determination of age on the

         basis of radiological examination be not accepted accurate

         determination and sufficient margin either way has to be

         allowed.
28. In the present case, no effort was made by

         prosecution to establish the age of victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2 in

         terms of Section 94 Sub-Clause (1) of the
Act of the POCSO

         Act, 2015
. It appears during cross-examination of victim girl i.e.

         "V.G."/PW-2 that she studied up to class Vth and, thereafter, she
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
35/48
dropped her study. This fact also corroborate by PW-3, who is

         the father of the victim girl that at present only one daughter

         (not victim) is going to school. No efforts appears to be taken by

         Investigating Officer as to collect any documents from first

         attending school of victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2, in support of her

         age in terms of
Section 94(2)(i)
of the Act of 2015. This is not a

         case, where victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2 was never attended any

         school. Investigating Officer also failed to collect any birth

         certificate in support of the age of victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2

         issued by local bodies in terms of
Section 94(2)(ii)
of the Act of

         2015. The provision of Section 94(iii) of the Juvenile Justice

         (Care and Protection of Children), Act 2015 applies only in the

         absence of provisions as made under
Sections 94 (2)(i)
and
94(1)(ii)
of the Act of 2015. Knowing the fact that victim girl

         i.e. VG/PW-2 was minor and studied up to class Vth, non-

         collecting of birth certificate from her first attending school on

         the part of investigating agency cannot be said to be a

         permissible ground to attract the precondition "only in the

         absence of" as to attract the provisions available under
Section

         94(2)(iii)
of the Act of 2015, where age shall be determined by

         an ossification test or any other latest medical age determination

         test.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
36/48
29. Therefore, in our considered opinion in the

         aforesaid circumstances, as prosecution failed to collect any

         evidence from first attending school of the victim girl i.e.

         VG/PW-2, regarding her age, from where she studied up to class

         Vth, it cannot be held conclusively that victim was below 18

         years of age as on the date of occurrence and, therefore, cannot

         be said that prosecution proved victim as a "child" under
Section 2(1)(d)
of the POCSO Act, and such, we are, therefore

         of considered view that finding of learned trial court regarding

         conviction of the appellants/accused for the offence punishable

         under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act is not a correct finding and

         same is liable to be set aside. There is no need of further

         discussion regarding correctness of sentence under
Section 6
of

         POCSO Act, in view of framing charge under
Section 4
of

         POCSO Act, causing prejudice to appellants/accused, as

         submitted, because core foundational issue to established victim

         as a "child" under
Section 2(1)(d)
of POCSO Act, failed itself.
30. Let us now consider the charge and conviction

         of appellants/accused under
Section 376-D
and
506
of the

         Indian Penal Code.
31. At this stage and in the context, it would be

         apposite to take a guiding note regarding "sterling witness" as
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
37/48
per ratio
laid down by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rai Sandeep @ Deepu, v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2012) 8 SCC

         21, where the Hon'ble Apex Court held in paragraph 22 that

         who can be said to be a "sterling witness". It is observed and

         held as under:
"22 In our considered opinion, the "sterling
                                 witness" should be of a very high quality and
                                 calibre whose version should, therefore, be
                                 unassailable. The court considering the version
                                 of such witness should be in a position to accept
                                 it for its face value without any hesitation. To
                                 test the quality of such a witness, the status of
                                 the witness would be immaterial and what
                                 would be relevant is the truthfulness of the
                                 statement made by such a witness. What would
                                 be more relevant would be the consistency of the
                                 statement right from the starting point till the
                                 end, namely, at the time when the witness makes
                                 the initial statement and ultimately before the
                                 court. It should be natural and consistent with
                                 the case of the prosecution qua the accused.
                                 There should not be any prevarication in the
                                 version of such a witness. The witness should be
                                 in a position to withstand the cross-examination
                                 of any length and howsoever strenuous it may
                                 be and under no circumstance should give room
                                 for any doubt as to the factum of the occurrence,
                                 the persons involved, as well as the sequence of
                                 it. Such a version should have co-relation with
                                 each and every one of other supporting material
                                 such as the recoveries made, the weapons used,
                                 the manner of offence committed, the scientific
                                 evidence and the expert opinion. The said
                                 version should consistently match with the
                                 version of every other witness. It can even be
                                 stated that it should be akin to the test applied in
                                 the case of circumstantial evidence where there
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
38/48
should not be any missing link in the chain of
                                 circumstances to hold the accused guilty of the
                                 offence alleged against him. Only if the version
                                 of such a witness qualifies the above test as well
                                 as all other such similar tests to be applied, can
                                 it be held that such a witness can be called as a
                                 "sterling witness" whose version can be
                                 accepted by the court without any corroboration
                                 and based on which the guilty can be punished.
                                 To be more precise, the version of the said
                                 witness on the core spectrum of the crime
                                 should remain intact while all other attendant
                                 materials, namely, oral, documentary and
                                 material objects should match the said version
                                 in material particulars in order to enable the
                                 court trying the offence to rely on the core
                                 version to sieve the other supporting materials
                                 for holding the offender guilty of the charge
                                 alleged."
32. The main argument as raised by learned

         counsel appearing on behalf of appellants/accused that there are

         major contradictions appearing regarding date, place and time of

         occurrence and, therefore, victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2 cannot be

         accepted as "sterling witness". It appears from the deposition

         of victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2 that she was raped on several

         occasions by both appellants/accused may be upto 50 (fifty)

         times, in last six months, under threat, where last such

         occurrence took place on 29.06.2019, which is the basis of FIR.

         It appears from her deposition that on certain occasions, she was

         raped by both appellants/accused and sometimes she was raped

         individually at different places, either in home or fields, causing
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
39/48
her pregnant. In such circumstances, contradictions regarding

         place of occurrence, time of occurrence, day/date of occurrence,

         whether she was raped by both appellants/accused or by single

         appellant/accused are very natural and on this score, it cannot be

         said that victim girl i.e. VG/PW-2, cannot be accepted as

         "Sterling witness". Moreover, fact of this case in totality of the

         circumstances, as available on record of the case discloses that

         victim/prosecutrix does not have a strong motive to falsely

         implicate appellants/accused. In defence, sometimes suggestion

         regarding false implication was given out of property dispute

         and sometimes love affairs with unknown person. Even

         appellants/accused             while         explaining   incriminating

         circumstances/evidence under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C., replied in

         very casual manner, simply showing their innocence, no defence

         witness was examined or even efforts were made during trial by

         appellants/accused to rebut presumption as available under
Section 114 A
of the Indian Evidence Act to 'rape victim'

         regarding consent. Statement of victim under
Section 164
of

         Cr.P.C. appears throughout consistent with her oral evidence

         while deposing before the learned trial court as VG/PW-2. Her

         statement is fully corroborated with medical evidence, Exhibit-

         5, and such taking all these aspects in totality, we have no
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
40/48
hesitation to accept victim/VG/PW-2 as "sterling witness".
33. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of
State

         of Maharashtra v. Chandraprakash Kewalchand Jain
reported in [(1990) 1 SCC 550 : 1990 SCC (Cri) 210],

         held as under:-
"that a woman who is a victim of
                                 a sexual assault is not an accomplice to the
                                 crime but is a victim of another person's lust
                                 and therefore her evidence need not be tested
                                 with the same amount of suspicion as that of an
                                 accomplice. She is not in the category of a child
                                 witness or an accomplice and therefore the rule
                                 of prudence that her evidence must be
                                 corroborated in material particulars has no
                                 application, at the most the court may look for
                                 some evidence which lends assurance.
8. This is what this Court said in
                                 paragraph 16 of the judgment in the
                                 aforementioned case: (SCC p. 559)
                                     "A prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be put
                                 on par with an accomplice. She is in fact a
                                 victim of the crime.
The Evidence Act
nowhere
                                 says that her evidence cannot be accepted
                                 unless it is corroborated in material particulars.
                                 She is undoubtedly a competent witness under
                                 Section 118 and her evidence must receive the
                                 same weight as is attached to an injured in
                                 cases of physical violence. The same degree of
                                 care and caution must attach in the evaluation
                                 of her evidence as in the case of an injured
                                 complainant or witness and no more. What is
                                 necessary is that the court must be alive to and
                                 conscious of the fact that it is dealing with the
                                 evidence of a person who is interested in the
                                 outcome of the charge levelled by her. If the
                                 court keeps this in mind and feels satisfied that
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
41/48
it can act on the evidence of the prosecutrix,
                                 there is no rule of law or practice incorporated
                                 in the
Evidence Act
similar to illustration (b) to
                                 Section 114 which requires it to look for
                                 corroboration. If for some reason the court is
                                 hesitant to place implicit reliance on the
                                 testimony of the prosecutrix it may look for
                                 evidence which may lend assurance to her
                                 testimony short of corroboration required in the
                                 case of an accomplice. The nature of evidence
                                 required to lend assurance to the testimony of
                                 the prosecutrix must necessarily depend on the
                                 facts and circumstances of each case. But if a
                                 prosecutrix is an adult and of full understanding
                                 the court is entitled to base a conviction on her
                                 evidence unless the same is shown to be infirm
                                 and not trustworthy. If the totality of the
                                 circumstances appearing on the record of the
                                 case disclose that the prosecutrix does not have
                                 a strong motive to falsely involve the person
                                 charged, the court should ordinarily have no
                                 hesitation in accepting her evidence."
34. Further, in the matter of
Krishna Kumar

         Malik v. State of Haryana
, (2011) 7 SCC 130, Hon'ble

         Supreme Court held as under:-
" It is observed and held by this
                                 Court that no doubt it is true that to hold an
                                 accused guilty for commission of an offence of
                                 rape, the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix is
                                 sufficient provided the same inspires confidence
                                 and appears to be absolutely trustworthy,
                                 unblemished and should be of sterling quality."
35. It is also submitted by learned counsel

         appearing on behalf of appellants/accused that the fact of case

         suggests that it may be a case of consensual physical
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
42/48
relationship. In this context, it is important to reproduce
Section

         114 A
of the Indian Evidence Act, which reads as under:-
"114-A. Presumption as to
                                 absence of consent in certain prosecution for
                                 rape.- In a prosecution for rape under clause
(a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (e),
                                 clause (f) clause (g), clause (h), clause (I),
                                 clause (j), clause (k), clause (l), clause (m) or
                                 clause (n) of sub-Section (2) of
Section 376
of
                                 the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where
                                 sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and
                                 the question is whether it was without the
                                 consent of the woman alleged to have been
                                 raped and such woman states in her evidence
                                 before the Court that she did not consent, the
                                 Court shall presume that she did not consent.
Explanation.- In this Section,
                                 "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
                                 mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of
section 375
of
                                 the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."
36. Importing above legal position to factual aspect

         of this case, it appears from the deposition of victim girl i.e.

         VG/PW-2, who deposed in her examination-in-chief before the

         learned      trial   court     that    out     of   rape   committed     by

         appellants/accused, Wakil Mandal and Loku Thakur, she

         became pregnant and just before a month, she gave a birth of a

         male child. She was examined before the learned trial court on

         6th December, 2019. Statement of victim was also recorded

         under
Section 164
of the Cr.P.C. before the learned Judicial

         Magistrate, who examined as PW-7. In her deposition, PW-7
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
43/48
also stated that victim named both appellants/accused and stated

         to commit rape upon her by both appellants/accused. She also

         stated about the threat advanced to her and also stated that by

         that time she was pregnant of five months.
37. Further, upon medical examination, VG found

         pregnant having single live foetus of twenty weeks and one day.

         The said medical report is available through Exhibit-5, which

         was proved by Dr. Jyotsna Kumari Sinha, as PW-6, before

         learned      trial    court.     No       evidence   was   brought   by

         appellants/accused during trial to rebutt presumption as

         available to victim under
Section 114A
of Indian Evidence Act.

         Statement of victim found consistent from her statement

         recorded under
Section 164
of Cr.P.C., oral deposition, which

         further corroborate with medical report (Exhibit-5), moreover,

         old ruptured hymen of victim and finding of habitual of sex,

         only corroborate the version of rape on multiple occasions as

         stated by VG/victim/PW-2. Thus, from aforesaid facts, and as

         appellants/accused failed to rebutt presumption under
Section

         114A
of the Indian Evidence Act, it can be held safely that

         victim/VG/PW-2 was not a consenting party.
38. The next argument, as raised by learned

         counsel appearing on behalf of appellants/accused that FIR in
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
44/48
present case cannot be said proved as informant/PW-3, only

         give his thumb impression, where he categorically deposed that

         contents of said FIR was not read over and explained to him. It

         is also submitted by him that it was lodged with a delay of three

         days as occurrence is of 29.06.2019. The said delay is also not

         appears explained by PW-3. In this context, it is also submitted

         that the occurrence was known to informant much prior to the

         last occurrence, as it was deposed by victim/PW-2 herself that

         the information was given to her father/informant over

         telephone and just to create recent cause of action, the

         occurrence of 29.06.2019 was falsely created, which cannot be

         believed in absence of examination of only eye-witness i.e.

         uncle of victim/VG/PW-2, namely Mahavir Kumar. By taking

         note of aforesaid submissions and facts as raised by learned

         counsel appearing for the appellants, it appears to us that written

         information of this case which was given to SHO, which is the

         basis of formal FIR, was made under thumb impression of PW-

         3, who is the informant of this case. He deposed as to narrate the

         occurrence before the police in same manner as he deposed

         through his examination-in-chief. He appears to be an illiterate

         person giving his thumb impression. PW-4, who is Investigating

         Officer, specifically deposed that the formal FIR is in hand
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
45/48
writing and bearing signature of SHO, namely, Avinash Kumar,

         which he identified before the court and same was exhibited as

         Exhibit-2. He also identified endorsement of SHO, Avinash

         Kumar regarding lodging of present case over written

         information given by informant/PW-3, which exhibited as

         Exhibit-3, and as such not reading the contents of FIR before

         putting thumb impression and not explaining the narration by

         subscriber of written information to PW-3 before putting his

         thumb impression does not appears fatal to prosecution. As far

         delay to lodge present FIR is concerned, it can be gathered

         safely from para-5 and 6 of cross-examination of informant/PW-

         3, where it appears that he resides outside village in connection

         of his livelihood, and, when he was asked by other persons and

         his Bhabhi i.e. (sister-in-law), only then he reported this

         occurrence to police. His deposition further reflects that his six

         brothers are living separately. They are illiterate, poor and man

         of rural background. He first discussed the occurrence at family

         level and, thereafter, at social level as to collect the courage to

         report such occurrence with police. Certainly, in case of rape, a

         decisive courage at family level/social level is required, which

         usually caused delay to lodge a case with police regarding

         occurrence. Hence, the factual background of this case is
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
46/48
sufficient to explain the delay as to lodge present FIR and thus,

         we did not find any force in submission of learned counsel

         arguing for appellants/accused, as submitted above.
39. Another important aspect, as raised by learned

         counsel appearing on behalf of appellants/accused that non-

         examination of DNA of living foetus of victim/PW-2 is also

         fatal to prosecution. It appears to us from cross-examination of

         PW-4 that a question was asked on behalf of appellant/accused

         Loku Thakur that whether DNA test of living foetus was

         conducted to ascertain the real father, on which it was replied by

         PW-4, i.e. Investigating Officer that no such effort was made by

         him regarding DNA test. In our considered opinion, DNA test in

         present case can only ascertain paternity or involvement of

         either of appellants/accused, and as such, not helping

         appellants/accused persons to prove their innocence in view of

         consistent statement of VG/PW-2. Even, if it is so, it is a case of

         negligence on the part of investigating officer. Certainly, a rape

         victim cannot be deprived from justice out of state negligence,

         that is negligence of investigating officer, while investigating a

         case, particularly when statement of victim appears trustworthy

         and inspire confidence, which is duly corroborated with her

         medical examination report (Exhibit-5). Hence, we are of
 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
47/48
considered opinion, that non-examination of DNA test of living

         foetus is also not appears fatal to prosecution. It was also argued

         by learned counsel that eye-witness of the occurrence dated

         29.06.2019 namely, Mahavir Kumar and sister of victim,

         namely, Babita, who witnessed the first occurrence of rape, were

         not examined in this case. We are of the view, that when

         victim/PW-2 herself accepted as a "sterling witness", in view

         of discussions as made above, non-examination of any eye-

         witness as submitted above is not appearing fatal.
40. Further, it also, appears that prosecutrix/victim

         stated that accused persons kept her into fear of death and also

         injury of her reputation and, therefore, she could not able to tell

         about the occurrence to any other persons, including family

         members. Victim was living with her younger brothers, sisters

         and old aged grandmother, where her mother died much prior to

         this occurrence and father was residing at remote place in

         connection with his livelihood. Moreover, victim girl i.e.

         VG/PW-2 through her deposition stated about the criminal

         intimidation       by     appellants/accused        and   there   is   no

         contradictions to disbelieve said testimony and, as such, this

         Court does not find any reason to set aside the conviction of

         appellants/accused under Sections 376-D and 506 of the Indian
              Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.257 of 2021 dt.09-10-2023
48/48
Penal Code, in view of aforesaid discussion.
41. Thus, conviction of appellants/accused under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act by the learned trial court is hereby

                      quashed, whereas conviction and sentence of both above named

                      appellants/accused under
Sections 376-D
and
506
of the Indian

                      Penal Code as recorded by learned trial court are hereby

                      confirmed alongwith fine, in view of abovesaid discussion.
42.    Hence, the appeal is partly allowed, in above

                      mentioned terms.
43. LCR, if any, be sent back to learned Trial

                      Court along with the copy of this judgment.
(Vipul M. Pancholi, J)



                                                         ( Chandra Shekhar Jha, J)

veena/-
AFR/NAFR                AFR
CAV DATE                19.09.2023
Uploading Date          09.10.2023
Transmission Date       09.10.2023
