Title: Search
Court: High Court while remanding the matter back to the
Date: 04 to 2006
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/179475441/

[Cites
28
, Cited by
2
]
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal - Delhi
M/S Nokia Corporation, New Delhi vs Adit, New Delhi on 2 September, 2019
IN THE INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
            DELHI BENCHES 'E', NEW DELHI
         Before Sh. Bhavnesh Saini, Judicial Member
             Dr. B. R. R. Kumar, Accountant Member

        ITA No. 1006/Del/2010 : Asstt.                Year : 2004-05
        ITA No. 1007/Del/2010 : Asstt.                Year : 2005-06
        ITA No. 1008/Del/2010 : Asstt.                Year : 2006-07
        ITA No. 5819/Del/2010 : Asstt.                Year : 2007-08
Nokia Corporation                      Vs   Asstt. Director of Income Tax,
(Formerly Nokia Networks OY)                Circle-2(1), International Taxation,
C/o Tarandeep Singh, F-99,                  New Delhi
Lajpat Nagar-II,
New Delhi-110024
(APPELLANT)                                 (RESPONDENT)
PAN No. AABCN3748E

        ITA No. 1236/Del/2010 : Asstt. Year : 2004-05
        ITA No. 1237/Del/2010 : Asstt. Year : 2005-06
        ITA No. 1238/Del/2010 : Asstt. Year : 2006-07

Asstt. Director of Income Tax,         Vs   Nokia Corporation
Circle-2(1), International Taxation,        C/o S.R. Batliboi & Co., 4th
New Delhi                                   Floor, Golf View, Tower-B,
                                            Sector    Road,    Sector-42,
                                            Gurgaon
(APPELLANT)                                 (RESPONDENT)
PAN No. AABCN3748E

                    Assessee by : Ms. Rashmi Chopra, Adv.
                    Revenue by : Sh. G. K. Dhall, CIT DR

Date of Hearing: 09.07.2019            Date of Pronouncement: 02.09.2019
                                      2                    ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
                                                             to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                Nokia Corporation



                                ORDER

Per Dr. B. R. R. Kumar, Accountant Member:
Si nce, the i ssues i nvol ved i n all these appeal s are common ,
they      were   heard   together   and   are   bei ng   di sposed        off     by
common order. G round Nos. 2 & 6 are not presse d.
2.     The assessee has rai sed the foll owi ng grounds:
"1. Ba sed on facts and ci rcumstan ces of the case and
     in law, the learned C ommissioner of              Income-
     tax(Appeals) [hereinafter referre d to as the CIT(A)]
     has erre d in holding that the income earned by the
     appellant     from     supply     of   telecommunication
     equipment (comprising of hardwa re and software) t o
     Indian telecom operat ors is taxa ble in India on the
     basis    that    the    appellant    has   a   Permanent
     Establishment ('PE') in India under the provisions of
Article 5
of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
     between     India    and   Finland   ("India-Finland  tax
     treaty").
2.     Not pressed
3.   Without    prejudice,    ba sed  on    facts   and
     circumstances of the case and in law, the ld. CIT (A)
     has erre d in applying gl obal net operating ma rgin of
     16.46 percent t o estimate the income from su pply of
     telecommunication equipment.
4.    Without  prejudice,   ba sed  on    facts   and
     circumstances of the case and in law, the ld. CIT (A)
     has erred in not considering the India specific Profit
     and Loss account furnished by the appellant, which
     reflected losses incurre d from supplies made to
     customers in India.
5.   Without   prejudice,   ba sed   on    facts  and
     circumstances of the case and in law, the ld. CIT (A)
     has erred in attributing 20 perce nt of the estimated
3                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

income from supply of telecomm unication equipment
to the alleged PE in In dia, by completely ignoring the
following facts submitted by the appellant:
(a) Supply contracts/purchase orde rs, being high
      value    contracts,   we re  'concluded/accepted '
      outside India in view of the fact that the 'powe r
      to conclude ' contra cts vests with the Boa rd of
      Directors/othe r approving authority off the
      assessee base d outside India at the registered
      office of the company in Helsinki (Finland).
(b) No supply contracts were signed in India.
(c) No income can be said to hav e accrued on
      account of mere signing of contra cts, as uphel d
      by the Hon'ble Supreme Cou rt i n the case of
      Ishikawajima Ha rima Heavy Industries Co. Ltd.
(288 ITR 408)
(d) The appellant's role was limited to supply of
      telecom equipment and it did not have any role
      in network planning activities undertaken in
      India.
6.   Not pressed
7. Based on facts and circumstances of the case and
 in law, the ld. CIT (A) ha s e rre d in uphol ding the
 action of the lea rned asse ssing officer who has
 arbitra rily imputed Rs 50 ,000,00 0 as income f rom
 vendor financing and taxed the same in the hands of
 the appellant in India as business Income, without
 providing any Justification for Imputation of the said
 Income and without seeking any information and
 detail    from  the  appellant   nor   providing   any
 opportunity to the appellant to contest such addition.
8. Based on facts and circumstances of the case and
 in law, the learned CIT (A) has erred in relying upon
 the unfounded allegations made by the learned
 assessing officer to h old a 'Fixed Place PE' of the
 appellant in India unde r the provisions of
Article 5(1)
of the India-Finland Tax Treaty, in respect of
4                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                       Nokia Corporation

     research & development ('R&D') a ctivities undertaken
     by Nokia India Private Limited ( Nokia India) in India
     for the appellant.
8.1    Without  prejudice,    based  on    facts  and
     circumstances of the ca se and in law, the leaned CT
     (A) has erred in applying the profit margin rate of
     21.42 percent on the total expenses incurred by
     Nokia Indi a on R&D a ctivities and attributing 100 %
     of the same to the alleged PE of the appellant in
     India.
8.2   Without    prejudice,   based    on   facts   and
     circumstances of the case and in law, the learned CIT
     (A) has e rred in not appreciati ng that an a rm's
     length payment has been made by the appellant to
     Nokia Indi a in respect of R &D activities undertaken
     by Noki a India, which has alrea dy been offered to tax
     in India by Nokia India.
8.3   Without   prejudice,   based   on    facts   and
     circumstances of the case and in law, the learned CIT
     (A) has erred in not allowing deduction for payments
     made by the appellant to Nokia India while
     computing    the   income     from   R&D     activities
     undertaken in India.
9. Based on facts and circumstances of the case and
     In law, the learned CIT (A) has erred In upholding
     the levy of interest under
section 2348
of the
     Income-tax    Act,  1961,    thereby  ignoring    the
     Judgment of the Hon'ble T ribunal In appellant's ow n
     case for AY 1997-98 and AY 1998-99."
3.   The Revenue has rai sed the foll owing grounds:
"1. On the facts and circumstances of the case, Ld.
     CIT(A) has erred in attributing onl y 20% of profits t o
     activity of the PE in India for supply of Hardware.
2. On the facts and circumstance s of the case, Ld.
     CIT(A) has erred in attributing only 20% of profits of
     activity of the PE in India for supply of Ope rating
     Systems Software.
5                        ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                            Nokia Corporation
3. On the facts and circumstance s of the case, Ld.
      CIT(A) has erred in attributin g the profits on
      Research & Development (R&D) a ctivities in the same
      proportion as the proporti on of Global Profits are
      attributable to ratio of Global R &D Expenses & Globa l
      Expenses and thus disrega rding th e facts that Global
      Expenses even contain expenses of the branches
      where R&D activities are not even carrie d out."
4.    The i ssues i n the grounds taken by the assessee as well as
the   revenue       i nvol ved    simil ar       i ssues.    Hence,     taken        up     and
adjudi cated together.
5.    Bri ef background of the case are that Noki a Corporati on i s
a    company    i ncorporated under                the l aws of        Finl and and i s
engaged        in      the        busi ness          of        suppl yi ng        advanced
tel ecommuni cati ons systems and equi pment for use i n fi xed
and mobil e phone networks. The assessee has presence i n Indi a
i n the form a 100% subsi di ary by the name of Noki a Indi a
Pri vate Ltd (hereinafter referred t o as Noki a Indi a). Accordi ng
to the assessee its Indi an li ai son offi ce had become defunct
after i ncorporati on of the Indi an subsi di ary, Noki a Indi a, i n May
1995 and was cl osed i n January 2002 after obtai ning requi si te
approval s from the Reserve Ban k of Indi a. For the rel evant
previ ous   years      the       appell ant       fil ed    i ts   returns     of     i ncome
decl ari ng 'Nil ' i ncome. In the assessment orders passed by A0 ,
the appell ant has been hel d to consti tute a PE i n Indi a and
revenues deri ved by the appell ant from foll owi ng sources were
taxed in Indi a:
Suppl y of hardware,
Suppl y of operati ng system software
6                   ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                Nokia Corporation

Income       from   Vendor   fi nanci ng (Onl y   for   assessment           years
2003-04 to 2006-07); and
Income       from   Re search   &   Development     acti vi ti es    (Onl y      for
assessment years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07).
Revenues from suppl y of ha rdwa re have been al l ocated at 60
percent of the total suppl y revenues and 100% of the gl obal
profi t margi ns earned by the appell ant were attri buted to the
PE. Revenues from suppl y of software have been all ocated as
40 percent of the total suppl y revenues and were taxed a s
'royal ty' both under the provi si ons of secti on 9(1)(vi ) of the
Act and Arti cl e 13 of the Indi a-Finl and Tax Treaty on a gross
basi s.    Rs.5,00,00,000/-     has   bee n   imputed    as    i ncome        from
vendor fi nanci ng. In respect of R&D acti vi ties, Noki a Indi a's
R&D center in Indi a has been held as a fixed pl ace of busi ness
for the appel l ant from where R&D acti vity of the appell ant i s
carri ed out. An attri buti on of 125% to 130% of profi ts from
R&D expenses incurred i n Indi a has been made.
6.       Comprehensi vel y the i ssues i s to be adjudi cated i n the
case are that
-   Whether the appell ant consti tutes a PE i n Indi a, thereby
         resul ti ng i n taxati on of revenues from suppl y of telecom
         hardwa re to the Indi an customers
-   If the appell ant consti tutes a PE i n Indi a, what i s the
         quantum of profi ts attri butabl e to such PE i n Indi a
-   Whether revenues from suppl y of software are i n the
         nature of 'royal ty' / 'fees for techni cal servi ces' under the
         provi si ons of the Act and the Indi a-Finl and Tax Treaty
7                    ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                         Nokia Corporation
-   Whether the assessi ng offi cer has correctl y i mputed the
         i ncome     of     Rs   5,00,00,000/-       as   i ncome      from        vendor
         financing        (Rel evant    for   Assessment       Years      2003-04          to
         2006-07)
-   Whether the appel l ant consti tutes a PE i n Indi a on account
         of R&D acti viti es undertaken i n Indi a under the terms of
         sub-contracti ng            agreement       executed        between             the
         appel l ant and Noki a Indi a (Rel evant for Assessment Years
         2004-05 to 2006-07)
7.       The orde rs of the l d. CIT (A) we re mai nl y based on the
orde r of the Speci al Bench of ITAT Del hi dated 22.06.2005 i n
the case of assessee. Later, the matter reached the Hon'bl e
Hi gh Court where the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court has passe d an orde r
dated 07.09.2012 25 Taxman 225 deali ng wi th the i ssues.
Later,         the   Speci al    Bench        was   consti tuted      foll owing         the
di recti ons of the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court                  and the ITAT Speci al
Bench, Del hi passed an order dat ed 05.06.2018 65 ITR (T) 23
for the assessment year 1997-98 and 1998-99.
8.       Ground Nos. 1 , 3 t o 5 of asse ssee's a ppeal i n ITA Nos.
1006 to 1008/Del /2010, Ground Nos. 2 & 3 of asse ssee's
appeal i n ITA No. 5819/Del /2010 and Ground Nos. 1 to 3 of
departmental appeal in ITA Nos. 1236 to 1238/Del/2010 deal s
wi th exi stence of permanent establi shment i n Indi a.
9.       Wi th regard to the PE, the l d. CIT (A) adjudi cated base d
on       the    order     of   the    Speci al    Bench   of   ITAT      Del hi      dated
22.06.2005. The rel evant part of the order i s as under:
"Taking up the second part of the second question a s
         to whether the Indian subsidiary of the assessee,
8                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

referred t o as NTPL , can be consi dered as a PE of the
assessee in India, we are of the view that having
regard of the findings re corded by both the Assessing
Officer and the CIT(Appeals), the NTPL can be
considere d as a PE. The issue has been dealt with in
paragraph 6 .3 of the orde r of the CIT(Appeals) ,
though in several earlier pa rts of the orde r, there i s
scattered reference to this a spe ct of the matter.
However, the final decision of the CIT(Appeals) is
only in paragraph 6 .3 of his order. A reading of this
paragraph shows clearly that wha t the CIT(Appeals)
has in mind, as in the case of the A.O., is that NTPL ,
the Indian subsidiary, is the virtual proje ction of the
assessee itself in India, though this idea may not
have been prope rly articulated i n the order of the
Income-tax authorities. The main point brought out
by them is that in respect of the services rendere d
by NTPL to the assessee under the "ma rketing
agreement", it was compensated on the basis of cost
plus 5% which means that in a ddi tion to getting the
expenses reimbursed, NTPL will get 5% more. It
stands to reason that in respect of the marketing
activity, NTPL has no scope for incurring any loss.
Nevertheless, its accounts Show s a book loss of Rs.
10    crores   (approximately)    and    even    if  the
depreciati on loss of Rs. 2 croe s i n ignored still the
loss is a round Rs. 8 crore s. The question, posed by
the Income-tax authorities is : Where from this loss
has arisen ? The answe r is that such a loss has arisen
only from the installation activity carried out by the
NTPL. In other words the installation charges
received by NTPL from the cellula r operat or in India
were not commensurate with the costs and expenses
incurred therefore and that is the reason why such a
loss has been incurred. Now the other question i s
how does that result in NTPL bei ng regarded as the
PE of the assessee company.
The answer is that since
NTPL is a wholly owned subsi diary of the assessee in
India and is consequently in a position to control an d
monitor its activities, the install ation charges were
directed to be so fixed that they were not
commensurate with the services rendered by NT PL.
The next question will be why would the assessee do
so. We cannot think of any other reason except that
9                 ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

the part of the price for installation of the GSM
equipment was diverted as the price for the supply
contract . Whether there is direct evidence or not for
this conclusion, or whether it 1s permissible for us
even    to   make     such    an    inference   from   the
circumstances of the case, i s not really material for
the present purpose. What it material is that there
was ample scope for the assessee to control and
monitor the activities of NTPL w hich, it should be
remembered i s a l00% subsidia ry of the assessee, in
such a manner that NT PL became a virtual projecti on
of the assessee company in Indi a. The other point
made by the Income-tax authorities was that the
assessee even re presented t o t he Indian cellular
operat or that it will not dilute its share holding in the
Indian subsidiary bel ow 51% w ithout the written
permission of the Indian cellular operat ors. This
allegation of the Income-tax authorities has not been
refuted or proved wrong by the assessee in the
course of the proceedings before them or even
before us. This also shows th at the distinction
between the two corporate entities, namely, the
assessee on one hand and NTPL , its 100% subsidiary
on the other hand, virtually got blurred with the
result that it can be said that when the Indian
cellular ope rators were dealing with NTPL in
connection    with     the   installation   contract   and
marketing agreement, they were in fact dealing with
the assessee itself. We are therefore, the opinion
that the test propounded by the Andhra Pra desh High
Court in the case of
CIT Vs. Vi
shakhapatnam Port
Trust 144 ITR 146 i s fully answered. We are ,
therefore, unable to find fault with the CIT(Appeals)
for holding that NTPL , the 100% Indian subsidia ry of
the assessee, constituted the a sse ssee's PE in India ."
(Emphasis Supplied).
As I have mentioned above, the facts of the case
before me for Assessment Years 2 002-03 to 2006-07
are similar t o the facts before the Honourable Special
Bench of the Delhi ITAT f or AY 19 97-98 and 1998-99.
Accordingly,     relying   on   the  decision  of  the
Honourable Special Bench of the Delhi ITAT, I
confirm the action of the assessing officer in this
10               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                        Nokia Corporation

      regard and uphold that the Nokia India constitutes
      appellant's PE in India."
10.   It was brought t o our noti ce that thi s matter of dependent
agent PE, fi xed based PE and att ri buti on of profi ts have been
di scussed and stands adjudi cated by the order of the Spe ci al
bench of ITAT Del hi dated June 05, 2018. The rel evant porti on
of the order i s reproduced hereunder for rea dy reference.
43. The key sequitur and proposi tion which is culle d
      out from the judgment of the H on'ble Supreme Cou rt
      is that;
firstly, the fix place should be w here the commercia l
      and economic activity of the enterprise is carried out;
secondly, such a fix place acts as a virtual projection
      of the foreign enterprise;
thirdly, PE must have three characteristics, st ability
      productivity and dependence; and

      lastly, fixed place of the business must be at the
      disposal of the foreign enterpri se through which it
      conducts business.
Thus, according to the Supreme Court the 'disposa l
      test' is pa ramount which needs to be seen while
      analyzing fixed place PE under
Article 5(1).
Though in
      our humble unde rstanding, the test of pe rmanency
      qua fixed place has been slightly diluted by the
      Hon'ble Court but not the "disposal test". Again this
      judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court has been
      reiterated and referre d extensively in a subse quent
      judgment by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Asstt. DIT v. E-Fund IT Solution
(supra) , whe rein the
      Hon'ble Apex Court ha d quoted e xtensively the same
      views and commentaries and al so the judgment of
      Formula One World Champi onship Ltd. and held that
      there must exist a fixed place in India which is at
      disposal of foreign enterprise through which they carry
      on their own business.
In tha t case, the In dian
11                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

subsidiary company of the fore ign enterprise wa s
rendering su pport se rvices which enabled the foreign
enterprise in turn to rende r servi ces to its client an d
the outsourcing of w ork t o the In dian subsidia ry wa s
held to be not giving ri se to fixed place of PE. Thi s
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court nearly
clinches the issue before hand i n so far as role of
Indian subsidiary while deciding the fix place PE.
44. Now in the light of the aforesaid principle we shall
examine the various kinds of contra cts/activities
undertaken by the assessee and the facts and material
on record, spe cifically with reference to the followin g
activities which have been identified by the Hon'bl e
High Court while remanding the matter back to the
Tribunal.
(a) Signing of contracts;
(b) Network planning;
(c) Negotiation of off-shore contra ct in India.
As discussed ea rlier, the Assessi ng Officer ha s note d
that LO was engaged in the activities of network
planning, negotiation of contra ct and si gning of
contracts, however in the earlier round it has been
categori cally held that LO is n ot a PE qua these
activities and nowhere there is a categorical an d
specific finding by the Assessing Officer or by the ld.
CIT(A) in the entire orde r that t here exist any fixed
place PE qua the Indian subsidia ry, i.e., NIPL, except
for stating that office of the LO and NIPL were co-
located, employees of the assesse e were w orking wit h
NIPL and therefore , it constituted a fixed place PE. If
that reasoning alone is t o be ta ke n into conside ration ,
then such an interpretation of PE did not found judicia l
favour either by the ea rlier Special Bench or by th e
Hon'ble High C ourt qua the LO, hence on sam e
reasoning and principle , NIPL w ould also cannot be
reckoned as fixed place PE. Be that as may be, one of
the key arguments by the Revenue before us is that
foreign expat riates we re present in NIPL office wh o
were working as an employee of NIPL and we re
engaged in the business of NIPL, i.e., installation and
marketing a ctivities. The key th rust of the l d. C IT-DR
12                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

before us was that; firstly, Country Manager of LO
continued to be the MD of the NIPL; secondly, the
identity between LO and NIPL we re blurre d and NIPL
was nothing but 'virtual projecti on' of the assessee in
India; thirdly, NIPL w as doing m ost of the activities in
India like Ma rket Development, liaisioning with
customers,     technical   assistan ce,   marketing     of
products, etc.; fourthly, employees of the assessee
company we re seconded to NIPL for installation
contract of NIPL, and their salari es were paid by th e
assessee, therefore , through these employees PE gets
constituted and in support he strongly relied upon the
judgment of Morgan Stanley and Centrica India off-
shore Private Ltd. (supra); la stly, whenever the
assessee's employee used t o come to India then NIPL
was providing infrast ructure facilities like, telephone,
fax, vehicles, etc. which goes to show that there was
a place in the form of NIPL which was at the disposal
of the assessee.
45. First of all, in so fa r as the allegation that the
Country Manage r of the LO continued to be the
Managing Dire ctor of the Indian Company, the same
has with reference to one employee, namely, Mr.
Hannu Karavitra who was the Country Manager in L O
and in that capacity has signed t wo contracts in the
month of February and March, 19 95. These contract s
were signed when NIPL wa s not even in existence.
After the incorporation of NIPL on 23.05.1995, n ot a n
iota of evidence has been brought on record that Mr.
Hannu Karavitra had signed any contract on behalf of
the assessee. He w as a Managi ng Direct or of NIPL
from 01.01.1996 t o 31.07 .1999 and after he w a s
employed with NIPL , he has not signed any supply
contracts    with  the   Indian   customers.   All  the
installation contracts which have been signed by th e
NIPL have been executed by the NIPL independently
with the Indian customers on principal to principa l
basis an d any income received or accrued thereof, wa s
subject to tax in India. During the course of the
hearing, it wa s brought to ou r notice that on one
assignment letter dated 24.05.199 5 was signed by Mr.
Hannu Karavitra whereby on shore se rvices were
assigned to NIPL and while working in India he was
13                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

receiving salary from a ssessee only. First of all, Mr.
Hannu Karavitra was employed with the LO earlier,
prior to the incorporation of NIPL and he was not
employed with the Indian company. In any case
assignment was from assessee to NIPL and n o
authority was being exercised on behalf of the
assessee company vis-à-vis the customers. Whether
Mr. Hannu Ka ravitra w as representative of the
assessee and w as working f or NIPL or was receiving
salary from a ssessee, same would have some
relevance in the context of 'Servi ce PE', but certainly
not while examining the 'fixed pl ace PE'. Even if the
arguments sake it is accepted that he was a seconde d
employee to NIPL , then also if he had worked unde r
the control of NIPL despite lien was maintained with
assessee company, then also it does not lead to an
inference that assessee company was having any kin d
of a PE, leave alone under paragraph 1 of
Article 5 .
Similarly the allegation has been made by the
Assessing Officer as well as strongly contended by th e
learned CIT-DR that employees of the NIPL were
mostly belonging to the assessee company as some of
the expatriates/ technical persons were working on
installation contract of NIPL for which activities,
salaries were paid and manage d by assessee. This
concept perhaps may assume some significance while
deciding the concept 'Service PE ' for which reliance
was also pla ced by the lea rned CIT-DR on Morga n
Stanley and Centrica off-shore Pvt. Ltd, however as
per the then existing provision of
Article 5
between
India and Finland treaty, there wa s no such concept of
'Service PE' pe r se except for certain activities
mentioned in clause (a) and (b) of Paragraph 3 of
Article 5
, which ostensibly are not applicable at all .
Since none of the on-shore activities are carried ou t
by the assessee in India al beit wa s done by its India n
subsidiary, provisions of para gra ph 3 of
Article 5
will
also not attract. Once there is no concept of 'Service
PE' (though there is no allegation by the Assessing
Officer or C IT (A) that there is any kind of service PE) ,
then such plea of the learned CIT-DR has no legs t o
stand. His core a rgument was on the point that
installation activities done through employees of the
assessee constitutes a 'Se rvice PE' and asse ssee wa s
14                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

unable to furnish the details of e mployees working in
NIPL al ongwith the details of their duration an d
therefore, in a bsence of such details adverse view
should be drawn for tre ating these employees
constituting PE in India. The entire thrust of his
argument simply whittles down for the reason that
firstly, there is absolutely no con cept of 'Se rvice PE' in
the then existing provision of Arti cle 5; and secondly,
other than off-shore su pply of equipment, no othe r
activities has been carried out by the assessee after
the incorporation of the Indian subsidiary NIPL an d
this fact has been accepted by th e Hon'ble High Cou rt
also. Thus, any activities relating to NIPL unde r the
independent contract cannot be re ckoned to constitute
a PE in the context of
Article 5(1);
and even if for
argument sake it is accepted that the activities of
NIPL were manage d by assessee , then also, it doe s
not constitute PE qua activities of supply contract or
any activity from where it can be held that any income
has been received or accrued to t he assessee in India
or through or f rom any asset i n India. NIPL is an
independent entity and all its income from Indi a
operati on is liable for tax in India.
46. Another set of allegati ons whi ch can said to have
some significance is that; whenever the employees of
the assessee were visiting India in the context of
networking, assigning or negot iation of off-shore
supply contract , the employees of NIPL we re either
assisting by providing certain administrative support
services made available in the form of telephone, fa x
and conveyance; or the NIPL was providing technica l
and marketing support services to assessee and hence
it is assisting in sale of equipments of the assessee in
India and therefore , NIPL pe r-se by 'force of attracti on
rule' will constitute a PE, because even if one sale of
the assessee is through Indian company then by virtue
of this rule as enshrined in
Article 7
of India-Finland
DTAA, PE will get constituted and there w ould be a
deemed PE in the form of Indian company whose
income has to be attributed a ccordingly. This secon d
part of allegati on does n ot hold ground at all ,
because; firstly, as stated in the earlier part of the
orde r, assessee and NIPL have e ntered into sepa rate
15                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

marketing and technical support agreements in
respect of the projects installed a nd has no correlation
with the supply contra ct. This h as been specifically
held so by the Hon'ble High Court also in para gra ph 34
reproduced in the earlier pa rt of the orde r; secondly ,
not only that, f or rende ring these services NIPL wa s
compensated with cost plus ma rk up of 5% which
though has been a dversely commented by the
Assessing Officer and ld. CIT (A) but there has been
no determination of ALP under transfe r pricin g
mechanism.      This    inter   alia   means    that   the
remuneration paid by the assesse e to NIPL for these
services has to be re ckoned at arm's length; and
lastly, not one off-shore sale ha s happened in India
through NIPL and this fact has again been accepted by
the Hon'ble High Court in its orde r that no pa rt of off-
shore supply wa s concluded in India with any business
connection in India as it was i ndependent contract
between Assessee and Telecom operators in India. In
so far as allegation of administrat ive support service s
provided to employees of asse sse e in India for su pply
contract by NIPL and hence it leads to fixed place PE ,
strong reliance has been placed by Ld. CIT-DR on the
statement of the then Managing Director, Mr. Simon
Bresford. From the relevant statement he had pointed
out that how the marketing support services have
been provided by the Indian company to the assesse e
and also the a dministrative su pport se rvices we re
provided by NIPL to assessee . Regarding ma rketin g
support services by NIPL to a ssessee we have already
discussed a bove that it was done under sepa rate
contract and NIPL wa s remunerat ed at arm 's length .
In so far as a dministrative facilities being provide d by
the NIPL t o the expatri ates coming for signing of
contract on behalf of the Nokia Fi nland, he had stated
that, administrative support like office support, ca rs,
telephones, etc. was being provided by NIPL; an d
earlier office of liaison office of NIPL are at the sam e
premise in the year 1995. Relying on such statement,
ld. CIT-DR has vehemently contended that this
material facts itself goes to prove that there is a fixed
place PE which was at the disposa l of the assessee. In
light of such contention, we have to see whether an y
place of business wa s provide d by NIPL t o the
16               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

assessee which can be said t o be at a disposal of the
assessee for ca rrying out its business wholly or partly
in India. The sequitur of the judgment of Hon'ble Apex
Court a s incorporated a bove is that, in order t o
ascertain a s to whether an e stabli shment being a fixed
place for PE or not is that physically located premise s
have to be 'at the disposal of the enterprise s'.
Nowhere the disposal test has been diluted by the
Hon'ble Apex Court rather it ha s been reiterated at
various places not only in the Formula One Worl d
Championship judgment but also in the subsequent
judgment of E-Fund. As culled out from the certain
observati ons of the Assessing Officer as well as the
statement of the MD that the employees of the
assessee whenever came t o India for the pu rpose of
supply contract f or negotiation on network planning,
then they were provided administrative services like
telephone, fax and conveyance. Now, whether such
kind of facilities can at all be treated to be a fixed
place of business of the assessee company. Telephon e
or fax or a car cannot be reckoned as physically
located premise. The word u sed in
Article 5(1)
i s
'fixed place of business through which business of
enterprise is wholly or pa rtly carried out'. A fixed
place alludes to some kind of a particular locati on ,
physically located premise or some place in physical
form. Nowhere is it borne out that any kind of
physically located premise or a pa rticular locati on was
made available to the assessee which was at th e
disposal of the assessee for carrying out wholly or
partly its business through that place. Not only there
should be an existence of a fixed place of business but
also through that fixed place business of the
enterprise should be wholly or pa rtly carried out. N o
such material has been brought on record that any
kind of such fixed place was made available. Providin g
telephone or fax or conveyance services can ever be
equated with fixed place. Even the co-location of
earlier LO office and the Indian subsidiary company
was only in the initial year of 1 995 and later on L O
office has moved out which is also evident from the
statement of the Managing Director. Thus, providin g
such kind of a dministrative support services t o th e
assessee's employees visiting Indi a will not form fixed
17                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

place PE, and therefore, the gre at emphasis by the
learned DR on this point is not much of credence as it
lacks any further mate rial support or evidence that
any physical place was made available which can be
said to be at the disposal of the a ssessee for ca rryin g
out its off-shore supply contract in India. In fact the
entire allegation of fixed place was qua the LO an d
never in the context of NIPL by the Assessing Officer.
The entire case of the Assessing Officer was that NIPL
is a DAPE of the assessee, because all employees of
the assessee were either working for the NIPL or NIPL
was underta king ce rtain marke ting and technical
support services for the assessee. The concept of
DAPE w ould be discu ssed in succeeding pa ragraphs.
However, so far a s the issue of fixed place PE is
concerned the same does not get established at all by
making to reference of providing of telephone, fax and
car facility to the employees of assessee visiting
India.   As    rega rds  allegati on   that    expatriates
employees of a ssessee in India were assisting the
NIPL and hence used the office of NIPL, is of n o
relevance qua a ssessee 's business, because, th e
technical expatriates we re in Indi a to a ssist/help NIPL
with performance of installation a ctivities of NIPL and
not to carry out the business of the assessee which
was manufacturing and sale of network equipments.
This activity per se cannot be reckoned that the Indian
office was being used for the pu rpose of assessee 's
business or assessee was unde rtaking business in
India through fixed place of business. The test laid
down by the H on'ble Supreme Court does n ot ge t
satisfied in this case as nothing has been brought on
record by the AO or ld. CIT-DR tha t any physical space
was made available which can be said to be at the
disposal of assessee for asse sse e's own business of
supply and sale of equipments.
47. Now coming t o the paragra phs 2, 3 and 4 of
Article 5
, it is not the case of an y one that the NIPL
constitutes any kind of PE under these provisions.
Albeit if one goes by clause (e) of Paragraph 4 of
Article 5
, where it has been ca tegorically provide d
that the PE shall not be dee med to include a
maintenance of a fixed place of bu siness solely either;
18               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation
a) for the purpose of advertising; b) for the supply of
information or for scientific research; c) bein g
activities solely of a preparat ory or an auxiliary
character in the business of the enterprise. This
clause clearly excludes any a ctivities solely for
prepa ratory or auxiliary in nature and if one goes by
scope of remand by the Hon'ble High Court, i.e., t o
see, whether signing, networking planning and
negotiation constitutes a PE and also whether profits
can be attri buted to such activities, then such kind of
an activity ostensibly falls within the scope and realm
of prepa rat ory or auxiliary in nature, because mere
signing, planning and negotiation or networking before
supply of goods, a re preliminary activities and
therefore, unde r this all pervasi ve exclusion clause
there cannot be any PE which can be deemed either in
terms of Paragra phs 1, 2 and 3 of
Article 5.
Under the
present DT AA if activities a re in the nature of
prepa ratory and auxiliary cha ract er, then same have
been specifically excluded from being treated as PE.
Hence, even if for the argument's sake it is accepted
that there can be some kind of fixed place unde r
Article 5(1)
, then such a place cannot be reckoned a s
PE, because the activities ca rrie d out f rom such a
place are in the nature of preparatory and auxiliary .
Accordingly, in te rms of
Article 5 (4)
, there could not
be any fixed place PE under
Article 5(1)
because the
activities of the assessee in India were purel y
pertaining to network plannin g, negotiation and
signing of contracts bef ore off-shore supply of (GSM)
equipments and sale of goods have been made off-
shore outside India .
48. Coming to the Dependent Age nt PE as provided i n
paragraph 5 of
Article 5
, the key considerati on for
holding an agent to be a deemed PE is that, a
person/enterprise wh o is not an a gent of independent
status is acting in a contracting state (here in this
case India) on behalf of an enterprise of othe r
contracting state (here Finland) in respect of any
activities where he habitually exercises an authority t o
conclude contracts on behalf of th e enterprise; or if he
has no such authority, but habitu ally maintains stock
of goods or merchandise which he regularly delivers
19                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

goods or merchandise on behalf of the enterprise,
then he is deemed to be DAPE. From the material facts
discussed in detail herein above are that the entire
contract supply of off-shore e quipments has been
done by the assessee outside In dia and no activity
relating to off-shore supply has been performed in
India. There is no material fact on record that NIPL
has negotiated or concluded any contract of supply of
equipment on behalf of the assessee which binds the
assessee. The title of the goods supplied i s di rectly
passed on t o the cust omers in In dia and NIPL neither
undertakes any negotiation process nor assist in
delivery of goods. Under a DAPE the character of the
agent can be said t o be dete rmined; firstly, his
commercial activities for the enterprise is subject t o
instruction or comprehensive control; and secondly ,
he does not bear the entreprene urial risk. The agent
must have sufficient authority to bind enterprise 's
participati on in the business activities and the agent
involves the enterprise to a pa rticular extent in the
business activities. Thus, the qualified character of
the agency is the authorization to act on behalf of
somebody else so much as t o conclude the contra cts.
Here the NIPL neither has any authority to conclude
contracts for supply nor any of t he orde rs ha s bee n
booked by NIPL which can be said to be binding upon
the assessee. NIPL is an indepen dent entity carrying
out activities of installation, technical support se rvices
for the equipments installed are being carried out on
principal to principal basi s independently with Indian
customers; and ma rketing su pport agreement is a n
independent agreement with the a ssessee for which i t
is remunerated at a rm's length and none of it s
activities   even    remotely     rela te to   supply    of
equipments, leave alone habitually exercising any
authority to conclude contra ct. La stly, it bears its own
entrepreneurial risks.
49. We shall in brief examine various allegati ons of
the AO, which has been ha rped u pon by the Ld. CIT-
DR also t o contend that there is some kind of PE in
the form of DAPE. Fi rst of all, Assessing Officer a s
discussed in the earlier part of this orde r has time and
again referred t o the employment details of Mr. Hann u
20                 ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                     Nokia Corporation

Karavitra which we have alrea dy clarified that he wa s
the employee of the assessee as Country Manager in
LO till the time NIPL was not incorporated and afte r
the incorporation of NIPL , he became the Managing
Director and his pe riod and design ation of empl oyment
is contained in pa ge 369 (9 to 11 ) of the pape r book,
from where it is seen that he w a s Managing Di rector
between 01.01.1996 to 31.07.1999. It has already
been clarified that once the said employee came int o
rolls of NIPL, he has not signe d a ny contract with any
Indian customer for off-shore supplies but has signed
installation contract s on behalf of the NIPL . All th e
details of supply cont racts are contained at page 20 3
of the paper book which al so giv es the details of the
persons signing it and none of the supply contract ha d
been signed by any employee of NIPL. Thus, the basi c
condition contained in
Article 5 (5)
does n ot stan d
satisfied at all. The contract which has been signed by
NIPL is installation which cannot be reckoned DAPE ,
because assessee in India has not carried out any
installation activities on its own . In so far a s the
allegation of the Assessing Officer that NIPL was in
complete control of the assessee and was subject t o
its instruction. This again in our opinion is not a
relevant consideration at all for a creation of a DAPE
as discussed a bove, be cause none of the supply
activities of the assessee has been carried out by NIPL
and the employees if at all w ere for the NIPL 's
activities in India for which it is li able to tax in India .
Further, for the purpose of this clause also, if
activities are of preparatory and auxiliary in nature,
then again the same will not sati sfy the threshold of
DAPE. The Assessing Officer has also referred to the
fact that in the accounts of LO for the peri od ending
31st December, 1995, there w as an expenditure of
Rs.5 crores which su ddenly from the year 1996, got
shifted in the Indian company and from there he
draws an inference that Indian company has not
received any compensation for the same from
assessee and this shows the close business connection
between the NIPL and the assessee. This observation
again is of n o consequence, beca use when the Indian
company came into existence in May, 1995 operation s
of the LO were slowly scaled dow n and there was no
21               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

was requirement of the LO and the employees of the
LO were transferred to the Indi an Company w.e .f .
June 1995. In so far as the allegat ion of the Assessing
Officer that NIPL is a depen dent agent, we find that
nowhere he has brought on record that NIPL had any
authority to conclude contracts relating to supply of
equipments on behalf of the asse ssee. The Managin g
Director in his statement in answer to question no.9
has clearly stated that network pl anning was a service
which could be provided by NIPL; however he
categori cally emphasized that it is pre-bid exercise
which was only exercised to request for quotation .
Nowhere it has been sai d in the statement that NIPL in
anyway had authority to conclude contract on behal f
of the assessee . In so fa r as the other allegation of
the Assessing Officer which has been discussed in the
earlier pa rt that, NIPL has concl uded contra cts with
cellular operat ors for installation services and it
becomes responsi bility of assessee to get the
contracts executed by the NIPL; and further assesse e
had issued guarantee to the Indian customers that it
will get the contract s executed by NIPL , again has n o
significance for dete rmination of DAPE, because such a
contention of the Assessing Officer may have bee n
relevant for composite contra ct si tuation which is not
the consideration in the present case and does not
have any bearing whatsoever in this matter. Even
otherwise also a ssisting in performance of th e
installation services of NIPL doe s not ma ke India n
Company DAPE of assessee under
Article 5(5);
and
revenues from installation is any way being taxed in
India. Coming to an other allegation that all the
contracts we re signed in India and employees of the
Indian company have attended meeting at the time of
finalization of such contracts as w itnesses, is again of
no consequence either for the purpose of fixed place
PE or DAPE, because for the fixed place, disposal test
needs to be satisfied; and for DAPE, authority to
conclude contracts which is binding on the assessee
needs to be seen. Next objection of AO is that th e
warranty and guarantee services provided by NIPL 's
employee were m onitore d by assessee and for the
installation work done by Indian company, some kin d
of note regarding installation contracts were sent t o
22               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation

the assessee. This objection ha s no relevance for
determination of PE , because, fi rstly, it would have
been of some relevance in the case of composite
contract   situation;  and   secon dly,  managing   or
providing gua rantee by assessee does not yield any
income to the assessee, albeit to NIPL, which is taxed
in India. Lastly, in so far as the expatriates of NIPL
were responsible for installation w ork were employees
of the assessee, only proves that assessee provide d
necessary assistance, informati on, knowledge an d
expertise to do the work. This observation of AO only
goes to prove that that expatriate s employees depute d
in NIPL are in connection with the installation
contracts executed by NIPL and since there is no
concept of 'Service PE' in India , therefore, nothing
turns around on such observati on. Thus, on the fact s
and material on record, we hold t hat there is no DAPE
within the scope and terms of
Article 5(5)
of the
treaty.
50. Admittedly, paragraph 6 of
Article 5
is not
applicable. Pa ragraph 7 of
Article 5
deals with 'a gent
of independent status.' Independe nce of an agent has
to be both legal as well as e con omic independence .
Legal independence has t o be see n from the context ,
whether the agent's commercia l activities for his
principal a re subject t o detail ed instructions or
comprehensive cont rol by the pri ncipal or n ot; or t o
what extent the agent exercises freedom in the
conduct of his business on behalf of principal; or th e
agent's scope of authority is affected by limitations on
the scale of business which may be conducted by the
agent. Econ omic independence h as to be seen f rom
the context as t o what extent the agent bea rs th e
'entrepreneuri al risk" or "business risk" and a gent's
activities are n ot integrated with those of the
principal; and whether the agent acts exclusively for
the    principal.  The   tests   for  determining    the
independent status has to be see n from what kind of
activities is being ca rrie d out by the agent for his
principal. Here in this case , first of all we have t o
borne in mind that installation activity carried out by
NIPL is not generating any revenue or income for the
assessee in India albeit any incom e from such activity
23                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

is already subje ct to tax in India. The off-shore supply
contract is ca rried out by assesse e on FOB basi s from
Finland and as discussed in fore going paragraphs NIPL
is carrying out various onsh ore activities, like
installation activity, marketing a nd technical support
services, which fact ha s been cl early highlighted by
the Hon'ble High Court in para 34, that these activities
have nothing to do with su pply cont ract. The
consideration accruing or a rising under the contra cts
undertaken by NIPL is al ready assessed in the hands
of NIPL in India and there is n o adverse inference in
this respect. The dispute as highli ghted by the Hon'ble
High Court only pertains to the consideration under
the Supply Agreement entered between the assesse e
and the various customers. Qua the supply contract
nothing is being pe rforme d by t he NIPL in In dia a s
agent of the assessee. None of the onshore activities
of NIPL can be said t o be devote d wholly and almost
wholly on behalf of the asse ssee, because , the
contracts unde rtaken an d signed by NIPL in India are
independent and on principal to principal ba sis with
the Indian customers and assessee has not signed any
kind of installation contra ct with the Indian customers
for which it could be said that the installation activity
of NIPL was wholly and almost wholly on behalf of the
assessee. The tw o contracts which were signed ea rlie r
prior t o the incorporation of NIPL were sepa rate an d
assigned to it and income from such installation has
been shown in the hands of NIPL in India. There is n o
income whatsoever from install ation activities has
been earned by the assessee in India or can be
attributed either directly or indirectly through NIPL.
Insofar as othe r activities like ma rketing and technical
support services a re concerned, same has bee n
transacted at arm 's length a s di scussed in detail in
foregoing pa ras, hence no profi t can be attributed
from these activities as held by the Hon'ble High
Court. Even if NIPL is held t o be; subject to significant
control with respect t o the manner in which work is t o
be carried out; is subject to detail instructions from
the assessee a s to the conduct of work; is exercisin g
less freedom in the conduct of business on behalf of
assessee; seeking approval f rom the assessee for the
manner in which the business is to be conducted; etc.,
24                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

then all such control if at all coul d be only in relation
to the contracts ca rrie d out by the NIPL in India t o
ensure technical quality of the contact work done.
When there is absolutely no income generated t o th e
assessee f rom installati on contract work done in Indi a
by the NIPL, then all such comprehensive control doe s
not have much relevance.
Article 5(7)
will apply only
when some of the activities of the foreign enterprise
are done by an agent wholly or almost wholly on
behalf of that enterprise. Here th e crucial test is that
activities of the assessee must be carried out through
the agent wholly and almost whol ly for the assessee .
When installation activity is not carrie d out by the
assessee in India and is done by NIPL on principal t o
principal basis with the customers then there is no
question of examining the inst allation activity for
purpose of PE. The activity carried out by the assessee
through an agent in India woul d be key factor for
examining PE. Thus, provision of paragraph 7 of
Article 5
will also not apply.
51. Lastly, coming to paragraph 8 of
Article 5
, it
clearly states that mere fa ct that company which is a
resident of a contra cting status controls or i s
controlled by a com pany which is resident of the othe r
contracting states or which ca rrie s on the business i n
other state, whether through a PE or othe rwise shal l
not of itself constitutes either company or a PE of
other. This inter alia means that if the NIPL, i.e., a n
Indian company is controlled by assessee who i s
resident of Finland, then this by itself will not
constitute a PE . Thus, a subsidia ry cannot be reckone d
to constitute PE merely because i t is controlled by a
foreign enterprise. In other w ords simply be cause
NIPL is a subsidiary and is controlled by assessee i t
will not be t reated a s a PE. Eve n the OECD and U N
Model C onventions cla rify that mere existence of
foreign enterprise's subsidia ry in a source st ate shoul d
not give rise to foreign enterprise's PE in the source
state. The reason being that the existence of a
subsidiary   does    not   by   itsel f, constitute   that
subsidiary company is a PE of its Parent entity, on the
principle that, for the purpose of taxation, a
subsidiary com pany constitutes an independent legal
25                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

entity in the source state. This h as been held so by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case E-Fund IT
Solutions. Thus, the exception giv en in Article 5(8) to
a company controlled by a forei gn enterprise or it s
subsidiary answers m ost of the allegation made by th e
Department that NIPL being a subsidiary of the
assessee itself will provide status of a PE.
52. In so far as the argument of the learned CIT DR
that Indian subsidiary is a virtual projecti on of the
assessee as empl oyees of Assessee Company were
practically performing all kinds of work, and therefore ,
it has to be treated as a perman ent establishment of
assessee.
In su pport of such a concept of virtua l
projection, st rong reliance has been placed on the
judgment of the Hon'ble Andh ra Pradesh High C ourt i n
the case of
CIT v. Vishakapatna
m Port Trust (supra)
which the learned CIT DR submitted that have been
referred and relied upon by the Hon'ble Suprem e
Court in the case of Formula One (supra) also. First of
all, the concept of 'virtual projection' has to be seen
in the context of any of the ingredient of PE enshrine d
in
Article 5.
Hon'ble Andhra Prade sh High Court while
explaining the concept of fixed place PE, obse rved that
the PE postulates existence of a substantial element of
enduring or pe rmanent nature of a foreign enterpri se
in another country which can be attributed to a fixed
place of business in that country. Such a fixed place
should be of such a nature that it would amount to a
virtual projecti on of the foreign enterprise of one
country to the soil of an other cou ntry. The concept of
'virtual proje ction' fl ows from the fixed place itself or
with any other parameters of establishment of PE
under
Article 5.
This concept alon e is not relevant but
has to be seen in relation to fixed place or any other
concept of PE. The Hon 'ble Supreme C ourt whil e
coming to the conclusi on in pa ra graph 76 , held tha t
not only Buddh Internati onal Circuit was a fixed place
where the commercial or economic activity of
conducting Formula One Champi onship was ca rrie d
out, but one could clea rly discern that it was a virtual
projection of a foreign enterprise, namely, Formul a
One on the soil of this country. All the characteristic
of the fixed place PE including the physical location
26                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                    Nokia Corporation

and disposal test stood satisfied. The concept of
virtual projecti on cannot be in vacuum dehors any
other parameters of PE. In other words, virtual
projection is in relation to either fixed place or in
relation to any other parame ters or con ditions
envisaged      in
Article  5.
As    in   the  case    of
Vishakapatnam Port T rust, it was in relation to fixe d
place. The concept of virtual proje ction doe s not mean
that even without a fixed place, virtual projection
itself will lead to an inference of a PE. If on a fact s
there is no est ablishment of a fixe d place and disposal
test is not satisfied, then virtual projecti on itself
cannot be held to be a factor for cre ation of a PE .
Thus, the concept of virtual projection brought in by
the AO will not lead to any kind of establishment of
PE. In so fa r as allegation of t he department that
employees of assessee were responsible for all the
activities, it has been already de alt by us that if at all
it may have some bearing or relevance when
examining Service PE, which was absent in the then
prevalent DTAA. Thus, we hol d that there is no PE
within the terms of
Article 5
of India Finland DTAA.
53. Now we shall deal with issue of whether assesse e
had any kind of a business conne ction in India in the
form of NIPL. Th ough this issue has become slightly
academic in view of our above finding, because even if
it is held that assessee had a bu siness connection in
India, then also unde r the treaty provisions, if there i s
no PE in terms of
Article 5
, the n no income can be
attributed to India under
Article 7.
The Hon 'ble High
Court while remanding the matter back t o the Tri bunal
in terms of paragraph 38 has also directed to examine
as to whether the subsidia ry of the assessee w ould
provide    business   connection    or   is   Permanen t
Establishment. Thus, for the sake of completeness, we
shall discuss in brief, whether the assessee was
having any kind of business connection in India or not .
The provision of Se ction 5 of the
Income-tax Act
defines the scope of total income and su b secti on (2)
reads as under:--
"(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the tota l
  income of any previous year of a person wh o is a
27                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

  non-resident includes all     incom e   from    whatever
  source de rived which--
(a) is received or is deemed to be received in India
  in such year by or on behalf of such person; or
(b) accrues or arises or is dee med to a ccrue or
  arise to him in India during such year.''

First requirement is whether any income is deemed to
have been received in India to non-resident. Here on
the facts of the case this cl ause may not be
applicable, because undisputedly the title of the goods
of the GSM equipments supplied by the assessee has
been transferred outside India and the payments hav e
also been received by the asse ssee outside India .
Secondly, coming t o the provisi ons of su b secti on 2(b)
which deals with accrual of incom e or deemed a ccrua l
of income, the provision of Secti on 9 has to be seen
as it stood at the relevant time which read as under:
"Income deemed to accrue or a rise in India.
  9 (1) The following incomes sh all be deemed t o
  accrue or arise in India:--
(i) all income accruing or arising, whether directly
  or indi rectly, through or f rom any business
  connection in India , or th rou gh or from any
  property in India, or through or f rom any asset or
  source of income in India, [* * *] or through th e
  transfer of a capital asset situate in India.
Explanation-- For the purposes of this clause --
(a) in the case of a business of which all the
  operati ons are n ot carried out in India, the income
  of the business deemed under thi s clause to accrue
  or arise in India shall be only such part of the
  income as i s reasona bly attributable to th e
  operati ons carried out in India;
(b) in the case of a non-resident , no income shall
  be deemed t o accrue or arise in India to him
  through or from ope rations which are confined t o
28                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

  the purchase of goods in India for the purpose of
  export;
(c) in the case of a n on-residen t, being a pe rson
  engaged in the business of running a news agency
  or of publishing newspape rs, ma gazines or journals,
  no income shall be deemed to a ccrue or arise in
  India to him through or f rom activities which are
  confined to the collection of news and views in
  India for transmissi on out of India
(d) in the case of a non-resident, being --
(1) an individual who is not a citizen of India ; or

    (2) a firm which does not have any partner who is
    a citizen of India or who is residen t in India; or

    (3) a company which does not have any
    shareholde r who is a citizen of India or wh o is
    resident in India,

    no income shall be deemed t o accrue or a rise in
    India to such individual, firm or company through
    or from operati ons which are confined to the
    shooting of any cinematograph fil m in India."
The provisions of
section 9(1)(i)
of the Act clearly
provide that income accruing or arising, whether
directly or indi rectly, through or from any business
connection in India , or th rough or from any prope rty
in India, or through or from any asset or sou rce of
income in India, or through the transfer of a capital
asset situated in India shall be taxable in India if they
come within the meaning of income deemed to a ccru e
or a rise in India as explained in
Section 9
of the Act .
Thus, where any income a ccrues or a rises t o a non-
resident through or from any "business connection" in
India where all the ope rations are not ca rried out i n
India only such income will be chargeable t o tax in
India as can be attributed to th e operati ons ca rrie d
out in India. In light of these provisions and facts of
the case, we will analyse the rival contentions of the
29               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

parties and the judicial proposition highlighted before
us in this regard.
54. Before us, regarding the ex istence of business
connection, Mr. Dee pak Ch opra relied upon the
judgment of Hon 'ble Supreme C ou rt in the case of
C IT
v. R. D. Agga
rwal and C o. [1965] 56 ITR 20 (SC) and
submitted that mere pe rformance of some activities in
the Indian Territ ory does not afford a bu siness
connection of foreign com pany in India. What is
important to examine here is that the trading
activities within the territories should be linked with
the trading activities carried on outside the taxable
territories. Here , in this case, he submitted that the
activity in question is the off-shore supply of
equipment for which relevant trading activities are
procuring of raw materials, manufacture of finished
goods, sale and delivery of goods, which all have been
carrie d out outside India. Only the marketing activities
which have been pe rformed by th e Indian C ompany i s
somehow relevant, but for that there is a separat e
agreement between the assessee and NIPL and alrea dy
income arising there from to the Indian company has
been offered to tax in the hands of NIPL.
The activities
performed by NIPL only led to making of offers by the
customers in the taxable territorie s to purchase goods
manufactured by the non-resident which latter was not
obliged to acce pt. Thus, in view of the principle
laid
down by
the Hon 'ble Supreme C ourt in the case of
R.D. Aga rwal and Co. (supra) he submitted that no
business connection can be sai d to exist in the present
case. The conce pt of agency as en visaged in the scope
of business connection
u/s.9(1)(i)
of the Act wa s
introduced by the
Finance Act
, 20 03 and hence woul d
not be a pplicable to the a ssessment years unde r
consideration. Without prejudice , he submitted that
how much portion of the profits whatsoever from the
off-shores supply can be taxed in India is moot point.
Regarding the agreements for contracts of supply of
goods sold to the customers on CIP/FCA basis, h e
submitted that Hon'ble High C ourt in assessee's ow n
case had given a very categorical finding that taxable
event, i.e., transfer of title took place outside India ,
in support paragraph 17 of the judgment was relie d
30                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

upon which is quite relevant hence for the sake of
ready reference is reproduced hereunder:--
"17. We find that the terms of contract make i t
  clear that acceptance test is not a material event
  for pa ssing the title and risk i n the equipment
  supplied. It is because of the re ason that even if
  such test found out that the system did n ot conform
  to the contractual pa rameters, as per a rticle 21.1 of
  the supply contract, the only consequence would be
  that the Cellular Operator would be entitled to call
  upon the assessee to cure defect by repairing or
  replacing the defective part. If there was delay
  caused due t o the acceptance test not bein g
  complied with,
Article 19
of the Supply Cont ract
  provided for damages. Thus, the taxable event took
  place outside India with the passi ng of the propert y
  from seller to buyer and acceptance was not
  determinative of this factor. Th e position might
  have been different if the buyer had the right t o
  reject the equipment on the failure of the
  acceptance test carried out in India............"
Finally, he strongly relied upon the judgment of
  Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of Norte l
Networks India International Inc. v. DIT
[2016] 386
  ITR 353/241 Taxman 464/69 taxmann.com 47 and
  submitted that this judgment squ arely clinches the
  issue in favour of the assessee and strongly relied
  upon paragraphs 43 to 47 of
the said judgment
.
  Relying upon the aforesaid judgm ent, he submitted
  that mere existence of a business connection it i s
  not enough to trigger taxa bility in India in respect
  of off-shore supply of telecom m equipment to
  Indian customers because there must be same
  activity carried out in India relating to the off-shore
  supply.
55. On the other hand, lea rned C IT-DR has reiterate d
the same set of arguments that right from negotiation
of contract t o supply was undertaken through
employees of the assessee eith er independently or
through NIPL and the entire marketing activities for
31                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

such sale has been done throu gh NIPL. Hence, it
constitutes a business connection in India.
56. We have heard the rival contentions made by the
parties and also material place d on record. First of all,
we find that the Hon'ble High Court in the context of
LO has held that there is no material or evidence on
the basis of which it can be said that LO can offer a
business connection to asse ssee i n India and it doe s
not constitute PE of the assessee in India. The same
reason ostensibly applies to NIPL also, as the term s
and conditions of supply contract continues as spelle d
out in para 17 of the judgment remains the same.
Further, the Hon'ble High Court i n paragraph 13 ha s
noted that income which has been earned by the
assessee is a result of suppl y of softwa re an d
hardwa re license under the suppl y agreement and i f
supply agreement is taken on standalone basis then
such supplies under this agreement were made outside
India. The prope rties and goods h as passe d on t o the
buyers under the supply contra ct outside India whe re
the equipment was manufactured and for coming t o
this conclusion, the Hon'ble High Court has referre d
and relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Ishikawajima Harima Heavy
Industries Ltd. (su pra) that such agreement would not
be taxable in India and no profit arising from supply of
equipment outside India would be chargeable to tax in
India. The Hon'ble C ourt has even drawn the parallel s
from the ratio of
the said judgment
of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the following manner:--
"(i) In both the case s the property in the equipment
  passed outsi de India and in the case even the risk
  passed outsi de India;
(ii) the case Ishikawajima's even though it was to
  perform onshore se rvices includin g the erection and
  commissioning of the equipment supplied by it ,
  nevertheless, the Supreme Court held that no part
  of the profit on the offshore supply of the
  equipment was taxable in India as a consequence of
  the performance of such activities in India. In th e
  assessee's case the a ssessee doe s not perform an y
32                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation

service in India in connection with the installation
of the equipment or otherwise;
(iii) the performance of the a ccept ance test in Indi a
was not conside red a relevant circumstance whilst
determining whether any part of the profit on the
offshore supply was charge able to tax in India in
the case of Ishikawajima, so also in the assessee's
case.
(iv) although admittedly a permanent establishment
existed in the case of Ishi kawaji ma, nevertheless,
the Court held that no part of the profit arisin g
from the supply of the equipment was chargea ble to
tax in India as the permanent est ablishment had no
role t o play in the transa ction sou ght to be taxed a s
it look place abroad, whilst in the case of the
assessee, it has been f ound as a fact by both the
appellate      authorities     that    no     permanent
establishment existed;
(v) the mere signing of the con tract pu rsuant t o
which the supply was made in India, in both case s
does not result in giving rise to a tax liability in
India;
(vi) the existence of the overall responsibility
clause was held to be irrelevant in Ishikawajima's
case and likewise the overall agreement executed in
the assessee's case should not make any difference
to the taxability of the equipment supplied;
(vii) giving the nomenclature of a turnkey project
or w orks contract is n ot releva nt in determining
whether any profit arising f rom the supply of
equipment     pursuant   to   such   contract  wa s
chargeable to tax in India;
(viii) the Supreme Court relied upon Instruction No.
1829 to come to the conclusion t hat the existence
of an overall responsibility clause was not mate rial
in determining the tax liability arising from the
offshore supply of equipment and as the said
instruction continues to be in force for the
33                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

  assessment year relevant to the present appeal s,
  the existence of an overall agreement should make
  no difference to the taxability of the equipment
  supplied by the assessee."
In paragraph 15, the Hon'ble Court has further
observed that no doubt the contract in question was
signed in India but it may not be a relevant
circumstance to determine the taxability of such an
income and for this proposition th ey have referred the
judgment of Hon 'ble Andh ra Prade sh High Court in th e
case of Skoda Export v. Addl. CIT [1983] 143 ITR
452/[1984] 17 Taxman 256.
Finally in paragraph 17 a s
incorporate d    above,   Hon'ble   High    Court     ha s
categori cally said that the taxable event took place
outside India with the passing of the property from
seller to buyer and acceptance test is not the
determinative of this factor an d further refe rring t o
the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Mahabir Commercial Co. Ltd. v. CIT
[1972] 86 ITR 417
(SC), held that overall agreement does not result the
income accruing in India and t he execution of a n
overall agreement is prom oted by purely commercial
considerations as India Cellular Operat or w ould be
desirous of having a single entity that could liaise
with. Thus, it was conclude d that the place of
negotiation, the place of signing of agreement or
formula acceptance there of or ove rall responsibility of
the assessee are relevant circu mstances. Since the
transaction i s relating to the sale of goods, the
relevant factor and determinative factor would be a s
to where the property in good passes and in th e
present case, the finding is that the property has
passed on high seas. In the present case, the goods
were manufactured outside India and even the sal e
has taken place outside India a nd once this fact is
established even in those cases where there is a on e
composite contract supply has to be segregated from
installation   and   only  then   would    question    of
apportionment arise having re gard to expresse d
language of
Section 9(1)(i)
of th e Act, which make s
the income taxable in India to the extent it arises i n
India.
34                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation
57. Whence in the concept of LO already a categori cal
finding has been given by the Hon'ble High Court that
supply of off-shore e quipment w hich has been done
outside India cannot be held t o be taxable in In dia ,
then the same principle and proposition would also be
applicable in the case of NIPL also, because , so fa r a s
the supply contracts a re conce rne d there is absolutely
no change in the fa cts and circumstances as even
after the NIPL is incorporate d in May, 1995, the off
shore supply equipment and the supply contract
remained the same. The marketing activities and
installation contract unde rtaken by NIPL has been on
principal to principal basis; and in the case of former
agreement between assessee and NIPL , the payment
has been made to NIPL on cost plus marku p basi s
which has not been disturbed; and in the late r
agreement there is an indepen de nt contracts by NIPL
with Indian customers which has nothing to do with
the assessee. The income arising from both the
contracts are taxable in the ha nds of the NIPL in
India. Thus, the finding and the ratio of the Hon'ble
High Court would a pply mutatis mutandis though
rendered in the context of LO will also apply in the
case of NIPL as qua the supply contract the re is n o
material change in any case.
58. Apa rt from the ju dgment of Hon'ble Delhi High
Court in the case of assessee as discussed above, we
find that, Hon'ble High Court in Nortel Network Indi a
International Inc.
(supra) someh ow on similar set of
facts has reiterated the same principle. Before that
the relevant facts in the said case were as under:--
The assessee was incorporated in the USA and was
  a tax resident of the USA. The assessee was a part
  of the N group which was state d to be a leadin g
  supplier of hardware and softwa re for global system
  for mobile communication cellula r ra dio teleph one
  systems. The assessee was a step-down subsidia ry
  of N, a company incorporated in Canada. N(C) also
  had an indirect subsidia ry in In dia N (I) . N (I)
  negotiated and entere d into three contra cts with R ,
  namely, optical equipment contract, optical service s
  contract and the softwa re contract on June 8, 2002 .
35               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation

  On the same date, N (I) entered i nto an a greement
  assigning all rights and obligations to sell, supply
  and    deliver  equipment    under   the   equipment
  contract to the assessee . R and N(C) were also
  parties to the assignment contract and in terms
  thereof, N(C) gua ranteed the pe rformance of th e
  equipment contract by the assessee (assignee). In
  terms of the assignment con tract, R place d
  purchase orde rs dire ctly on the assessee and also
  made all payments for the equipment supplied
  directly to the assessee. The equi pment supplied t o
  R was manufactured by N(C) and another grou p
  entity in Ireland. The same was invoiced by the
  assessee directly to R and consideration for it was
  received directly by the assesse e. The Assessin g
  Officer held that income arose t o the a ssessee i n
  India and w as a ssessa ble. T he Commissione r
  (Appeals): held that keeping in view the facts of the
  case, 50 per cent, of the assessee's estimated
  profits could be att ributed to the permanent
  establishment in India. This was upheld by the
  Tribunal. The Income-tax authoriti es concluded that
  the assessee w as a shadow com pany of N(C) an d
  both the companies we re esse ntially a singular
  entity. In other words the Income-tax authorities
  disrega rded the corporate structure of the assesse e
  and proceeded on the basis that it s identity was the
  same as N(C).
On the issue, whether the appellant had a PE, both
fixed place PE and DAPE in India in the terms of
liaison office Nortel Canada an d also in terms of
subsidiary Nortel Network India Pv t. Ltd. which carried
out installation services, Hon 'ble High Court obse rved
and held as under:--
'It is appa rent from the plain reading of
Section
  9(1)
of the Act that all income which accrues or
  arises through or from any business connection i n
  India would be deemed t o accrue or a rise in India .
In
CIT v. R.D. Aggarwal & Co.
: (1965) 56 ITR 20
  (SC), the Supreme Cou rt observ ed that business
  connection w ould mean "a rel ation between a
  business carried on by a non-re sident and some
36                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation

activity in the taxable territ ories which are
attributable dire ctly or indi rectly to the earnings,
profits or gains of such busine ss". However, by
virtue of Explanation 1 to
Section 9(1)
of the Act ,
only such part of the income wh ich is reasonably
attributable to operati ons ca rrie d out in India woul d
be taxable. Thus, if it is accepted that the Assessee
has received only the consideration for the
equipment manufactured and delivered oversea s, i t
would be difficult to uphold the view that any part
of Assessee 's income is chargeabl e to tax under the
Act as n o portion of the said income could be
attributed to ope rations in India.
44. There is little material on re cord to hold tha t
Nortel India habitually exercises any authority on
behalf of the Assessee or Nortel C anada to conclude
contracts on their behalf. There is also no material
on record which w ould indi cate that Nortel Indi a
maintained any stocks of goods or merchan dise in
India from which goods were regu larly delivered on
behalf of the Assessee or Nortel Canada. Thus, by
virtue of Explanation 2 read with Explanation 3 t o
Section 9(1) (i)
of the Act, no part of Assessee 's
income could be brought to tax u nder the Act. It i s
only when a non-resident Assessee's income i s
taxable under the Act that the question whether any
benefit under the Double Taxation Avoidance T reaty
is required to be examined.
**    **   **
47. As noticed e arlier, there seem s to be no dispute
that the title to the equipment passed in favour of
Reliance overseas. However, the AO, CIT (A) an d
ITAT did not consider the same to be relevant as
according to them, the equipment continued to be
in the possessi on of the " Nortel Group" till its fina l
acceptance by Reliance. In our v iew, even if it is
accepted that the equipment supplied oversea s
continued to be in possession of Nortel India till the
final acceptance by Reliance, the same would n ot
imply that the Assessee 's incom e from su pply of
equipment could be taxed under t he Act. Clause (a)
37                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

  of Explanation 1 to
Section 9
( 1)(i) of the Act
  postulates the principle of a pport ionment and only
  such income that can be reasonably attributed to
  operati ons in India w ould be chargeable t o ta x
  under the Act . The position in Ish ikawajima-Harim a
  Heavy Industries (supra) was al so similar. There
  too, the equipments were supplied overseas and the
  contract or continued to retain con trol of e quipment
  and material till the provisional acceptance of th e
  work or the termination of the contract.'

Thus, the Hon'ble High C ourt i n Nortel's case ha s
clearly concluded that equipments supplied oversea s
cannot be taxed unde r the Act and as pe r clause (a) of
Explanation 1 to
Section 9(1)(i)
which postulates the
principle of apportionment, the only such income that
can be reasona bly attributed to assessee in India
could be cha rgea ble to tax u nder the Act an d
therefore, unde r the fact where there is off sh ore
supply of equipments nothing can be held to be taxed
in India in terms of
Section 9
( 1). In fact, in the
finding of the Hon 'ble High C ourt in para gra phs 69 t o
72, it has been held that the Indian subsidiary of
Nortel and LO will not constitute a PE. For the sake of
ready reference, paragraphs 69 t o 72 a re reproduce d
hereunder:--
69. The AO, CIT (A) and ITAT have held that the
  office of Nortel India and Nortel LO constituted a
  fixed place of business of the Assessee. As pointed
  out earlier, we find no materia l on record that
  would even remotely sugge st that Nortel LO ha d
  acted on behalf of the Assessee or Nortel Canada in
  negotiating and concluding agre ements on their
  behalf. Thus, it is not possi ble t o acce pt that the
  offices of Nortel LO could be con sidered a s a fixed
  place of business of the Assessee. In so far as
  Nortel India is concerned, there is also no evidence
  that the offices of Nortel India we re at the di sposal
  of the Assessee or Nortel Canada. Even if it is
  accepted that Nortel India had a cted on behalf of
  the Assessee or Nortel Canada, it does not
  necessarily follow that the offices of Nortel Indi a
  constituted a fixed place busi ness PE of the
38                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                Nokia Corporation

Assessee or Nortel Canada . Nortel India i s a n
independent company and a sepa rate taxable entity
under the Act . There i s no materi al on record which
would indicate that its office was used as an office
by the Assessee or Nortel Cana da. Even if it i s
accepted that certain a ctivities were carried on by
Nortel India on behalf of the Assessee or Nortel
Canada, unless the conditions of paragraph 5 of
Article 7
of the Indo-US DTAA is satisfied, it cannot
be held that Nortel India constitu ted a fixed place
of business of the Assessee or Nortel Canada.
70. The AO has further alleged t hat the offices of
Nortel LO and Nortel Indi a were used as a sale s
outlet. In our view, this finding is also unmerited as
there is no material which w ould support this view .
The facts on record only indicate that Nortel Indi a
negotiated contracts with Reliance. Even assuming
that the contracts f orm a pa rt of the single turnkey
contract , which include supply of equipment - as
held by the authorities below - the same cannot
lead to the conclusion that Nortel India was acting
as a sales outlet.
71. The AO's conclusion that there is an installation
PE in India, is also without an y merit. A bare
perusal of the Services Contract clearly indicates
that the tasks of installation, commissioning an d
testing was contracted to Nortel India and Nortel
India performed such tasks on its own behalf an d
not on behalf of the Assessee or Nortel Canada .
Undisputedly, Nortel India was also received the
agreed consideration      for pe rf ormance  of   the
Services Contra ct directly by Reliance.
72. The finding that Nortel Indi a i s a services PE of
the Assessee is also errone ous. Th ere is no material
to hold that Nortel India pe rformed services on
behalf of the Assessee.
73. The AO has also held that Nortel Indi a
constituted Dependent Agent PE of the Assessee in
India. The aforesaid conclusi on wa s premised on the
finding that Nortel India habitually concludes
39                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

  contracts on behalf of the Assessee and othe r
  Nortel Group Companies. In the present case, there
  is no materi al on record which w ould indicate tha t
  Nortel India ha bitually exercises authority t o
  conclude contracts for the Assessee or Nortel
  Canada. In order to conclude t hat Nortel Indi a
  constitutes a Dependent Agent PE, it would be
  necessary for the AO to n otice at least a fe w
  instances where contracts had been concluded by
  Nortel India in India on behalf of other grou p
  entities. In absence of any such e vidence, this view
  could not be sustained.
74. The CIT (A) as well as the ITAT has proceede d
  on the basis that the Assessee had employed the
  services of Nortel India for fulfilling its obligation s
  of installation, commissi oning, a fter sales service
  and warranty services. The ITAT also concurre d
  with the view that since employees of grou p
  companies had visited Indi a in connection with the
  project, the business of the Assessee was carrie d
  out by those employees from the business premise s
  of Nortel India and Nortel LO. In this rega rd, it i s
  relevant to observe that a subsidi ary company is an
  independent tax entity and its income is chargeabl e
  to tax in the state where it is resident. In the
  present case, the tax payable on activities carried
  out by Nortel India w ould have to be ca ptured i n
  the hands of Nortel India.
Chapter X of the Act
provides an exhaustive mechanism for determining
  the Arm s Length Price in case of related pa rty
  transactions f or ensu ring that real income of a n
  Indian Assessee i s charged to ta x under the Act .
  Thus, the income from installation, commissioning
  and testing activities as well as any function
  performed by expatriate employ ees of the group
  companies seconded to Nortel India would be
  subject to tax in the hands of Nortel India and the
  same cannot be considere d as income of the
  Assessee."
This judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court clearl y
clinches the issues in hand, both on the point of
taxability u/s. 9(1)(i) and also in the context of PE.
40               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

Thus, respectfully following the ratio laid down in
aforesaid judgment of Hon 'ble High Court in the case
of assessee as well a s in the case of Nortel, we hol d
that income of the assessee from off-shore supply of
equipments in pursuance of supply contract cannot be
brought to tax in India.
59. Since we have al ready held that nothing is taxabl e
on   account   of  signing,   netw ork  planning    an d
negotiation of off shore supply contracts, therefore ,
there is no question of any attribution of income on
account of these activities which are purely related t o
supply contracts. Accordingly, the issue of att ribution
which has been remanded back by the Hon'ble High
Court has become pu rely academic.
60. Now coming to the last issue of taxability of
interest from Vendor Financing, we find that the
Assessing Officer in his order ha s made the a ddition
on the ground that assessee prov ided credit facilities
to its cust omers f or which it shou ld have charge d the
interest on the same. For comin g to this conclusi on,
he has referre d to one clause giv en in paragraph 6.9
of the contract between the assessee and Modi Telstra
to conclude that purchaser we re liable to pay interest
@18% for ea ch day ela psed f rom the due date of
actual payment. Thus, the only reason for ma king
such an addition was existence of a particular clause
in the agreement signed between the assessee and
some of the Indian Cellular Opera tors. The ld. CIT (A)
too has confirmed the said addi tion on the groun d
that, since the assessee is foll owing a me rcantile
system of accounting and a s per t he contract assesse e
was entitled to receive such interest, and therefore ,
same should have been accounte d for and in support
he has relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of State Ban k of Travancore (supra) .
Ld. counsel for the assessee had submitted that the
said ju dgment has al ready been distinguished in the
subsequent judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of UCO Bank (supra) and se condly, only the real
income can be brought t o tax an d not something on
hypothetical   basis,    because    t here  has   to   be
corresponding liability to the other party to wh om the
41                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

income becomes due and here such a clause was never
enforced by the parties. Al ready the arguments of
both the parties have been incorporated in ea rlier pa rt
of the order; therefore , same is not being discusse d
again.
61. After conside ring the relevant finding and riva l
contentions, we find that, it has not been brought on
record that in any of the contra ct the assessee ha d
charged any interest on delayed payment or providin g
any credit facilities to its customers or any custome r
has paid any such am ount for ea ch day elapsed f rom
the due date to the actual payme nt. Once none of the
parties have either acknowledge d the debt or any
corresponding liability of the othe r pa rty to pay, then
it cannot be held that any income should be taxed on
notional basis which has neither accrued nor received
by the assessee. Whence the benefit of credit period
given to the customers has neit her accrued to the
assessee n or ackn owledged by th e other person, then
it cannot be said that interest on notional basis shoul d
be calculated for the purpose of taxation. Otherwise ,
it is a well settled proposition th at income cannot be
generated, actual or accrued if no income has actuall y
been accrued or received to the assessee. There ha s
to be some income which has resu lted to the assessee
and even though in books, entri es have been made
about hypothetical income which does not materialize d
at all cannot be brought to tax. Th e income tax is levy
on real income, i .e., the profits a rrived on commerci al
principles. Assessee must have re ceived or acquired a
right to receive the income before it can be taxed. In
other words, there must be a debt owed t o it by
somebody if it is to be taxed on accrual basis unless a
debt has been created in favour of the assessee by
somebody it cannot be sai d that income has accrue d
to it or it ha s a ri ght to receiv e the income. This
proposition has been well settled by Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of
E.D. Sassoon Co. Ltd. v. CIT
[1954] 26
ITR 27, CIT v. Ashokbhai Chaamanbha
i
[1965] 56
ITR 42, CIT v. Shoorji Vallabhdas and C
o.
[1962] 46 ITR 144 and Godhara Electricity Co. Ltd. v .
CIT, [1997] 225 ITR 746/91 Taxm an 351. Further, the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
42               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation

State Bank of T ravancore, (supra) which has bee n
relied upon by the ld. CIT (A), has not been treated t o
be correct enunciation of law by the Hon'ble Suprem e
Court in the ca se of Godha ra Electricity Co. Lt d.
(supra) and UC O Ban k (supra). Here in the present
case, the assessee itself has n ot treated the amoun t
of interest to be due from any of the telecomm
operat ors either recognise d as a debt or a s a legal
claim. Even the conduct of the parties show that such
a clause even though may have been agreed upon ha s
never been enforce d or a cted upon. In such a
situation, in our opinion, the amount of interest
cannot const rue a de bt due to th e assessee. Further,
assessee has not debited the account of any customer
with interest which can be treat ed as income of the
assessee. Nowhere has it been h eld by the Assessing
Officer/CIT (A) that such an interest is legally
claimable right against the Indian customers i n
respect of interest on delayed cre dit period on Vendor
Financing. Thus, we hold that when assessee has
neither treated the amount to be legally claimed nor
has acknowledge d any debt due too on its customer as
delayed payment then it cannot be held that any
interest accrued to the asse ssee, and therefore, such
a notional charging of interest f or each day elapse d
from the due date t o the actual payment cannot be
held to be taxable t o the assessee.
This proposition
has also been now well upheld by Hon'ble Suprem e
Court in the case of
Excel Industries Ltd.
(supra) .
Hence, no income can be said to accrue to th e
assessee on account of delayed payments as neither
there was any corresponding lia bility on any of the
debtors nor a ssessee had claimed any entitlement on
such an interest. Accordingly, this issue is also
decided in favour of the assessee.
62. The aforesaid findings and conclusions given in
respect f or the A.Y . 1997-98, will apply mutatis
mutandis in the appeal for the A.Y. 1998-99 year, as
exactly similar facts and issues a re permeating in this
year also.
63. In the result, all the issues which have bee n
remanded back by the Hon'ble High Court to this
43                     ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                     Nokia Corporation

       Tribunal stands decided in favour of the assessee and
       against the Revenue."
11.    Si nce, the matter of PE stands adjudi cated i n favour of
the assessee, i n the absence of a ny change i n the materi al
facts, fol l owing the earl i er order of thi s Tri bunal , we hereby
hol d that the assessee do not have a PE withi n the terms of
Arti cl e 5 of Indi a-Finl and DTAA. Thus, thi s ground of appeal
of the assessee i s all owed.
12.    Ground Nos. 4 to 6 of assessee 's appeal i n ITA No.
5819/Del /2010 and Ground No. 2 of de partmental appeal i n
ITA    Nos.   1236   to   1238/Del /2010         deal s   wi th     supply         of
equi pment as hardwa re and soft ware a rbi trari l y basi s and
whether the consi derati on towards the softwa re porti on of
the equi pment i s i n the nature of royal ti es under Arti cl e 13
of Indi a-Fi nl and DTAA.
13.    The orde r of the l d. CIT ( A) on the taxabili ty of the
suppl y of hardwa re i n rel ati on to the PE has al ready been
di scussed above.
14.    Regardi ng the     taxabili ty    of    revenue    from         suppl y     of
software, the l d. CIT (A) hel d that si nce software i s an
i ntegral part of the tel ecom hardware and software suppl y
has been made pursuant to the contract i n respect of whi ch
a PE has been uphel d, software i s effectivel y connected to
the PE and shoul d be deal t wi th as the "busi ness profi ts' i n
accordance wi th provi si ons of Arti cl e 7. In vi ew thereof,
there i s no need to segregate the payments for software
from    other   busi ness    recei pts        from   suppl y      of     tel ecom
44             ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                       Nokia Corporation

hardwa re. The    same vi ew has al so been uphel d by the
Honourabl e Speci al Bench of the Delhi ITAT for Assessment
Years 1997-98 and 1998-99 wherei n at Para 281 of the
orde r, i t has hel d as under:
"The fourth question is regarding the treatment to be
     accorded t o the payments made to the assessee for
     supply of software. The AO has assessed the payment s
     as royalties but the CIT(A) ha s assessed it as business
     profits on the ground that the a ssessee has a PE in
     India in the form of Both "LO" and NTPL. On this
     point, the parties a re agreed that the nature of
     payments made by the cellular operat ors for use of
     software supplied by the asse see alongwith the
     hardwa re is the same as in the cases of Ericsson and
     Motorola . Only one aspe ct needs to be n oticed in thi s
     case and that is that in para 8.1 of his order, the CIT
     (Appeals) has decided that the amount paid for use of
     the software i s to be t reated as the commercia l
     income or business profits of the assessee since the
     assessee had been held by him t o have PE in India .
     However, the nature of the paym ent had been f ound
     by us in the cases of Ericsson an d Motorol a to be not
     royalty at all. We have found that the payment is for a
     copyrighted a rticle and not the copyright right. Th e
     same finding holds good in this case also. Therefore ,
     even
Article 13.6
of the DTAA which provides that if
     the foreign enterprise ha s a PE in India, the royalties
     shall be taxed not unde r
Article 13
but as business
     profits under
Article 7
of the DTAA will not be
     attracted. In other w ords even though we have held
     that the 100% Indian subsidiary of the assessee,
     namely, NTPL, constitutes the assessee's PE in India ,
     the payment for the software cannot be asse sse d
     under
Article 15
for the reasons that it is not in the
     nature of royalty. However, a question may arise as to
     why the payment cannot be assessed as "business
     profits under
Article 7.
The reason is that the software
     has been held by us to be part of the GSM Cellular
     Systems as a whole, the sale of which has taken place
     outside India as held by us earlier."
45                   ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                Nokia Corporation

      Accordingly, relying on the decisi on of the Honoura ble
      Special Bench of the Delhi ITAT, I hold that there is
      no need to bifurcate the payments from supply of
      telecommunication system separately into hardwa re
      and software . The entire receipt s in respect of the
      contract for Supply of telecom equipment including
      hardwa re and softwa re shall be treated as business
      Income."
15.   Thi s i ssue has been summari zed in the judgment of
Hon'bl e Hi gh Court as under:
"6.1 These questions have been decided by the Special Bench
      vide judgment dated 22.06.2005; however, in so far as the
      appeal relating to the assessee is considered, the following
      findings have been given by the Special Bench which finding
      too has been summarized in the judgment of the Hon'ble High
      Court in the following manner:--
(1)   Liaison Office neither constituted a business connection
            under the Act nor a PE of the Nokia under
Article 5
of the
            India-Finland DTAA, as it merely carried on advertising
            activities in India.
(2)   Sale of hardware took place outside India and no income
            from sale of hardware accrued to Nokia in India.
      (3)   Nokia was not responsible for installation of telecom
            equipment and Nokia's arrangement with the Indian
            Telecom Operators did not constitute a works contract.
NIPL is a separate corporation entity and is also assessed
            separately for its installation income.
      (4)   However, Nokia was held to have a PE in India in the form
            of NIPL, on the basis that Nokia virtually projected itself in
            India through NIPL and Mr. Hannu Karavirta, acted for
            both. Losses incurred by NIPL and guarantees given by
            Nokia that it will not 'dilute its shareholding in NIPL below
            51% without written permission of Indian Telecom
            Operators was used as the main basis to hold that Nokia
            was in a position to control and monitor NIPL's activities.
      (5)   While upholding NIPL as a PE of Nokia, the Special Bench
            observed that it did not matter that there was no direct
            evidence for the control of NIPL by Nokia. For purposes of
            PE, what is relevant is only the perception that NIPL was a
            projection of Nokia, whether or not in fact and in truth its
46                     ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                            Nokia Corporation

      activities were being controlled/monitored            by     Nokia.
      Following discussion ensued on this aspect:--
'... We only meant to convey that because of the close
      connection between the assessee and NIPL, it was possible
      to look upon NIPL as a "virtual projection" of the assessee
      in India. We have in fact clarified in the same paragraph
      that what matters is that there was scope for previewing
      the assessee's soul in the body of NIPL and that it did not
      matter that there was no direct evidence for the control of
      NIPL by the assessee. For purposes of PE, what is relevant
      is only the perception that NIPL was a projection of the
      assessee, whether or not in fact and truth its activities
      were being controlled/monitored by the assessee. Our
      observations are therefore confined to the question of PE.
      Otherwise, both the assessee and NIPL remain separate
      corporate entities and NIPL has also been assessed
      separately for its installation income. Thus the
      observations in para 274(b) have no relevant to what has
      been discussed in this paragraph.'
(6)   Payment for supply of software was not in the nature of
      'royalty' because the same was for a copyrighted article
      and 'not for a copyright. Further, software was held to be
      integral part of GSM equipment. Payment for supply of
      software was held not taxable both under the provisions of
      the Act and under DTAA.
(7)   Interest income from vendor financing was held to have
      been correctly added.
(8)   Following 3 activities were held to have been carried out
      by NIPL, the PE of Nokia in India:
(a)   Network Planning;
(b)   Negotiations in connection with the sale of
      equipment; &
(c)   Signing of supply and installation contracts.
(9)   20% of the net profit determined on the basis of the global
      net profit of Nokia (10% towards signing of the contract
      and 10% towards other two activities) was attributed to
      the PE in India. This margin was directed to be applied on
      the Indian sales of Nokia (clarified by the Special Bench of
      the ITAT to mean revenues arising from supply of
      hardware and software).
47              ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                               Nokia Corporation
7. The substantial question of law admitted by the
Hon'ble High Court and the fin al conclusion/answer
given by the Hon'ble C ourt can be tabulated in the
following manner:--
Revenue Appeals b efore H on'ble High Court
(lead case ITA 512/2007)
Substantial Question of Law
                                   Conclusions
admitted by Hon'ble High Court
Q1. Whether on a true and
correct interpretation of secti on
9(1)(i) of the
Income-tax Act
,
the Respondent can be said to
have a 'business connection ' in
India in the form of a Liaison
                                   Decided in favour
Office?
of assessee (Para
Q2. Without pre judice, whether
                                   23 of HC Order)
the      respon dent     has     a
'permanent esta blishment' in
India because of its Liaison
Office within the meaning of the
relevant    provisi on  of   DTAA
between India and Finland?
Q3. Whether any part of the
consideration     for  supply   of
software      stated    by     the
                                   Decided in favour
Respondent to be integral to
                                   of assessee (Para
the equipment is taxable as
                                   30 of HC Order)
'royalty' either under
section
9(l)(vi)
or     the    relevant
provisi on
Q4. Whether on facts and in law
without prejudice, the Tribunal
is correct in law in att ributing Issue      remitted
only 20% of the Global Net back to AO (Para
Operating Profits t o the PE in 31 of HC Order)
the form of NIPL (Noki a India
Pvt. Ltd.) a subsidiary
Q5. Whether on facts an d in law Decided in favour
interest under
section 234B
is of assessee ( Para
leviable?                          30 of HC Order)
Assessee Appeals before Hon'ble High Court
(ITA 1137 & 1138/2007
48                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                         Nokia Corporation

      Q1. Whether on a true and
      correct interpretation of the
      relevant DTAAA the T ribunal's
      reasoning is right in law in
      holding     that     NIPL,     (the
      subsidiary of the Appellant) is a
      permanent establishment?
Q2. Whether the T ribunal was
      right in law in holding that a
      perception of virtual projecti on
      of the foreign enterprise in
      India results in a pe rmanent
      establishment?                        All these Issues
      Q3. Whether prejudice , if the        have         been
      answers to Q.1 &                      remitted back to
      Q.2 a re in affirmative, is there     ITAT (P ara 38 of
      any attribution of profits on         High Court order)
      account of signing, network
      planning and negotiation of
      offshore supply contra cts in
      India and if yes, the extent and
      basis thereof?
Q4. Whether in law the notional
      interest        on         delayed
      consideration    for    supply   of
      equipment     and    licensing   of
      software is taxable in the hands
      of assessee as intere st from
      vendor financing?
16.   From the above, we fi nd that the i ssue of suppl y of
hardwa re has been deal t i n poi nt no. 2 at pa ra 6 .1 and suppl y
of software whi ch i s i ntegral to the suppl y of hardware an d
taxing i t royal ty has been deci ded vi de Questi on No. 3 by the
Hon'bl e Hi gh Court of Delhi vi de orde r dated 7 t h Septembe r
2012. It stands adjudi cated that the sal e of hardware t ook
pl ace outsi de Indi a and hence no income from sal e of hardware
accrued to Noki a i n Indi a. The i ssue of royal ty on the software
has been hel d i n favour of the assessee base d on the orde r i n
49                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                        Nokia Corporation

the case of (343 ITR 470) DIT Vs Eri cssi on AB. It was hel d that
these payments cannot be sai d t o be i n the nature of royal ty
ei ther as per the Indi an
Income Tax Act
or DTAA and hence
cannot be hel d to be taxabl e. It was hel d that what was sol d
was a GSM whi ch consi sted bot h hardware as wel l as the
software and hence they cannot be taxed under two di fferent
arti cles. For rea dy reference the rel evant part of the judgment
of the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court i s reproduced as under:
"QUESTION OF LAW NOS. 3 & 5
25. This aspect has already been discussed in detail
     by us in DIT v. E ricsson A.B. [2 012] 343 ITR 470 /
     204 Taxman 192 / [2011] 16 taxmann.com 371
     (Delhi) which reasoning equally applies to these
     cases. The relevant portion of th e said judgment is
     reproduced bel ow:
"55. Once we proceed on the basis of aforesai d
     factual findings, it is difficult to hold that payment
     made to the assessee was in the nature of royalty
     either under the
Income-Tax Act
or under the DT AA.
     We have to keep in mind what was sold by the
     assessee t o the Indi an custome rs was a GSM which
     consisted both of the ha rdwa re as well as the
     software, therefore, the T ribunal is right in holding
     that it was not permissible for the Revenue to assess
     the same under two different art icles. The softwa re
     that was loa ded on the hardware did not have any
     independent existence. The software supply is an
     integral pa rt of the GSM mobile te lephone system and
     is used by the cellular operator for providing the
     cellular services to its customers. There could not be
     any independent use of such soft ware. The softwa re
     is embodied in the system and t he revenue accepts
     that it could not be used independently. This software
     merely facilitates the functioning of the equipment
     and is an integral pa rt there of. On these facts, it
     would be useful to refer t o the judgment of the
     Supreme Court in TATA C onsultancy Services v. State
     of Andhra Pra desh, 271 ITR 401 , wherein the Apex
50                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

Court held that software which is incorporated on a
media would be goods an d, there fore, liable to sales
tax. Following discussion in this behalf is requi red t o
be noted:-
"In our view, the term "goods" as used in
Article
366(12)
of the Constitution of India and as defined
under the said Act are ve ry wide a nd include all types
of movable prope rties, whether those properties be
tangible or intangible. We are in complete agreement
with the observations made by this Court in
Associ ated
Cement Companies Ltd.
(supra). A software
programme may consist of various commands which
enable the compute r to pe rform a de signated ta sk.
The copyright in that programme may remain with the
originator of the programme. But the moment copies
are made and ma rketed, it be com es goods, which a re
susceptible to sales tax. Even intellectual prope rty,
once it is put on t o a media , whet her it be in the form
of books or canvas (In case of pa inting) or compute r
discs or cassettes, and marke ted would becom e
"goods". We see no difference between a sale of a
software programme on a CD/floppy disc from a sale
of music on a cassette/CD or a sale of a film on a
video cassette/CD. In all such ca ses, the intellectual
property has been incorporated on a media for
purposes of transfer. Sale is not just of the media
which by itself has very little value. The software and
the media cannot be split up. What the buyer
purchases and pays for is not the disc or the CD. As
in the case of paintings or books or music or films the
buyer is purchasing the intellectual prope rty and not
the media i.e. the pape r or cassette or disc or CD.
Thus a transaction sale of computer software is
clearly a sale of "goods" within the meaning of the
term as defined in the said Act. The term "all
materials, articles and commodi ties" includes both
tangible and intangible/incorporea l prope rty which is
capable of abstraction, consum ption and use and
which can be t ransmitted, t ran sferred, delivered,
stored, possesse d etc. The softwa re programmes have
all these attributes.
.....................
51                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                         Nokia Corporation

      ...................
29. Our re asoning given in Eri csson A.B. (supra)
      therefore would apply to this case as well. Even
      otherwise, we find, as a fact, the assessee had
      entered into contract f or supply of GSM e quipment.
      Responsibility for installation and commissi oning of
      the equipment and provisioning of technical services
      was untaken by NIPL underta ken its separate contract
      with Indian customers. This insta llation contract ha s
      not been entered into between the assessee and Tata .
      We also find that Clause 19.1 of the supply contra ct
      between the respondent and T ata has been examined
      threadba re by the ITAT Special Bench in para 277 to
      hold that title and risk in the equipment has passe d
      to Tata outside India and thereaf ter, Tata continues
      to hold the hardware at their own risk an d therefore ,
      no part of the contract prior to the passing of the title
      and risk could be lawfully terminated by it. Tata's
      right to terminate the contract in case of breach of
      any material condition relates to failure on the pa rt of
      the respondent t o supply fully functional equipment.
      Clause 19.1 of the supply contract with Tata does not
      provide that non-perf ormance of "Acceptance Test" i s
      a material conditi on for breach of the supply contract
      and reference placed by the Revenue is factually
      incorre ct. That contract further re veals that NIPL wa s
      responsi ble for unde rtaking accept ance test under the
      terms of its installation cont ra ct with the Indian
      customers. The fact that Acce pta nce Test was to be
      done by respon dent's subsidi ary, NIPL has been
      specifically noted by the ITAT Special Bench in para
279. We are therefore, of the opinion that this
      submission of the Revenue is factually in correct.
30. Question nos.3 and 5 are accordingly decided in
      favour of the assessee and against the Revenue."
Thus, thi s ground of appeal of the assessee i s all owed.
17.   Ground No. 7 of assessee's appe al i n ITA Nos. 1006 to
1008/Del /2010 and Ground No. 9 of assessee 's appe al i n ITA
52                     ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                 Nokia Corporation

No. 5819/Del /2010 deal s with taxabili ty of the noti onal i nterest
/vendor    fi nanci ng   on   del ayed   consi derati on     for     suppl y        of
equi pment and li censi ng of software.
18.   On thi s i ssue, the l d. CIT (A) has uphel d the addi ti on
made on the noti onal i nterest @ 18% based on the judgment of
Speci al Bench of ITAT Del hi dated 22 n d June 2005. The rel evant
part of the l d. CIT (A) i s as under:
"The appellant has submitted t hat the assessing
      officer has arbitrarily imputed an income of Rs
      5,00,00,000/- from vendor financing for each of the
      Assessment Y ears 2003-04 to 2006-07, without
      assigning any reasons in his assessment order,
      Further, as per the appellant while imputing income
      from vendor financing at Rs 5,00,00,000/- the
      assessing officer has not provide d any basis for the
      same. The said income has been considered as
      "business income" and taxed a t the rate of 4 0
      percent (plus surcharge and cess) on the basis that
      such income is taxable in India a s per provisions of
      the India-Finland tax treaty.
In my view, this issue does not need any detailed
      discussion. The mere fact that no credit was taken in
      the account books for interest cannot stop the
      accrual thereof as the appellant's income. The
      Honourable Special Bench of the Delhi ITAT at Para
      283 of the orde r has held that i ncome from vendor
      financing has been rightly impute d since there i s no
      evidence on record to subst antiate that such interest
      was not charge d. Para 283 of t he orde r reads as
      under:
"We have considere d the facts and the rival
          contentions but we find no Substance in the
          assessed's case . The findings of the CIT (Appeals)
          have not been refuted before u s on the ba sis of
          any material or evidence. The existence of the
          clause in the agreement for charging interest @
          18% p.a. is not denied. All that is contended is
53                  ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                            Nokia Corporation

        that the clause was not activated but this
        contention is without su bstance because if the
        agreement is in force then it is in force with all its
        clauses which includes the chargi ng of interest. It
        was for the assessee to show on the basis of any
        evidence    or    correspon dence     or   subsequent
        agreement modifying the earlier agreement under
        which interest was chargea ble. T his has not been
        done. The mere fact that no cre dit was taken in
        the account books for the interest cannot stop the
        accrual there of as the assessee's income. Even
        before us n o evidence was filed t o show that the
        financial position of the cell operators w as bad an d
        that there was an agreement between the parties
        not to charge intere st or n ot to activate the clause
        providing for interest. In these ci rcumstances, we
        uphold the addition for both the years."
Respectfully,  following   the   decision  of    the
      Honourable Spe cial Bench of the Delhi TATAT, I hold
      that income from vendor financing is taxable in the
      hands of the appellant. In the absence of details
      from the appellant, the AO wa s right in estimating
      this  income.   Therefore,   the  addition  of   Rs.
      5,00,00,000/- on this account is upheld for ea ch of
      the AYs 2003-04 to 2006-07."
19.   Much water has fl own subsequent to the order of the
Speci al Bench of ITAT on whi ch the l d. CIT (A) reli ed upon.
Subsequentl y,   post   Hi gh   Court   order   in   the   case       of    the
assessee, a Spe ci al Bench of ITAT Del hi vi de order dated 5 t h
June 2018 has deci ded thi s i ssue in favour of the assessee. For
ready reference, the orde r of the Speci al Bench of ITAT Delhi
dated 5 t h June 2018 i s reproduce d as under:
"60. Now coming to the la st issue of taxability of
      interest from Vendor Financing, we find that the
      Assessing Office r in his orde r has made the addition
      on the ground that asse ssee provi ded cre dit facilities
      to its custome rs for which it shoul d have charge d the
      interest on the same. For coming to this conclusion ,
54                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

he has referred to one cl ause given in paragraph 6.9
of the cont ract between the assessee an d Modi
Telstra to conclude that pu rchase r were liable t o pay
interest @18% for each day ela psed from the due
date of actual payment. Thus, the only reason for
making such an a ddition was existence of a pa rticula r
clause in the agreement signed between the assessee
and some of the Indian Cellular Ope rators. The ld.
CIT (A) too has confirmed the said addition on the
ground that, since the assessee is following a
mercantile system of accounting and as per the
contract assessee w as entitled to receive such
interest, and the refore , same should have been
accounted for and in support he has relied upon the
judgment of H on'ble Supreme C ourt in the case of
State Bank of Travancore (supra). Ld. counsel for the
assessee had submitted that the said judgment has
already   been    distinguished   in    the  subsequent
judgment of H on'ble Supreme C ourt in the case of
UCO Ban k (supra) and secondly, only the real income
can be brought to tax and not something on
hypothetical   basis,   because    t here   has  to   be
corresponding liability to the other party to whom the
income becomes due and he re such a clause wa s
never enforced by the parties. Al ready the arguments
of both the pa rties have been incorporated in ea rlie r
part of the orde r; therefore , same is not being
discussed again .
61. After considering the releva nt finding and rival
contentions, we find that, it has not been brought on
record that in any of the contract the assessee ha d
charged any interest on delayed payment or providing
any credit facilities t o its custom ers or any custome r
has paid any such amount for each day elapsed from
the due date t o the actual payment. Once n one of the
parties have either acknowle dge d the debt or any
corresponding liability of the other party to pay, then
it cannot be held that any income should be taxed on
notional basis which has neither a ccrued nor received
by the assessee . Whence the ben efit of credit peri od
given to the customers has neither accrued t o the
assessee nor acknowledged by the other person , then
it cannot be said that interest on notional basi s
55                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                  Nokia Corporation

should be calculated for the purpose of taxation.
Otherwise, it is a well settled proposition that income
cannot be generated, actual or a ccrued if no income
has actually been accrued or received to the
assessee. There has to be some income which has
resulted to the assessee and even though in books,
entries have been made about hypothetical income
which does not mate rialized at all cannot be brough t
to tax.
The income tax is levy on real income , i.e.,
the profits arrived on commercial principles. Assessee
must have received or acqui red a right to receive the
income before it can be taxed. In other words, there
must be a debt owed t o it by somebody if it is to be
taxed on accrual basis unless a debt has been created
in favour of the asse ssee by som ebody it cannot be
said that income has accrued to it or it has a right to
receive the income. This proposi tion has been well
settled by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of E.D.
Sassoon C o.
Ltd. v. CIT
[1954] 26 ITR 27, C IT v.
Ashokbhai Chaamanbhai [1965] 56
ITR 42, CIT v.
Shoorji Vallabhdas and C
o. [196 2] 46
ITR 144 and
Godhara Electricity Co. Ltd. v. C IT
, [1997] 225 ITR
746/91 Taxman 351.
Further, the judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of
Travancore, (supra) which has been relied upon by
the ld. CIT (A), has not been treated to be correct
enunciation of law by the Hon'bl e Supreme Cou rt in
the case of
Godhara Electricity Co. Ltd.
(supra) an d
UCO Bank (supra). Here in the present ca se, the
assessee itself has n ot treate d the amount of interest
to be due from any of the telecomm operat ors eithe r
recognise d as a debt or as a le gal claim. Even the
conduct of the parties show that such a clause even
though may have been agreed upon has never been
enforced or acted upon. In such a situation, in our
opinion, the am ount of interest cannot construe a
debt due to the assessee . Furthe r, assessee has not
debited the account of any customer with interest
which can be treated as income of the assessee.
Nowhere has it been held by the Assessing Officer/CIT
(A) that such an interest is legally claimable right
against the Indian customers in respect of interest on
delayed credit pe riod on Vendor Financing. Thus, we
hold that when assessee has neither treated the
56                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                 Nokia Corporation

      amount to be legally claimed nor has acknowledge d
      any debt due too on its customer as delayed payment
      then it cannot be held that any interest accrued t o
      the assessee, and therefore , such a notional charging
      of interest for each day elapsed from the due date t o
      the actual payment cannot be held to be taxable t o
      the assessee.
This propositi on has also been now well
      upheld by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Excel
      Industries Ltd.
(supra) . Hence, no income can be said
      to accrue to the assessee on account of delaye d
      payments as neither there was any correspondin g
      liability on any of the debtors nor assessee ha d
      claimed any entitlement on such an interest.
Accordingly, this issue is also deci ded in favour of the
      assessee."
As a resul t, appeal of the assessee on thi s ground i s all owed.
20.   Ground No. 8 of assessee's appe al i n ITA Nos. 1006 to
1008/Del /2010, Ground Nos. 7 & 8 of assessee's appeal i n ITA
No. 5819/Del /2010 and Ground No. 3 of departmental appeal i n
ITA   Nos.   1236     to   1238/Del /2010      deal s    with   taxabili ty         of
revenue from R&D activi ti es undertaken i n Indi a.
21.   The background of the i ssue i s that Noki a Indi a, the
Indi an subsi di ary of the assessee has carri ed out R&D acti vi ties
for the assessee duri ng the AYs 2004-05 to 2006-07 i n terms of
the "Research and Devel opment Subcontracti ng Agreement".
AO i n the assessment orders for these years has hel d that
Noki a Indi a consti tutes 'fixed pl aces PE' and 'Dependent Agent
PE' of the assessee i n respect of these R&D activi ti es.
22.   The l d. CIT (A) hel d that si nce the assessee does not have
separate a ccounts i n respect of such expenses and revenues
rel atabl e to them and determi nati on of profi ts attri butabl e to
the   PE   poses    di ffi cul ties.   Therefore   in   terms   of    Arti cl e      7
57                         ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                               Nokia Corporation

(paragraphs 3 an d 4) of the DTAA, appli cati on of Rul e 10 of IT
Rul es, 1962 by the AO i s uphel d. However, as far as the
attri buti on rati o of 126% to 130% i s concerned, i t was hel d
that the same i n i s excessi ve. From the cal cul ati ons of the AO
menti oned above i t i s seen that he has attri buted 100% of the
profi ts to R&D acti viti es. Profi t of an enterpri se i s the resul t of
vari ous acti vi ti es li ke manufacturi ng, selling and di stri buti on,
financing, brandi ng, goodwill , R&D and l ogi sti cs etc. R&D i s
thus, one of the acti vi ties amongst several others whi ch resul ts
i nto profi ts to the enterpri se. A rati onal basi s of all ocati on of
profi ts to R&D w oul d be i n the proporti on R&D expenses to
total expenses i .e. i n the year 2004 whi ch has been consi dered
as an exampl e, R&D expenses of 3,733 milli on Euros i s about
15.20%        of    the     total    expenses       of     24,558    milli on        Euros        of
expenses. Therefore, i t woul d be fai r to all ocate 15.20% of the
profi ts of the appel l ant (i .e. 716 milli on Euros of a t otal profi t
of 4,709 milli on Euros) to the R&D acti viti es for the year 2004.
The proporti on of such profi ts to the total R&D expenses woul d
then be 1917 i .e. 19.17% (716 milli on Euros di vi ded by total
R&D expenses of 3,733 milli on Euros). Thus for the year 2004
the   fi gure       of    attri butabl e   profi ts      woul d    be     equal       to     total
expenses i ncurred on R&D acti vi ti es i n Indi a duri ng the year
mul ti pli ed wi th the proporti on/ attri buti on rati o of .1917 or
19.17%. Hol di ng thi s, the l d. CIT (A) di rected that AO shoul d
cal cul ate        wei ghted        average    of        attri buti on     rati o      by      the
methodol ogy bel ow:
i ) He shoul d fi rst work out the we i ghted average of attri buti on
rati o in accordance wi th the method di scussed above and
58                          ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                                                 Nokia Corporation

ii ) He shoul d then mul ti ply the expenses i ncurred on R&D i n
Indi a i n a parti cul ar AY with the wei ghted attri buti on rati on for
that year.
23.    Before us, du ri ng the heari ng, the l d. AR argue d that the
si mil ar matter has been adjudi cated by the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court
of    Del hi    in   the    case      of     Adobe        Systems         Incorporated             69
taxmann.com 229 vi de order date d 16th May 2016. The l d. DR
reli ed on the order of the revenue authori ti es.
24.    The      bri ef facts of        that     case        are     the    assessee         was a
company i ncorporated under the l aws of Del aware i n USA. It
provi ded       software         sol uti ons    for       network         publi shing        whi ch
i ncl uded       web,       pri nt,        vi deo,        wi rel ess      and        broadban d
appl i cati ons. The assessee had a wholl y owned subsi di ary i n
Indi a, namel y, Adobe Indi a. Adobe Indi a provi ded softwa re
rel ated       Research     and       Devel opment            (R&D)        servi ces       to    the
assessee        and     the       assessee         di d     not     have      any       busi ness
operati ons i n Indi a. The R&D services rendere d by Adobe Indi a,
were pai d for by the assessee on cost pl us basi s in terms of an
agreement entered i nto between the assessee and Adobe Indi a.
For rel event years, the Asse ssi ng Offi cer and the TPO acce pted
the fees pai d by the assessee on cost pl us 15 per cent basi s as
bei ng     on    ALP       and     Adobe       Indi a's       assessment           was        made
accordi ngl y.       Subsequentl y,          the      Assessi ng        Offi cer     sought         to
reopen the assessment. The reasons recorded for sai d purpose
were that acti vi ties carri ed out by Adobe Indi a were a part of
the    assessee's       core       busi ness         acti viti es      and,    consequentl y,
Adobe Indi a consti tuted the assessee's PE under arti cl e 5(1) of
DTAA. The Assessi ng Offi cer further reasoned that si nce the
59                 ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                           Nokia Corporation

assessee had a PE i n Indi a, a part of the profi t accrui ng to the
assessee whi ch was attri butabl e to the activi ti es i n Indi a was
chargeabl e to tax under the Act.
25.   At thi s juncture, we fi nd that the facts of Adobe Systems
Incorporated are si mil ar to the assessee and the i ssue i n
questi on before us. The l d. C IT ( A) hel d that there i s fi xed PE
i n terms of Arti cl e 5 of DTAA. The premi ses have been used for
carryi ng R&D acti vi ti es of the assessee and the assessee ha s
pai d for all the costs and facilities. The assessee had control
and authori ty to deci de the R&D projects undertaken by Noki a
Indi a. The premi ses have been i n control of the assessee.
These i ssues have been cl early deal t by the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court
i n thei r order. Furthe r, the H on'bl e Hi gh Court has al so taken
queue from the order of E-Funds IT Sol uti ons regardi ng the
fixed pl ace PE. The reasoni ng of the l d. Assessi ng Offi cer i n the
case of Adobe Systems and the order of the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court
deali ng wi th the fixed PE i s as under:
"Reasons to     believe    that   income    had     escaped
      assessment.
12. In the rea sons recorde d by t he AO for issuance
      of the impugned notices, the AO had recorded that:
(a) Adobe India develops softwa re for the Assessee
      for which Adobe India has been compensated on a
      'cost plus profit basis'; (b) the ownership of the
      software developed by Adobe India is the sole
      property of the Assessee and Adobe India does not
      retain any intellectual property rights in respect of
      the software developed by it; (c) t he Assessee ma kes
      substantial profits by selling the software develope d
      in India abroa d for which no taxes have been paid by
      the Assessee in India; (d) Adobe India has been
      working wholly and exclusively for the Assessee an d
60                ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                   Nokia Corporation

does not develop softwa re for any other conce rn; and
(e) the Assessee's transaction wi th Adobe India a re
not isolated transactions "but a continuous business
connection as Adobe India is connected to the
Assessee th rough a network of lease lines and othe r
technological means".
13. On the basis of the a bove, the AO conclude d that
activities carried out by Adobe In dia were a pa rt of
the    Assessee's   core    business    activities   and,
consequently, Adobe India constituted the Assessee's
PE under
Article 5(1)
of the Indo-US Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement (DT AA). He also obse rved that
in terms of the agreement between Adobe India an d
the Assessee, the Assessee was obliged to provide
assistance, specifications and supervision and wa s
further entitled to audit the facilities of Adobe In dia
for maintenance of the requisit e standards. This,
according to the AO, indicated tha t the Assessee had
a Service PE in In dia in terms of
Article 5(2)(l)
of the
Indo-US DTAA. According t o the AO, Adobe India wa s
also a dependent agent of the Assessee and thus,
constituted its PE in terms of
Article 5(5)
of the
Indo-US DTAA.
14. The AO reasoned that since the Assessee had a
PE in India, a part of the prof it accruing to the
Assessee which is att ributable t o the activities in
India was chargea ble to tax under the Act.
15. The AO further observed th at the transaction
between the Assessee and Adobe India involved
transfer of intangibles and m ultiple interrelated
transactions which could n ot be e valuated separately
for the purposes of determining ALP by any one
transaction. The AO also recorde d that development
and customisation of softwa re wa s a highly technical
job and the same could not be restricted to
computation on cost plus basi s. In his view, cost plus
basis was n ot a suitable method for intangibles like
software se rvices and the Profit Split Method w as
applicable in terms of Rule 10B of the Income Tax
Rules. Finally, the AO took note of the global profits
reported by the Asse ssee and h eld that the same
61                   ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                            Nokia Corporation

      should be apporti oned in the ratio        of      the     R&D
      expenses incurred by the Assessed."
26.   The order of the Hon'bl e Hi gh Court deali ng wi th the i ssue
above as under:
"32. Para (1) of
Article 5
defines a PE to mean a fixed
      place of business through which the business of an
      enterprise is wholly or partly ca rried on. The term
      'fixed place of business' includes premises, facilities,
      offices which are used by an enterprise for ca rrying on
      its business. The fixed place must be at the disposal
      of an enterpri se through which it carrie s on it s
      business wholly or partly. Al though, the word
      'through ' has been interpreted li berally but the very
      least, it indicates that the particular locati on shoul d
      be at the disposal of an Assessee for it to carry on its
      business through it. These attributes of a PE under
Article 5(1)
of the Indo-US DTAA were elucidated by
      the Supreme C ourt in Morgan Stanley & C o. Lt d.
      (supra). In a re cent decision , a Division Bench of this
      Court in DIT v. E-Funds IT Solut ion [2014] 364 ITR
      256/226 Taxman 44/42 taxmann.com 50 (Delhi)
      reiterated the a bove-stated attri butes; after qu oting
      from various authors, this Court held that "The term
      'through ' postulates that the taxpayer should have the
      power or liberty to control the place and, hence, th e
      right to dete rmine the conditions according t o it s
      needs". In the present case, th ere is no allegati on
      that the Assessee has any Branch Office or any other
      office or establishment through which it is carrying on
      any business other than simply stating that Adobe
      India's constitutes the Assessee's PE. There is n o
      evidence that the Assessee ha s a ny right to use th e
      premises or any fixed place at its disposal. The AO ha s
      simply proceede d on the basis that the R&D services
      performed by Adobe India a re an integral pa rt of the
      business of the Assessee and therefore, the offices of
      Adobe India re present the Assessee's fixed place of
      business. Thus, clearly the right to use test or the
      disposal test is not satisfied f or h olding that the
      Assessee has a PE in India in terms of
Article 5(1)
of
      the Indo-US DTAA.
62               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                 Nokia Corporation
33.
In
E-Funds IT Solution
(supra), this Court had
expressly negated that an a ssi gnment or a su b-
contract of any work t o a subsidia ry in India could be
a factor for dete rmining the applicability of
Article
5(1)
of the Indo-US DTAA. The Court had furthe r
expressly held that :
"Even if the foreign entities have saved and reduce d
  their expenditure by transferring business or bac k
  office operations to the Indian subsidiary, it would
  not by itself create a fixed place or location
  permanent establishment. The ma nner and mode of
  the payment of royalty or associ ated transactions i s
  not a test which can be applied to determine ,
  whether    fixed   place   permane nt  establishment
  exists.
Reference to core of auxiliary or preliminary activity
  is relevant when we apply pa ragraph 3 of
Article 5
or when sub-clause (a) to paragraph 4 to
Article 5
is under conside ration. The fact t hat the subsidiary
  company was ca rrying on core activities a s
  performed by the foreign asse sse e does n ot create
  a fixed place permanent establishment."
34. Thus, the AO's view that Adobe India constituted
the Assessee's PE in term s of paragraph 1 of
Article 5
of the Indo-US DTAA is palpa bly erroneous and not
sustainable on the basis of the facts as recorded by
him.
35. We also find that there is no material to hold that
the Assessee's employees constit ute a Service PE in
terms of
Article 5(2)(l)
of the Indo-US DT AA. Th e
Assessee has denied that any of its employees has
rendered any service in India. T here is no materia l
available with the AO that w ould contradict the same .
The AO has concluded that the Assessee has a PE in
India in terms of
Article 5(2)(l)
of the Indo-US DTAA,
only on the basis that the Assessee has a right to
audit Adobe India and that the agreement between the
Assessee an d Adobe India entail s that the Assessee
would     provide   specifications,    assistance   and
supervision for the R&D service s procured by the
63                  ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                             Nokia Corporation

      Assessee. The said te rms of the agreement do not i n
      any manner indicate that the Assessee has bee n
      providing services in India. Clause 5.5 of the
      agreement referred t o by the AO indicates that the
      Assessee is authorized t o audit the Indian subsidiary
      (Adobe In dia), so as to ensu re that Adobe Indi a
      adheres to the standards requi re d by the Assessee.
      The same cannot possibly lead to the inference tha t
      the Assessee has been renderin g services t o Adobe
      India. The stipulation as to provi de specification and
      further assistance is only for the purpose of ensurin g
      that the Assessee procures the service that it ha s
      contracted f or f rom Adobe India. Such clauses in the
      agreement cannot lead t o an inference that the
      Assessee has a PE in India f or ren dering services, that
      is, a Se rvice PE in terms of
Article 5(2)(l)
of the Indo-
      US DTAA. This has also been aut horitatively held by
      Supreme Court in Morgan Stanley & Co. Ltd. (supra)."
27.   Si nce, the matter i s squarel y appli cabl e to the i nstance
case, we hereby hol d that fi xed pl ace PE do not exi st as the
ri ght to use test or the di sposal test i s not sati sfi ed. The appeal
of the assessee on thi s ground i s all owed.
28.   Ground No. 9 of assessee's appe al i n ITA Nos. 1006 to
1008/Del /2010, Ground No. 12 of assessee 's a ppeal i n ITA No.
5819/Del /2010 deal s wi th l evy of interest
u/s 234B
of the Act.
29.   In vi ew of the deci si on on the grounds no. 1 to 8.3 i n
favour of the assessee, the adjudi cati on on thi s i ssue becomes
academi c i n nature and hence we refrai n to do so.
30.   In the resul t, appeal s of the assessee on the grounds-
a. Exi stence of PE - all owed
b. Taxabi lity of the software - all owed
c. Taxabili ty of the noti onal i nterest - all owed
d. R&D acti vi ti es - all owed
64               ITA Nos. 1006 to 1008, 1236
to 1238 & 5819/Del/2010
                                                       Nokia Corporation

e. Interest
u/s 234B
- i nfructuous.
The appeal s of the revenue are di smi ssed.
(Order pronounce d i n the open Court on 02.09.2019)


            Sd/-                                 Sd/-
(Bhavnesh Saini)                       (Dr. B. R. R. Kumar)
 Judicial Member                       Accountant Member
Dated: 02/09/2019
*Subodh*
Copy forwarded to:
1. Appellant
2. Respondent
3. CIT
4. CIT(Appeals)
5. DR: ITAT
                                               ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
