Title: Search
Court: High Court upon the legal advice so
Date: 1 of 2011
Citation: AIR 1962 Supreme
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/183718559/

[Cites
19
, Cited by
3
]
National Consumer Disputes Redressal
M/S M. I. Plywood Industries, vs The Senior Branch Manager, on 5 December, 2012
NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION




 

 



 


NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION 

 

NEW
DELHI 

 

  

   REVISION
PETITION NO. 3246 of OF 2011 

   alongwith   

 

   (I. A. No. 1 of 2011) 

 

   ( For delay) 

 

(From order dated
26.7.2010 in Appeal No.
2863 of 2009 

 

of Karnataka State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission,
Bangalore)  

 

  

 

  

 

M/s M. I.
Plywood Industries,  

 

Near APMC
Yard, Bangarpet,  

 

Kolar
District     

 

  

 

     Petitioner  

 

  

 

  Versus 

 

  

 

The Senior
Branch Manager,  

 

Canara
Bank, 

 

Bangarpet
Town    .Respondent  

 

   

 

 BEFORE: 

 

  

 

 HONBLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA,
PRESIDING MEMBER 

 

  

 

For the Petitioner : Ms.
Manjula Gandhi, Advocate  

 

  

 

For the Respondent :
Mr. Rakesh Pathak, Advocate 

 

 

 

 Pronounced on: 5th
December, 2012 

 

   

 

 ORDER
PER MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA, PRESIDING MEMBER 

 

 Present revision petition has been
filed by the petitioner challenging order dated 26.7.2010, passed by State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Karnataka, Bangalore (for short, State
Commission). Alongwith this petition, an application seeking condonation of
delay has been filed. However, no period of delay has been mentioned.
2. Petitioner/complainant filed a
complaint under
Section 12
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (for short,
Act) before District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Kolar (for short,
District Forum), with regard to the repayment of loan amount due to
respondent/OP. It has been alleged in the complaint that despite entire payment
of the loan amount being paid to the respondent under One Time Settlement
Scheme, respondent has failed to hand over the original documents of the title
in relation to the properties which were mortgaged in faovur of the respondent.
Moreover, respondent has failed to issue No Objection Certificate to the
petitioner after having received the amount and has failed to act further in
the process of settlement. Alleging deficiency in service on the part of the
respondent, petitioner made the following prayers in its complaint ;
(i) Hold that there is deficiency
in service on the part of the Opposite
Party towards the Complainant.
(ii) Direct the Opposite Party to close
the loan account of the complainant
with the Opposite Party.
(iii)  Direct the Opposite Party to
release/return the documents of title
relating to properties mortgaged in favour of the Opposite party.
(iv) Direct the
Opposite Party to issue no due certificate to the Complainant.
(v)             
Direct the Opposite Party a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- as
compensation for the hardship caused to the Complainant on account of the trade
practice and deficiency in service on the part of the Opposite party.
(vi)           
Direct the Opposite party to return Rs.25,000/- which
is deposited in Non-Lien account in the Opposite Party Bank by them since; the
Opposite Party has not complied with the Legal Notice dated 30/04/2008.
3. Case of respondent as per its written
statement is that, petitioner has availed loan facility upto the limit of
Rupees Thirty Lakh from it. Petitioner had also mortgaged the properties and
also hypothecated the raw materials and goods. Since beginning, petitioner is
irregular in making the payment of the loan amounts and installments to the
respondent. Accordingly, petitioner filed a case before the Debt
Recovery Tribunal (for short, DRT) O. A. Case No. 139/2000 for recovery of
the balance loan amount. On 16.1.2004
after contest, the DRT has passed an award for Rs.,42,70,000/-, plus
interest in favour of the respondent and against the petitioner. Inspite
of award, petitioner did not make any attempt to repay the decreetal amount,
for which respondent has also filed Execution Petition in the DRT. Under these
circumstances, present complaint is not maintainable.
4. District Forum, vide order dated
11.8.2009, allowed the complaint and passed the following directions ;
The OP
shall close Open Cash Credit Account No. 226 relating to the complainant as
fully settled, after crediting Rs. 25,000/- deposited on 09.06.2008 by
complainant and further OP shall return the documents of title deeds and as
such other securities that may be now available with it to complainant and
shall issue No Due Certificate to complainant if required to redeem any
mortgage or other encumbrances.
5. Aggrieved by the order of District
Forum, respondent filed an appeal before the State Commission, which allowed
the same.
6. Hence, this revision petition.
7. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and
gone through the record.
8.  As far as for condonation of delay is
concerned, no period of delay has been mentioned at all. However, the grounds
on which condonaton has been sought are
reproduced as under ;
2. The petitioner had earlier
challenged the impugned order and filed a writ petition being W. P. No. 29255
of 2010 before the Honble Kanataka High Court upon the legal advice so
rendered by its counsel. The Honble High Court vide order dated 10.2.2011, was
pleased to dispose off the Writ Petition, holding therein, that the Petitioner
has an efficacious, alternative remedy under the provisions of
Consumer Protection
Act, 1986
. The relevant portion of the said order  

 

 as against
the aforesaid order dated 26.7.2010, the petitioner herein has an efficacious,
alternative remedy under the provisions of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
.
We therefore, hereby relegate the petitioner to his aforesaid remedy.
3. That the
Petitioner bonafidely trusted the legal advice given to it by its counsel and
pursued the Writ Petition before the Honble High Court.
4. That the time
spent by the Petitioner in pursuing the said Writ Petition before the Honble
High Court was neither intentional nor deliberate, but was upon the legal
advice so rendered by its counsel.
5. That the Petitioner herein
craves the leave of this Honble Commission herein submits and states that the
time spent by it in bonafidely pursuing a remedy before the wrong Forum may
kindly be condoned.
6. The
petitioner in this case is a senior citizen aged about 68 years and is
suffering from various ailments, diabetes and had a massive heart attack after
the disposal of the Writ Petition and has also undergone angioplasty.
7. Even
otherwise, the old age and other ailments of the petitioner together with the
heart problem have restricted the movement of the petitioner substantially. The medical records in
this regard are annexed herewith.
8. The petitioner respectfully states that due to the aforesaid facts
and circumstances his accompanying Revision Petition has got delayed
considerably, as he could not contact any lawyer in Delhi. After having recovered
from such ailments the petitioner contacted the present lawyer and briefed them about
the facts of the case for filing the accompanying revision petition. The delay
has been caused, is not deliberate but only valid, bonafide, unintentional and
due to facts and circumstances mentioned above, which was beyond the control of
the petitioner.
9. Above pleas taken by petitioner are not sustainable in view of
decision of Honble Supreme Court in M/s Advance Scientific Equipment
Ltd. & Anr. Vs. West Bengal Pharma & Photochemical Development
Corporation Ltd. (Appeal (Civil) Nos. 17068-17069/2010, decided on 9 July 2010)
wherein it observed inter alia, as under;
. We are further of the view that the
petitioners venture of filing petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution
was clearly an abuse of the process of the Court and the High Court ought not
to have entertained the petition even for a single day because an effective
alternative remedy was available to the petitioner under
Section 23
of the Act
and the orders passed by the State Commission did not suffer from lack of
jurisdiction.
10. Assuming for the sake of arguments that petitioner was
pursuing the remedy by way of Writ Petition before the High Court, even then
present petition which has been filed on 28.09.2011 against order dated
26.7.2010, is hopelessly barred by limitation. The plea taken by the petitioner
is that he is an old man, ill and not
able to move, but there is no documentary evidence to prove that during the
period in question, petitioner was confined to bed and was unable to move.
11. It is well settled that sufficient cause with
regard to condonation of delay in each case, is a question of fact.
12. In Ram Lal and Ors. Vs. Rewa Coalfields Ltd., AIR 1962 Supreme
Court 361, it has been observed;
It is, however, necessary
to emphasize that even after sufficient cause has been shown a party is not
entitled to the condonation of delay in question as a matter of right. The
proof of a sufficient cause is a discretionary jurisdiction vested in the Court
by
S.5
. If sufficient cause is not proved nothing further has to be done; the
application for condonation has to be dismissed on that ground alone. If sufficient cause is shown then the Court has to enquire whether in its
discretion it should condone the delay. This aspect of the matter naturally
introduces the consideration of all relevant facts and it is at this stage that
diligence of the party or its bona fides may fall for consideration;
but the scope of the enquiry while exercising the discretionary power after
sufficient cause is shown would naturally be limited only to such facts as the
Court may regard as relevant .
13. Similarly, in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Kailash Devi & Ors.
AIR 1994 Punjab and
Haryana 45, it has been laid down that;
There is no denying the fact that
the expression sufficient cause should normally be construed liberally so as to
advance substantial justice but that would be in a case where no negligence or
inaction or want of bona fide is imputable to the applicant. The discretion to
condone the delay is to be exercised judicially i.e. one of is not to be swayed
by sympathy or benevolence.
14. In R.B. Ramlingam Vs. R.B.
Bhavaneshwari, 2009 (2) Scale 108, it has been observed ;
We hold
that in each and every case the Court has to examine whether delay in filing
the special appeal leave petitions stands properly explained. This is the basic
test which needs to be applied. The true guide is whether the petitioner has
acted with reasonable diligence in the prosecution of his appeal/petition.
15.
Further, Supreme Court in Anshul Aggarwal vs. New Okhla
Industrial Development Authority, IV (2011) CPJ 63 (SC) laid down that;
It is also
apposite to observe that while deciding an application filed in such cases for
condonation of delay, the Court has to keep in mind that the special period of
limitation has been prescribed under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
for
filing appeals and revisions in consumer matters and the object of expeditious
adjudication of the consumer disputes will get defeated if this Court was to
entertain highly belated petitions filed against the orders of the consumer
Foras.
16.  Under these
circumstances, no sufficient cause is made out for condoning the delay of 140
days in filing the present revision petition. Thus, present petition is
hopelessly barred by limitation.
17. Even on merits, petitioner has got no case
at all. Main limb of the petitioners argument is that respondent had obtained
recovery certificate from the DRT by playing fraud as DRT was never
apprised of the fact that during the pendency of the Original Application
proceedings, respondent had compromised the matter with the petitioner and in
lieu thereof, petitioner had already paid a sum of Rs.35 lacs approximately
upto 2003. Thus, the said recovery certificate was void and non-est in the eyes
of law. Under these circumstances, impugned order is liable to be set aside.
18.
In support, learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied upon a decision of the Apex court,
Sardar
Associates and others Vs. Punjab & Sind Bank & others
, (2009) 8 Supreme
Court Cases 257.
19. On the other hand, it is contended by
learned counsel for the respondent that execution proceedings before the DRT
are still pending. The Consumer Fora, under these circumstances has no
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint.
In support, learned counsel for the
respondent has relied upon a decision of this Commission in
Bank of
Baroda Vs. Ranjeet Singh, RP No.
2119 of 2012 decided on 13.09.2012.
20.
 It is an admitted case that execution
proceedings against petitioner were filed before the DRT. As per findings of
the State Commission, proceedings before the DRT are still pending as apparent from the following observations
made by it ;
Admittedly
the amount paid by the Respondent has been credited to his loan account. Since
the DCP No. 3123 is still pending before DRT for recovery of dues, the
complainant/Respondent cannot maintain this complaint before the DF, the DF is
not right in directing the OP/Appellant bank to close the loan account and to
return the documents to the Respondent along with  No Due Certificate.
In the light of the above
facts, we are of the view that the complaint filed by the complainant is liable
to be dismissed.
21.  Even otherwise, as per decision of this
Commission in
Bank of Baroda
(supra) Consumer Fora has no
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint in view of the pendency of Original
Application Proceedings before the DRT.
This Commission in
Bank of
Baroda
(supra) has observed;
8. Learned counsel for the petitioner
then submitted that consumer fora had no jurisdiction to entertain the
complaint in view of the pendency of the original application before the Debt
Recovery Tribunal. Counsel for the petitioner  bank has invited our attention
to the provisions of
Section 18
and
34
of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993
which is to the following effect;
18.  Bar of Jurisdiction : On and from the appointed day, no Court or
other authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction,
powers or authority (except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising
jurisdiction under
articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution) in relation to the
matters specified in
Section 17
.
34.  Act to have over-riding effect - (1) Save as provided under sub- section
(2), the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
(2)
The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to,
and not in derogation of, the
Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948
(15 of
1948 ), the
State Financial Corporations Act, 1951
(63 of 1951 ), the
Unit
Trust of India Act, 1963
(52 of 1963 ), the
Industrial Reconstruction Bank of
India Act, 1984
(62 of 1984 ), and the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provisions) Act, 1985
(1 of 1986 ) and the
Small Industries Development Bank of
India Act, 1989
( 39 of 1989).
9. On
the strength of the above provisions and the fact that original application
seeking recovery of the debt in respect of the Deoli Branch outstanding dues
was filed prior to the filing of the present complaint, learned counsel submits
that the consumer fora had no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint raising
the same controversy. He submits that
original application is being defended by the respondent on the same plea on
which the complaint was filed before the District Consumer Forum and if the
complainant  respondent thought that the withholding of the title deeds by the
petitioner  bank was illegal / unauthorised on the premise that bank had no
lien over the same, the respondent  complainant could have sought release of
the said documents from the said Tribunal.
We find force in this contention because the provisions of the
Recovery
of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993
leave no manner of
doubt that the Legislature has clearly forbidden any other Court or Authority
to exercise any jurisdictional power or authority except the Supreme Court and
High Court exercising their jurisdiction under
Article 226
and
227
of the
Constitution in relation to matters specified in
Section 17
. The provision is
enacted with the clear object that such matters should not be considered and
decided by any other Court or authority except the Tribunal constituted under
the above Act.
22.  Since, Consumer Fora had no jurisdiction to entertain the said
complaint, State Commission has rightly dismissed the complaint of the
Petitioner.
Decision of Sardar Associates
(supra) is not applicable to the facts of present case. There
is no ambiguity or infirmity in the impugned order passed by the State
Commission.
23. Consequently, present revision petition stand dismissed
firstly, on the point of limitation and secondly, on merits also with cost of
Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only)
for wasting the precious time of this Commission.
24. Petitioner is directed to deposit the
aforesaid cost by way of demand draft, in the name of Consumer Legal Aid
Account of this Commission, within eight weeks from today. In case, petitioner fails to
deposit the cost within the prescribed period, then it shall also be liable to
pay interest @ 9% p.a., till realization.
25. List on
08.02.2013 for compliance.
J. 

 

(V.B.
GUPTA) 

  PRESIDING MEMBER

 

  

 

SSB
