Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 1 of 1872
Citation: SCC 481
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/187055891/

[Cites
41
, Cited by
0
]
Karnataka High Court
Income Tax Officer vs Smt Gulsanober on 21 February, 2026
Author:
Suraj Govindaraj
Bench:
Suraj Govindaraj
-1-
                                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


                   HC-KAR

                                                                         ®
                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU

                      DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2026

                                             BEFORE
                      THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURAJ GOVINDARAJ
                      WRIT PETITION NO. 34625 OF 2019 (GM-RES)
                   BETWEEN

                   INCOME TAX OFFICER AND CPIO
                   INCOME TAX DEPARTMENT
                   CENTRALISED PROCESSING CENTRE
                   PRESTIGE ALPHA POSTBOX NO.1
                   ELECTRONIC CITY POST
                   BANGALORE-560500

                                                                   ... PETITIONER
                   (BY SRI. M. DILIP AND
                       SRI. Y.V. RAVIRAJ., ADVOCATES)

                   AND

                     1. SMT GULSANOBER
                        BANO ZAFAR ALI ANSARI
                        C/O HAYAT PALACE, 101, 1ST FLOOR
                        DR NAIR ROAD, OPP NAIR HOSPITAL
Digitally signed        MUMBAI -400008
by SHWETHA
RAGHAVENDRA
Location: HIGH       2. CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
COURT OF                2ND FLOOR, C-WING
KARNATAKA
                        AUGUST KRANTI BHAWAN
                        BHIKAJI CAMA PLACE
                        NEW DELHI-110066

                                                                .... RESPONDENTS
                   (BY SRI. KEMPARAJU., ADVOCATE FOR R1;
                       SRI. SHANTHI BHUSHAN., DSGI FOR R2)

                        THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226
& 227
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO ISSUE A WRIT OF
                   CERTIORARI TO QUASH THE ORDER DATED 12.4.2019 BEARING FILE
                               -2-
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



NO. CIC/CCITB/A/2017/180340-BJ PASSED BY THE              SECOND
RESPONDENT PRODUCED AS ANNEXURE-D AND ETC.

     THIS WRIT PETITION COMING ON FOR ORDERS AND HAVING
BEEN RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 10.12.2025, THIS DAY, THE
COURT PRONOUNCED THE FOLLOWING:

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURAJ GOVINDARAJ


                        CAV ORDER



1.   The Petitioner/Income Tax Officer is before this Court
     seeking for the following reliefs:

          "a) Issue a writ of certiorari to quash the order
          dated        12.4.2019      bearing    File   No.
          CIC/CCITB/A/2017/180340-BJ passed by the
          second respondent produced as Annexure-D and
          etc.

          b) Issue such other writ or directions deems fit to
          grant the facts and circumstances of the present
          case in the interest of justice and equity."

2.   The Petitioner, who is serving as the Chief Public
     Information Officer (CPIO) at the Central Processing
     Centre of the Income Tax Department, Bengaluru,
     was seized of an application dated 07.08.2017
     submitted by Respondent No.1 under the provisions
     of the
Right to Information Act, 2005
(for short, "the
RTI Act
"). Respondent No.1, who is the wife of Sri
     Zafar Ali Asar Ali Ansari, sought disclosure of certain
     information relating to her husband. The information
     requested pertained to the Assessment Years 2012-
                                 -3-
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     2017 and included copies of his Income Tax Returns,
     details of tax paid, and the name and address of the
     bank(s) connected with his financial records.

3.   Upon consideration of the request, the Petitioner, by
     order dated 31.08.2017, rejected the application
     invoking
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act. The rejection
     was premised on the ground that the information
     sought constituted third-party information held by
     the Income Tax Department in a fiduciary capacity
     and was therefore exempt from disclosure. It is
     stated that notice under
Section 11
of the RTI Act
     was issued to the concerned third party, namely Sri
     Zafar Ali Asar Ali Ansari. However, no response was
     received from him within the prescribed period.

4.   Aggrieved    by      the   rejection,     Respondent       No.1
     preferred    a    statutory      appeal   dated   07.09.2017
     before the Joint Commissioner of Income Tax (
CPC
),
     who was functioning as the First Appellate Authority
     under the
RTI Act
. The Appellate Authority, by order
     dated 23.09.2017, dismissed the appeal. It was held
     that   the       information     sought    fell   within    the
     exemptions contemplated under
Section 8(1)
of the
     RTI Act and that the Income Tax Department holds
     such information in a fiduciary relationship. The
                                   -4-
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                 WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     Appellate Authority further observed that disclosure
     of such information to a third party would be
     permissible    only    if    a     larger    public    interest   so
     warranted, and concluded that no such larger public
     interest had been established by Respondent No.1.

5.   Thereafter, Respondent No.1 carried the matter in a
     second   appeal       before       the      Central    Information
     Commission.     The         Commission,        by     order   dated
     12.04.2019, allowed the appeal and directed the
     Petitioner to furnish the information sought, placing
     reliance upon an earlier order passed in W.P. No.
     18778/2017 (Smt. Jammalu Padma Manjari v. CPIO
     & DCIT). It is this order dated 12.04.2019, passed by
     the Central Information Commission, that is called in
     question in the present writ petition.

6.   Sri Y.V.Ravi Raj, learned counsel appearing for the
     Petitioner, would submit that:

     6.1. Insofar    as the justification for rejection is
          concerned, the Petitioner contends that the
          information       sought         by      Respondent      No.1
          constitutes       purely        private        and   personal
          information relating to her husband. It is
          submitted that such information was furnished
          by the assessee to the Income Tax Department
                               -5-
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          exclusively for the purpose of assessment and
          compliance under the provisions of the Income-
          tax   law.   According       to    the   Petitioner,   the
          Department receives and retains such material
          in a fiduciary capacity, reposing trust in the
          confidentiality    of     disclosures     made    by   the
          assessee.

     6.2. It is therefore asserted that the information so
          obtained cannot be divulged, either wholly or in
          part, to Respondent No.1, who is a third party
          within the meaning of the
Right to Information
          Act, 2005
. Any disclosure, it is contended,
          would amount to a breach of the fiduciary
          relationship between the Department and the
          assessee     and    would         be   contrary   to   the
          statutory    exemptions           contemplated     under
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act. On this premise, it
          is submitted that the rejection of the request
          was legally justified and in consonance with the
          protective framework governing confidential tax
          information.

     6.3. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble
          Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench in
                                  -6-
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




              Adarsh vs. The State of Maharashtra1, more
              particularly, paras 10, 11, 12 and 14 thereof,
              which   are   reproduced      hereunder     for      easy
              reference:

                "10. This Court has dealt with the issue of
                applicability of
Section 8
and
11
of the RTI Act
                by analysing the judgment of the Hon'ble
                Supreme Court in Central Public Information
                Officer, Supreme Court of India V/s. Subhash
                Chandra Agarwal (supra) and the Court has
                explained that the
RTI Act
operationalise the
                disclosure of information held by public
                authorities to reduce the asymmetry of
                information between individual citizens and the
                State apparatus. However, the Constitution
                Bench has observed that enacting the
RTI Act
the Parliament was cognizant that an
                unrestricted disclosure of information could be
                fiscally inefficient, result and would do real-
                world harms and infringe the rights of others.
                Thus, the Constitution Bench while quoting the
                provisions of
Section 8
of the RTI Act explained
                the non-obstante phrase carved exceptions
                under
Section 8
to the general obligation to
                disclose information under the
RTI Act
.
                Therefore, where the conditions set out in any
                of the sub-clauses of Clause (1) of
Section 8
are satisfied, Information Officers are under no
                obligation to provide information of any
                applicant. Clause (d) of
Section 8 (1)
provides
                that information is exempt from disclosure
                where such disclosure would harm the
                competitive position of a third party and the
                exemption is further qualified by the phrase,
                unless the competent authority is satisfied that

1
    WP.No.11135/2025 dated 11135/2025
                            -7-
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         larger public interest warrants the disclosure.
         Thus, the exemption under clause (d) of
Section 8(1)
is not absolute but is qualified and
         cannot be invoked where a larger public
         interest exists. In the context of clause J of
Section 8 (1)
explanation provides a qualified
         exemption      from    disclosure    where     the
         information relates to personal information the
         disclosure of which has no relationship to
         public activity or interest and the information
         would cause an unwarranted invasion of the
         privacy. However, the exemption may be
         overridden where the Information Officer is
         satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
         the disclosure. Thus, clause (j) of
Section 8
is
         not an absolute exemption from the disclosure
         of information on the ground of privacy and
         the disclosure is exempted where personal
         information is sought and there is no larger
         public interest. Thus under
Section 8 (1) (j)
an
         information which has relevance to privacy and
         relates to personal information can be denied.
         If such an information relates to a third party
         then
Section 2 (n)
of the RTI Act defines third
         party to mean a person other than a citizen
         requesting information and includes a public
         authority.
Section 11
is concerned with third
         party information. Third party information is an
         information which relates or has been supplied
         by any other person other than the information
         applicant and has been treated as confidential
         by third party. Wherever the disclosure of third
         party is sought and such information has been
         prima facie treated as confidential by the third
         party in question, the procedure under
Section
         11
of the RTI Act is mandatory. The provision
         expressly mandates the Information Officer to
         consider the objections of third party while
         deciding whether to disclose or not disclose the
                           -8-
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         information. In the instant case the information
         which is sought relates to the third party and
         the GST Authorities holds the Information i.e.
         GST returns of the third party. When such an
         information is asked the Authorities constituted
         has to issue under
Section 11
to the effected
         person as this provision is held to be
         mandatory. As such, the first objection of the
         Petitioner that no notice ought to have been
         given to the Industries whose GST returns
         were asked by applicant is rejected.

         11. The next issue is whether Section 158 of
         the GST Act would also be an impediment in
         providing information under the
RTI Act
.
         Section 158 (1) of the GST Act provides that
         the Information of the GST cannot be provided
         to third parties. For ready reference, Section
         158 of GST Act is as below:

         "Section 158. Disclosure of Information by a
         public servant.-

         (1) All particulars contained in any statement
         made, return furnished or accounts or
         documents produced in accordance with this
         Act, or in any record of evidence given in the
         course of any proceedings under this Act
         (other than proceedings before a criminal
         court), or in any record of any proceedings
         under this Act shall, save as provided in sub-
         section (3), not be disclosed.

         (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872), no
         court shall, save as otherwise provided in sub-
         section (3), require any officer appointed or
         authorised under this Act to produce before it
         or to give evidence before it in respect of
         particulars referred to in sub-section (1).
                            -9-
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (3) Nothing contained in this section shall
         apply to the disclosure of,-

         (a) any particulars in respect of any statement,
         return,    accounts,    documents,     evidence,
         affidavit or deposition, for the purpose of any
         prosecution under the
Indian Penal Code
or the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(49 of
         1988), or any other law for the time being in
         force; or

         (b) any particulars to the Central Government
         or the State Government or to any person
         acting in the implementation of this Act, for the
         purposes of carrying out the objects of this
         Act; or

         (c) any particulars when such disclosure is
         occasioned by the lawful exercise under this
         Act of any process for the service of any notice
         or recovery of any demand; or

         (d) any particulars to a civil court in any suit or
         proceedings, to which the Government or any
         authority under this Act is a party, which
         relates to any matter arising out of any
         proceedings under this Act or under any other
         law for the time being in force authorising any
         such authority to exercise any powers
         thereunder; or

         (e) any particulars to any officer appointed for
         the purpose of audit of tax receipts or refunds
         of the tax imposed by this Act; or

         (f) any particulars where such particulars are
         relevant for the purposes of any inquiry into
         the conduct of any officer appointed or
         authorised under this Act, to any person or
         persons appointed as an inquiry officer under
         any law for the time being in force; or
                          - 10 -
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (g) any such particulars to an officer of the
         Central    Government     or   of any   State
         Government, as may be necessary for the
         purpose of enabling that Government to levy
         or realise any tax or duty; or

         (h) any particulars when such disclosure is
         occasioned by the lawful exercise by a public
         servant or any other statutory authority, of his
         or its powers under any law for the time being
         in force; or

         (i) any particulars relevant to any inquiry into
         a charge of misconduct in connection with any
         proceedings under this Act against a practising
         advocate, a tax practitioner, a practising cost
         accountant, a practising chartered accountant,
         a practising company secretary to the authority
         empowered to take disciplinary action against
         the members practising the profession of a
         legal practitioner, a cost accountant, a
         chartered accountant or a company secretary,
         as the case may be; or

         (j) any particulars to any agency appointed for
         the purposes of data entry on any automated
         system or for the purpose of operating,
         upgrading or maintaining any automated
         system where such agency is contractually
         bound not to use or disclose such particulars
         except for the aforesaid purposes; or

         (k) any particulars to an officer of the
         Government as may be necessary for the
         purposes of any other law for the time being in
         force; or

         (l) any information relating to any class of
         taxable persons or class of transactions for
         publication, if, in the opinion of the
                             - 11 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



           Commissioner, it is desirable in the public
           interest, to publish such information."

           12. Section 158 (1) of the GST Act specifically
           prohibits giving Information of GST returns
           except as provided in sub-
section 3
, so also
Section 8 (1) (j)
of the RTI Act prohibits
           information     which    relates    to    personal
           information the disclosure of which has no
           relationship to any public activity or interest, or
           which would cause unwarranted invasion of the
           privacy of the individual unless the Central
           Public Information Officer or the State Public
           Information Officer or the appellate authority,
           as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger
           public interest justifies the disclosure of such
           information.

           14. In the instant case, the Petitioner has
           applied for the information contending that
           that there is a large scale fraud and that he
           needs the information in order to prosecute the
           industries. The allegation is bald in nature.
           There is no prima facie evidence to show that
           the industries have indulged in large scale
           fraud. Although the response given by the
           industries is that the industries are closed on
           account of the harassment by the Petitioner.
           Based on the reply the Authorities have not
           provided Information of GST returns of the
           Industries as there is no larger public interest
           involved in the matter. Thus no case is made
           out under proviso to
Section 8 (1) (j)
to grant
           information.

     6.4. By relying on Adarsh he submits that the
         Hon'ble Bombay         High Court examined the
         scope and interplay of
Sections 8
and
11
of the
                               - 12 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          Right to Information Act, 2005, in the light of
          the principles enunciated by the Constitution
          Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Central
          Public Information Officer, Supreme Court
          of India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal. It is
          contended that while the
RTI Act
was enacted
          to    operationalise     transparency        and    reduce
          informational asymmetry between citizens and
          the    State,    Parliament         was    simultaneously
          conscious that unrestricted disclosure could
          result in fiscal inefficiency, real-world harm,
          and infringement of the rights of third parties.
          The non obstante clause contained in
Section
          8(1)
carves out specific exemptions from the
          general obligation of disclosure. Where the
          conditions stipulated under any of the sub-
          clauses    of
Section      8(1)
are   satisfied,    the
          Information      Officer     is    under    no   statutory
          obligation to furnish such information.

     6.5. It is further submitted that clauses (d) and (j)
          of
Section 8(1)
provide qualified exemptions. In
          particular,     clause       (j)     protects      personal
          information, the disclosure of which bears no
          relationship to any public activity or public
          interest   and    which       would       amount    to   an
                                 - 13 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          unwarranted           invasion        of      privacy.        The
          exemption,       though        not    absolute,         can    be
          overridden only upon a demonstrable showing
          of larger public interest. In cases involving
          third-party information treated as confidential,
          the procedure under
Section 11
of the RTI Act
          is mandatory, and the objections of the third
          party must be duly considered before any
          disclosure is ordered.

     6.6. The      Petitioner     further       submits      that       the
          reasoning adopted in Adarsh is apposite to the
          present case. Just as GST returns were held to
          be protected from disclosure in the absence of
          a larger public interest, income tax returns and
          related financial particulars of an assessee are
          similarly       confidential         in      nature.      Such
          information is statutorily protected, and its
          disclosure, absent compelling public interest,
          would amount to an unwarranted invasion of
          privacy. The mere assertion of grievance or
          personal necessity does not elevate the matter
          to one of larger public interest.

     6.7. On the strength of Adarsh, it is urged that the
          object     of   the
RTI     Act
is     not   to    enable
                            - 14 -
                                            NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          indiscriminate   access      to   personal   financial
          information, but to promote transparency in
          public functioning. Disclosure of private tax
          information between estranged spouses, it is
          contended, falls outside the purview of the Act's
          transparency mandate and would defeat the
          statutory safeguards embedded in
Section 8
.

     6.8. Learned counsel for the Petitioner contends that
          Clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
Section 8
of the
          Right to Information Act, 2005 contemplates
          exemption    from         disclosure    where    such
          disclosure would harm the competitive position
          of a third party. Though the exemption under
          clause (d) is qualified by the expression "unless
          the competent authority is satisfied that larger
          public interest warrants the disclosure," it is
          submitted that such larger public interest must
          be real, demonstrable, and proximate.

     6.9. According   to   the      Petitioner,   disclosure   of
          income tax returns of one spouse to the other
          neither arises out of any public activity nor
          advances any public interest. The information
          sought is personal financial information, the
          disclosure of which does not subserve the
                                  - 15 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          transparency objectives of the
RTI Act
. In the
          absence      of   a    finding       of    overriding   public
          interest, it is contended that the exemption
          operates with full force, and therefore, the
          Central Information Commission could not have
          directed disclosure of the income tax returns.

     6.10. It is further submitted that the husband, being
          an assessee under the Income-tax regime,
          squarely answers the description of a "third
          party" within the meaning of
Section 2(n)
of the
          RTI Act, which defines "third party" to mean a
          person other than the citizen making the
          request for information. Since the applicant is
          Respondent No.1 and the information sought
          pertains to her husband, the husband must
          necessarily be treated as a third party for the
          purposes of the Act.

     6.11. On   that    premise,          it   is   argued    that   any
          information relating to such a third party is
          confidential      in    nature       and    protected      from
          disclosure unless the statutory conditions are
          strictly   satisfied.       The      mere    fact   that    the
          applicant is the spouse of the assessee does not
          dilute the confidentiality attached to income tax
                                      - 16 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                    WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




              returns. It is emphasised that income tax
              returns not only contain personal financial
              particulars     of     the       assessee    but    may    also
              disclose transactional details involving other
              individuals and entities. Disclosure of such
              information,      it    is      urged,   would     potentially
              infringe the privacy rights of multiple persons
              and defeat the statutory safeguards embedded
              in
Section 8
of the RTI Act.

         6.12. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex
              Court in Central Public Information Officer,
              Supreme        Court            of   India   Vs.    Subhash
              Chandra Agarwal2, more particularly, paras
              235,     251     and         293      thereof,     which      are
              reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                 235. The appellant argued that the information about
                 the assets of Judges is exempt from disclosure, by
                 virtue of
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act which casts a
                 fiduciary duty on the Chief Justice of India to hold the
                 asset declarations in confidence. It is argued by the
                 respondent that Judges, while declaring their assets,
                 do so in their official capacity in accordance with the
                 1997 Resolution and not as private individuals. It is
                 urged that the process of information gathering about
                 the assets of the Judges by the Chief Justice of India,
                 is in his official capacity and therefore, no fiduciary
                 relationship exists between them.




2
    2020 (5) SCC 481
                               - 17 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



           251. The third referral question to be answered by
           this Court is:"Whether the information sought for is
           exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act." The
           question requires this Court to determine whether
           and under what circumstances the information sought
           by the applicant should be disclosed under the
           provisions of the
RTI Act
. This Court is cognizant that
           in interpreting the statutory scheme of the
RTI Act
,
           the constitutional right to know and the constitutional
           right to privacy of citizens are also implicated. In
           answering the question, it is necessary to analyse the
           scheme of the
RTI Act
, the role of the exemptions
           under
Section 8
, the interface between the statutory
           rights and duties under
Section 8(1)(j)
and the
           constitutional rights under Part III of the Constitution.

           293. The right to information and the need for
           transparency in the case of elected officials is
           grounded in the democratic need to facilitate better
           decision-making by the public. Transparency and the
           right to information directly contribute to the ability
           of citizens to monitor and make more informed
           decisions with respect to the conduct of elected
           officials. Where the misconduct of an elected
           representative is exposed to the public, citizens can
           choose not to vote for the person at the next poll. In
           this manner, the democratic process coupled with the
           right to information facilitates better administration
           and provides powerful incentives for good public
           decision-making. In the case of Judges, citizens do
           not possess a direct agency relationship. Therefore,
           the "public interest" in disclosing information in
           regard to a Judge cannot be sourced on the need for
           ensuring democratic accountability through better
           public decision-making but must be located
           elsewhere."

     6.13. By relying on Subhash Chandra Agarwal's
         case, his submission is that in that case, the
         Hon'ble     Supreme           Court     considered            the
         contention that information relating to the
                                    - 18 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          assets of Judges was exempt from disclosure
          under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act on the
          ground that such declarations were held in a
          fiduciary capacity. The issue revolved around
          whether       the    Chief         Justice    of     India,       while
          receiving        asset     declarations,        held        them     in
          confidence pursuant to a fiduciary relationship.
          The Petitioner emphasises that the Supreme
          Court     examined                the   scope        of     fiduciary
          obligations       under
Section    8(1)(e)
and    the
          nature      of    confidentiality           attached        to    such
          disclosures.

     6.14. It is contended that the Hon'ble Supreme Court
          emphasised the need to balance the statutory
          scheme of the
RTI Act
with the constitutional
          right    to      privacy          under      Part    III     of    the
          Constitution.        The           Court      recognised           that
          exemptions          under
Section      8
,        particularly
Section 8(1)(j)
, are not to be mechanically
          disregarded and that disclosure of personal
          information must be tested against privacy
          concerns and the requirement of a larger public
          interest.
                                  - 19 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     6.15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the
          democratic       justification        for    transparency      in
          respect of elected representatives stems from
          the       need   for     public       accountability      in   a
          representative system. However, in the case of
          Judges, who do not stand in a direct agency
          relationship with the electorate, the "public
          interest" in disclosure cannot be equated with
          democratic accountability in the electoral sense.

     6.16. On the strength of the aforesaid observations,
          learned counsel submits that the relationship
          between the Income Tax Department and an
          assessee is analogous, for the present purpose,
          to    a    fiduciary     relationship.        Just   as   asset
          declarations made by Judges were argued to be
          held in confidence, the income tax returns and
          financial particulars furnished by an assessee
          are       submitted      to     the    Department         under
          statutory compulsion with an expectation of
          confidentiality. It is his submission that if not
          for the statutory compulsion, such information
          and finer details would not have been provided
          by the Assesse. It is therefore contended that
          such information is held in a fiduciary capacity
                                  - 20 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          and   attracts       the        exemption     under
Section
          8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act.

     6.17. It is urged that disclosure of such personal
          financial information to a third party, even if
          that third party is the spouse of the assessee,
          would trench upon the privacy rights of the
          individual       and       would     not      advance     any
          identifiable public interest. Hence, the direction
          issued by the Central Information Commission,
          according to the Petitioner, runs contrary to the
          principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
          Court in Subhash Chandra Agarwal.

     6.18. Learned       counsel     for     the   Petitioner    further
          contends that the information sought, namely
          the income tax returns, assessment particulars
          and     financial      disclosures       of   the    assessee,
          squarely falls within the protective ambit of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Right to Information Act,
          2005.     It    is   submitted       that     such    material
          constitutes personal information, the disclosure
          of which has no relationship to any public
          activity or public interest and would amount to
          an unwarranted invasion of privacy.
                                  - 21 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     6.19. According to the Petitioner, while the
RTI Act
recognises a statutory right to information, that
          right is not absolute and must necessarily be
          balanced against the constitutional right to
          privacy.
Section          8(1)(j)
embodies    this
          legislative balance by carving out an exemption
          where personal information is sought without a
          demonstrable larger public interest. Thus, the
          "right to know" cannot override the right to
          privacy    except         in     circumstances     expressly
          contemplated by the statute.

     6.20. It is further submitted that the only permissible
          ground         for   disclosure       of    such   protected
          personal information would be the existence of
          a     larger     public        interest    warranting   such
          disclosure. The concept of public interest, it is
          argued, must transcend individual disputes and
          relate to transparency in public functioning or
          accountability in governance. In the present
          case, the request emanates from a private
          matrimonial context and does not subserve any
          broader public cause.

     6.21. On this basis, learned counsel reiterates that
          the    Income        Tax        Department     stands   in   a
                                    - 22 -
                                                        NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




               fiduciary relationship with the assessee; the
               financial information furnished by the assessee
               is inherently private; and in the absence of any
               overriding     public        interest,     the        protection
               afforded by
Section 8(1)(j)
operates in full
               measure. Consequently, it is contended that no
               disclosure to Respondent No.1 is warranted
               under the
RTI Act
.

         6.22. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex
               Court     in   Central        Board        of     Secondary
               Education        and         another            Vs.     Aditya
               Bandopadhyay                 and         others3,         more
               particularly, paras 12, 20 and 66 thereof, which
               are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                   12. To consider these questions, it is necessary
                   to refer to the Statement of Objects and
                   Reasons, the Preamble and the relevant
                   provisions of the
RTI Act
.
The RTI Act
was
                   enacted in order to ensure smoother, greater
                   and more effective access to information and
                   provide an effective framework for effectuating
                   the right to information recognised under
Article
                   19
of the Constitution. The Preamble to the Act
                   declares the object sought to be achieved by the
RTI Act
thus:

                   "
An Act
to provide for setting out the practical
                   regime of right to information for citizens to
                   secure access to information under the control of

3
    (2011) 8 SCC 497
                          - 23 -
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         public authorities, in order to promote
         transparency and accountability in the working
         of every public authority, the constitution of a
         Central Information Commission and State
         Information Commissions and for matters
         connected therewith or incidental thereto.

         Whereas     the Constitution of       India   has
         established democratic republic;

         And whereas democracy requires an informed
         citizenry and transparency of information which
         are vital to its functioning and also to contain
         corruption and to hold Governments and their
         instrumentalities accountable to the governed;

         And whereas revelation of information in actual
         practice is likely to conflict with other public
         interests including efficient operations of the
         Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal
         resources and the preservation of confidentiality
         of sensitive information;

         And whereas it is necessary to harmonise these
         conflicting interests while preserving the
         paramountcy of the democratic ideal;"

         20. It will also be useful to refer to a few
         decisions of this Court which considered the
         importance and scope of the right to
         information. In State of U.P. v. Raj Narain
         [(1975) 4 SCC 428] this Court observed: (SCC
         p. 453, para 74)

         "74. In a Government of responsibility like ours,
         where all the agents of the public must be
         responsible for their conduct, there can be but
         few secrets. The people of this country have a
         right to know every public act, everything that is
         done in a public way, by their public
         functionaries. They are entitled to know the
                               - 24 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



             particulars of every public transaction in all its
             bearing. The right to know, which is derived
             from the concept of freedom of speech, though
             not absolute, is a factor which should make one
             wary, when secrecy is claimed for transactions
             which can, at any rate, have no repercussion on
             public security."

                                         (emphasis supplied)

             66. The right to information is a cherished right.
             Information and right to information are
             intended to be formidable tools in the hands of
             responsible citizens to fight corruption and to
             bring in transparency and accountability. The
             provisions of the
RTI Act
should be enforced
             strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to
             light the necessary information under clause (b)
             of
Section 4(1)
of the Act which relates to
             securing transparency and accountability in the
             working of public authorities and in discouraging
             corruption. But in regard to other information
             [that    is,  Information      other  than    those
             enumerated in
Sections 4(1)(b)
and (c) of the
             Act], equal importance and emphasis are given
             to other public interests (like confidentiality of
             sensitive information, fidelity and fiduciary
             relationships,       efficient     operation     of
             Governments, etc.)."




     6.23. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further places
          reliance upon the decision of the Hon'ble
          Supreme Court in Aditya Bandopadhyay, and
          submits that the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while
          analysing     the    Statement      of    Objects        and
                                - 25 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          Reasons and the Preamble of the RTI Act,
          emphasised        that    the   Act   was   enacted     to
          promote transparency and accountability in the
          working of public authorities and to secure
          access to information in order to strengthen
          democratic governance. However, the Court
          also recognised that disclosure of information
          may    conflict     with      other   public   interests,
          including   preservation        of    confidentiality   of
          sensitive information, efficient functioning of
          the Government, and fiduciary relationships.

     6.24. Learned counsel submits that the right to know,
          though flowing from
Article 19(1)(a)
of the
          Constitution, is not absolute. It is circumscribed
          by legitimate considerations of secrecy where
          warranted, particularly when the information
          sought does not pertain to public acts or public
          transactions carried out by public functionaries
          in a public capacity.

     6.25. It is contended that while the
RTI Act
is a
          potent tool to combat corruption and ensure
          transparency, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
          categorically observed that equal importance
          must be accorded to other public interests,
                                 - 26 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          such as confidentiality of sensitive information,
          protection      of    fiduciary        relationships,     and
          efficient functioning of public authorities.
The
          Act
is not intended to be deployed in a manner
          that disregards these countervailing interests.

     6.26. On the strength of the above principles, learned
          counsel submits           that   the     right   exercisable
          under the
RTI Act
is essentially a right to seek
          information regarding the functioning, actions,
          and decisions of public authorities and public
          functionaries. It is not a mechanism to access
          private   personal        information      of    individuals,
          which happens to be in the custody of a public
          authority.

     6.27. According to the Petitioner, income tax returns
          are   private        documents     submitted         by    an
          assessee to the Department in compliance with
          statutory requirements. Such returns do not
          relate to any public act performed by a public
          functionary but concern the personal financial
          affairs of an individual. Hence, it is contended
          that disclosure of income tax returns does not
          fall within the core objective of the
RTI Act
and
                               - 27 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          is instead protected by the exemptions carved
          out under
Section 8
.

     6.28. Learned counsel for the Petitioner contends that
          the right to information, as recognised under
          the
RTI Act
, is intended to operate as a
          powerful instrument in the hands of responsible
          citizens   to     promote       transparency,       ensure
          accountability, and combat corruption in public
          administration. The legislative intent, according
          to him, is to expose maladministration and
          bring   clarity    to    the    functioning    of    public
          authorities.

     6.29. It is submitted that the present request does
          not     advance         any    such     objective.      The
          information sought pertains exclusively to the
          personal financial affairs of a private individual
          and arises in the context of a private dispute
          between spouses. There is no allegation of
          corruption,       misuse       of    public   office,    or
          irregularity in the functioning of the Income Tax
          Department. Nor is there any element of public
          accountability implicated in the request.

     6.30. In the absence of any demonstrable larger
          public interest or public purpose, it is contended
                                   - 28 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




               that the machinery of the
RTI Act
cannot be
               invoked to secure disclosure of private tax
               information. The statutory exemptions under
Section 8
, particularly those protecting fiduciary
               relationships    and        personal     privacy,   would
               therefore operate as a bar to disclosure.

         6.31. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex
               Court in Girish Ramchandra Deshpande Vs.
               Cen. Information Commr. & Ors.,4 more
               particularly, paras 13 and 14 thereof, which is
               reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                  13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the
                  courts below that the details called for by the
                  Petitioner ie copies of all memos issued to the
                  third respondent, show cause notices and orders
                  of censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be
                  personal information as defined in clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act. The performance of
                  an employee/officer in an organisation is
                  primarily a matter between the employee and
                  the employer and normally those aspects are
                  governed by the service rules which fall under
                  the expression personal information, the
                  disclosure of which has no relationship to any
                  public activity or public interest. On the other
                  hand, the disclosure of which would cause
                  unwarranted invasion of privacy of that
                  individual. (Of course, in a given case, if the
                  Central Public Information Officer or the State
                  Public Information Officer of the Appellate

4
    SLP(C) No.27734/2012
                                  - 29 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



                Authority is satisfied that the larger public
                interest justifies the disclosure of such
                information, appropriate orders could be passed
                but the Petitioner cannot claim those details as a
                matter of right.

                14. The details disclosed by a person in his
                income tax returns are personal information
                which stand exempted from disclosure under
                clause (i) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act, unless
                involves a larger public interest and the Central
                Public Information Officer or the State Public
                Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
                satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
                the disclosure of such information."




     6.32. By       relying      on         Girish      Ramchandra
          Deshpande., he submits that the Hon'ble
          Supreme Court categorically held that service
          records,       memos,           show-cause       notices,    and
          orders of censure relating to an employee
          constitute "personal information" within the
          meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. The
          Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that such
          matters       primarily         concern    the     relationship
          between employer and employee and their
          disclosure       would      ordinarily     amount       to    an
          unwarranted          invasion        of    privacy,     unless
          justified by a larger public interest.
                            - 30 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     6.33. More significantly, learned counsel submits that
          the Hon'ble Supreme Court expressly held that
          details disclosed by a person in his income tax
          returns   are   personal       information       and   are
          exempt from disclosure under
Section 8(1)(j)
of
          the RTI Act, unless a larger public interest is
          established and the competent authority is
          satisfied that disclosure is warranted.

     6.34. It is contended that the issue in the present
          case stands squarely covered. Income tax
          returns, by their very nature, contain personal
          financial particulars of an individual and fall
          within the protective ambit of
Section 8(1)(j)
.
          The exemption is qualified only by the existence
          of a larger public interest, which must be
          demonstrated and cannot be presumed.

     6.35. According to the Petitioner, in the present case,
          the   request    emanates             from   a    private
          matrimonial dispute and does not involve any
          question of public accountability, corruption, or
          misuse of public office. In the absence of any
          overriding   public       interest,    the   information
          sought    remains     exempt          from   disclosure.
          Therefore, it is submitted that the direction
                                   - 31 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




              issued by the Central Information Commission
              is contrary to the law laid down by the Hon'ble
              Supreme       Court      in        Girish   Ramchandra
              Deshpande.

         6.36. He relies upon the decision in Shailesh Gandhi
              Vs. Central Information Commission5, more
              particularly,    para         25     thereof,   which     is
              reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                 "25. In my view therefore, the proviso cannot be
                 sought to be interpreted in the manner which the
                 Learned Counsel for the Petitioner seeks to do.
                 There is also a basic fallacy in the contention
                 raised on behalf of the Petitioner. The Petitioner
                 wants to proceed on the hypothesis that the
                 information sought by him cannot be denied to
                 the Parliament. In so far as the Parliament is
                 concerned, the Parliament has its own rules of
                 business and it therefore cannot be presumed
                 that the information in respect of the Income Tax
                 Returns of a Member of Legislature would be
                 sought. The same would undoubtedly be in the
                 discretion of the Honourable Speaker. In the said
                 context, it is also relevant to refer to
Section 75A
of the Representation of the People Act under
                 which every elected candidate for a House of
                 Parliament has to furnish information relating to
                 the movable and immovable property, his
                 liabilities to any public financial institution, his
                 liabilities to the Central Government or the State
                 Government to the Chairman of the Council of
                 States or the Speaker of the House of the People
                 i.e. Loksabha or the Chairman of the Council of

5
    (2015) 58 Taxmann.Com 147 (Bombay)
                             - 32 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



            the State i.e. Rajyasabha. Hence there are
            adequate provisions in the
Representation of the
            People Act
under which the information sought is
            to be provided to the Parliament to the extent
            mentioned in the said provisions and therefore
            reliance cannot be placed on the proviso to
Section 8(1)(j)
to contend that the exemption
            provided in the said Section would not operate."

     6.37. By relying on Shailesh Gandhi, he submits
         that in the said judgment, the Hon'ble Bombay
         High Court examined the scope of the proviso
         to
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act and rejected
         the contention that information which could
         hypothetically be sought by Parliament must
         necessarily be disclosed under the
RTI Act
. The
         Court observed that Parliament functions under
         its own procedural framework and statutory
         mechanisms,       including            specific       legislative
         provisions    such        as
Section          75A
of     the
         Representation       of     the        People     Act,        which
         mandate       disclosure          of     certain       financial
         particulars     by          elected        representatives.
         Therefore, the mere possibility that information
         could be sought in another forum does not
         dilute or override the exemptions provided
         under
Section 8(1)(j)
.
                                          - 33 -
                                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




           6.38. On       the    strength         of   the    above     reasoning,
                   learned counsel submits that the exemptions
                   carved out under Clause (j) of Sub-section (1)
                   of
Section 8
are substantive protections and
                   must be given full effect. The proviso cannot be
                   so interpreted as to render the exemption
                   otiose.       Personal          information,        particularly
                   financial     information           such    as   income      tax
                   returns, remains protected unless the statutory
                   requirement of a larger public interest is clearly
                   satisfied.

           6.39. It      is therefore contended that the Central
                   Information         Commission,             while     directing
                   disclosure, failed to accord due weight to the
                   statutory exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
and
                   the      settled     judicial        position       that   such
                   exemptions are not to be lightly disregarded.

           6.40. He relies upon the decision in CPIO/Deputy
                   Commissioner             of         Income       Tax6,     more
                   particularly,      para         19    thereof,       which    is
                   reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                         "19. The issue raised herein has been settled
                         by a Bench of three Member Bench of the CIC
                         which, in the opinion of this Court, is binding on

6
    (2024) 464 ITR 672 (Delhi)
                          - 34 -
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         the Bench which has passed the impugned
         order. A Bench of three Commissioners of the
         CIC in G.R. Rawal v. Director General of Income
         Tax (Investigation), 2008 SCC OnLine CIC
         1008, while considering the very same issue
         has observed as under:

         "15. Thus, both the
Right to Information Act,
         2005
and
Section 138
of the Income Tax Act,
         1961 deal with disclosure of information.
While
         Right to Information Act
is a general law
         concerning the disclosure of information by the
         public authorities,
Section 138
of the Income
         Tax Act is a special legislation dealing with
         disclosure of information concerning the
         assesses. This Commission in "Rakesh Kumar
         Gupta v. ITAT, decided on 18th September,
         2007 decided by a Full Bench, has dealt with
         the issue of applicability of special law to the
         exclusion of the general law. The Commission
         has relied upon the Hon'ble Apex Court's
         decision in "Chandra Prakash Tiwari v.
         Shakuntala Shukla -- AIR 2002 SC 2322". The
         following two paragraphs from the said decision
         of the Commission are pertinent and quoted
         below:

         37. A special enactment or Rule, therefore,
         cannot be held to be overridden by a later
         general enactment or simply because the latter
         opens up with a nonobstante clause unless
         there is clear inconsistency between the two
         legislations -- one which is later in order of time
         and the other which is a special enactment. This
         issue came again for consideration before the
         Hon'ble Apex Court in Chandra Prakash Tiwari
         v. Shakuntala Shukla --AIR 2002 SC 2322 and
         the Hon'ble Supreme Court quoted with
         approval the Broom's Legal Maxim in reference
         to two Latin Maxims in the following words:
                           - 35 -
                                          NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                      WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         "It is then, an elementary Rule that an earlier
         Act must give place to a later, if the two cannot
         be reconciled - lex posterior derogate priori -
         non est novum ut priores leges ad posteriors
         trahantur (Emphasis supplied) - and one Act
         may repeal another by express words or by
         implication; for it is enough if there be words
         which by necessary implication repeal it. But
         repeal by implication is never to be favoured,
         and must not be imputed to the legislature
         without necessity, or strong reason, to be
         shown by the party imputing it. It is only
         effected where the provisions of the later
         enactment are so inconsistent with, or
         repugnant to, those of the earlier that the two
         cannot stand together2; unless the two Acts are
         so plainly repugnant to each other that effect
         cannot be given to both at the same time a
         repeal cannot be implied; and special Acts are
         not repealed by general Acts unless there be
         some express reference to the previous
         legislation, or a necessary inconsistency in the
         two Acts standing together, which prevents the
         maxim generalia specialibus non derogant
         (Emphasis supplied) from being applied. For
         where there are general words in a later Act
         capable of reasonable application without being
         extended to subjects specially dealt with by
         earlier legislation, then, in the absence of an
         indication of a particular intention to that effect,
         the presumption is that the general words were
         not intended to repeal the earlier and special
         legislation, or to take away a particular privilege
         of a particular class of persons."

         38. In the aforesaid case, the Hon'ble Apex
         Court also cited with approval an earlier
         decision in Maharaja Pratap Singh Bahadur v.
         Thakur Manmohan Dey - MANU/SC/0202/1966,
                                - 36 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



               in which it was indicated that an earlier special
               law cannot be held to have been abrogated by
               mere implication. That being so, the argument
               regarding implied repeal has to be rejected for
               both the reasons set out above."

               Propriety demanded that the CIC ought to have
               followed the opinion of the larger Bench, which
               is binding on it."

     6.41. By relying on Girish Mittal, he submits that in
          that case reliance was placed on the earlier
          three-Member Bench decision of the Central
          Information Commission in G.R. Rawal v.
          Director        General        of      Income        Tax
          (Investigation).

     6.42. It is submitted that in the said decisions, the
          interplay between the
Right to Information Act,
          2005
and
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act,
          1961 was specifically considered. The reasoning
          adopted therein proceeds on the principle that
          while the
RTI Act
is a general enactment
          governing access to information held by public
          authorities,
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act
          is   a    special      statutory     provision   dealing
          specifically    with      disclosure    of   information
          relating to assessees.
                                - 37 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     6.43. Relying     upon    the       well-established         maxim
          generalia specialibus non derogant, it is
          contended that a later general law does not
          impliedly override an earlier special law unless
          there is clear inconsistency or irreconcilable
          repugnancy         between         the    two.    Repeal      by
          implication is not to be readily inferred.

     6.44.
Section     138(1)(b)
of    the    Income-tax         Act
          expressly regulates disclosure of information
          relating to an assessee and vests discretion in
          specified high-ranking authorities, namely the
          Principal       Chief           Commissioner,            Chief
          Commissioner,         Principal           Commissioner         or
          Commissioner,        to       determine      whether       such
          information may be furnished. The statutory
          framework thus creates a specific mechanism
          and threshold for disclosure of income tax
          information.

     6.45. According     to    the       Petitioner,       this   special
          statutory regime governing confidentiality of
          tax information would prevail over the general
          provisions of the
RTI Act
by virtue of settled
          principles    of    statutory       interpretation.      It    is
          therefore contended that Section 138 of the
                              - 38 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          Income-tax Act operates as a self-contained
          code    concerning          disclosure        of        assessee
          information     and      cannot        be     bypassed         by
          invoking
Section       22
of        the        RTI    Act.
          Consequently,      the      direction       issued       by   the
          Central Information Commission is stated to be
          contrary to the binding statutory scheme and
          the settled position of law.

     6.46. In the aforesaid factual and legal backdrop,
          learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that
          the impugned order passed by the Central
          Information Commission is unsustainable in
          law.

     6.47. It is contended that the Commission has failed
          to properly appreciate:

          6.47.1. The fiduciary relationship between the
                 Income      Tax        Department               and    the
                 assessee;

          6.47.2. The statutory exemptions under
Sections
                 8(1)(e)
and
8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act;

          6.47.3. The    protection        afforded         to    personal
                 financial      information           under        binding
                                   - 39 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                     precedents        of   the    Hon'ble    Supreme
                     Court; and

            6.47.4. The    overriding       effect    of   the   special
                     mechanism under
Section 138
of the
                     Income-tax Act, 1961.

     6.48. According to the Petitioner, the information
            sought pertains exclusively to private financial
            affairs of a third party, does not relate to any
            public    activity,     and     does     not   satisfy   the
            threshold of larger public interest. The direction
            to disclose, therefore, is alleged to be contrary
            to the statutory scheme and settled judicial
            principles.

     6.49. On these grounds, it is submitted that the
            present writ petition deserves to be allowed,
            the order dated 12.04.2019 passed by the
            Central Information Commission is liable to be
            set aside, and the RTI application filed by
            Respondent No.1 deserves to be rejected.

7.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent No.1,
     submits that:

     7.1.   Respondent No.1 is the legally wedded wife of
            Sri Zafar Ali S/o Asar Ali. In that view of the
                            - 40 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          matter, it is contended that the husband cannot
          be treated as a "third party" vis-à-vis his wife
          in a strict or adversarial sense, or vice versa,
          particularly   when       the    information   sought
          pertains to issues directly impacting her legal
          rights. The relationship between the parties,
          being matrimonial, carries with it reciprocal
          obligations, including financial disclosure in
          appropriate proceedings.

     7.2. Respondent No.1 had instituted proceedings
          under
Section 12(1)
of the Protection of Women
          from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. In the said
          proceedings, it was specifically pleaded that the
          husband was carrying on business in Bengaluru
          under   the    name       S.A.    Trading   Company,
          engaged in the sale and purchase of sewing
          machines. Though the husband is stated to
          have indicated that he could produce income
          tax returns pertaining to his business, he
          neither disclosed the turnover nor produced the
          relevant income tax returns before the Court.

     7.3. It is submitted that an application was filed
          before the concerned Magistrate seeking a
          direction to the husband to produce his income
                                - 41 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          tax returns. However, in the final adjudication
          of   the   matter,      the     said    aspect   was    not
          effectively addressed. The Court, observing that
          there was no specific evidence regarding the
          earnings of the husband, rejected the claim of
          maintenance at Rs.75,000/- per month and
          awarded only Rs.7,000/- per month.

     7.4. Aggrieved     by         the        quantum      awarded,
          Respondent No.1 preferred Criminal Appeal
          No.303/2017 before the Sessions Court. The
          appellate court also declined to enhance the
          maintenance        on         the     ground     that   no
          documentary evidence had been placed on
          record to establish the actual income of the
          husband. It is further submitted that even the
          maintenance     amount          so     awarded   was    not
          regularly paid, resulting in the issuance of
          recovery-cum-arrest warrants. An application
          seeking stay of the distress warrant was also
          filed by the husband.

     7.5. It is in this factual backdrop that Respondent
          No.1 invoked the provisions of the
RTI Act
and
          sought copies of the income tax returns filed by
          her husband, with the specific object of placing
                                - 42 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          the same before the competent courts to
          substantiate her claim for maintenance.

     7.6. Learned counsel emphasises that in the RTI
          application    itself,        Respondent     No.1   clearly
          disclosed     that    she       was    the   wife   of   the
          concerned assessee and that the information
          was sought in connection with proceedings
          pending       before          the     XLVI    Metropolitan
          Magistrate Court at Mumbai under the Domestic
          Violence Act. It was expressly stated that the
          information was required because the courts
          had recorded a finding that no specific proof of
          income had been produced.

     7.7. It is therefore submitted that Respondent No.1
          has no alternative or effective mechanism to
          establish the true income of her husband
          except by obtaining copies of the income tax
          returns filed by him. The income details being
          within the exclusive knowledge and control of
          the husband and the Income Tax Department,
          denial of such information would effectively
          defeat her statutory right to seek appropriate
          maintenance.
                                     - 43 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                    WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




         7.8. According to learned counsel, these aspects
                were      duly     considered          by    the      Central
                Information        Commission,              which,        upon
                appreciating the peculiar facts and the nature of
                the request, allowed the appeal and directed
                disclosure. It is therefore contended that the
                order of the Central Information Commission is
                reasoned,     justified,      and    does     not    warrant
                interference       under
Article      226
of    the
                Constitution.

         7.9. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble
                Gujarat High Court in Rajendra Vasantlal
                Shah         Vs.             Central         Information
                Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors7. more
                particularly, paras 8.2 and 8.4 thereof, which
                are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                   "8.2 Accounts of respondent No.4, being a
                   Religious Charitable Trust, is statutorily audited,
                   whose administration is subject to certain
                   controls    by    the   Charity      Commissioner
                   Information Commissioner, under the Bombay
                   Public Trust Act. Its action of filing income-tax
                   returns with the In-come Tax Department
                   cannot be, in the con-text of the RTI. 'Act,
                   viewed as a fiduciary relationship. No contrary
                   interpretation can be given to defeat the object
                   of the act, rendering lack of transparency in


7
    AIR 2011 Gujarat 70
                              - 44 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



            functioning of public and religious charitable
            trusts which carry considerable importance in
            their functioning, which touch greater portion of
            the population through different activities and
            would also make them immune from publishing
            their accounts, expenditure, funds, etc.

            8.4 As already noted, respondent No.4 is a
            religious charitable Trust, functioning un-der the
            Scheme formulated by the District Court, having
            considerable public importance and registered
            under the Bombay Public Trust Act, as a
            religious charitable Trust. Considering its nature
            and activities, emerging from the objects of the
            Trust, it can be stated that disclosure of such
            information is in relation to any public interest of
            activity. The Trust is engaged, in public
            activities, disclosure of its statements and
            accounts of income-tax returns and assessments
            orders cannot be withheld under
Section 8(1)(c)
or (j) of the RTI. Act."




     7.10. By relying on the judgment of the Hon'ble
         Gujarat High Court in Rajendra Vasantlal
         Shah, he submits that in the said decision, the
         Hon'ble Gujarat High Court considered whether
         income     tax    returns     filed    by   a    religious
         charitable trust could be withheld under the
         exemptions contained in
Section 8(1)
of the RTI
         Act on the ground of fiduciary relationship or
         privacy. The Hon'ble Gujarat High Court held
         that the filing of income tax returns by such a
                              - 45 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          trust, which was subject to statutory regulation
          and audit under the Bombay Public Trust Act
          and whose functioning was of considerable
          public importance, could not be treated as
          constituting a fiduciary relationship so as to
          defeat the object of the
RTI Act
.

     7.11. The Hon'ble Gujarat High Court observed that a
          public charitable trust, engaged in activities
          affecting a significant section of the public and
          operating under statutory control, cannot claim
          immunity    from      disclosure    of   its   financial
          statements and assessment orders. In such
          circumstances, disclosure of income tax returns
          was held to be connected with public interest
          and transparency in public functioning.

     7.12. Learned counsel submits that the concept of
          fiduciary relationship cannot be expansively
          interpreted so as to shield all income tax
          returns from disclosure under the
RTI Act
.
          According to him, the mere fact that a return is
          filed with the Income Tax Department does not,
          by itself, create a blanket fiduciary protection.

     7.13. It is therefore contended that the Income Tax
          Department cannot mechanically invoke Section
                                      - 46 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




               8(1)(e) or 8(1)(j) in every case involving
               income tax returns. Where the information
               sought bears relevance to the enforcement of
               legal rights and involves elements of public
               interest or statutory obligations, disclosure may
               be warranted. Learned counsel submits that the
               Central      Information       Commission,        having
               considered these principles, rightly directed
               disclosure in the present case.

         7.14. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi
               High Court in Kusum Sharma Vs. Mahinder
               Kumar Sharma8, more particularly, para 16
               thereof, which is reproduced hereunder for easy
               reference:

                  "16. In Puneet Kaur v. Inderjit Singh Sawhney
                  (supra), this Court, while dealing with
Section 24
of the Hindu Marriage Act, directed both the
                  parties to file detailed affidavits of their assets,
                  income and expenditure. The relevant portion of
                  the said judgment is held as under:

                  7. ...both the parties are directed to file their
                  respective affidavits of assets, income and
                  expenditure from the date of the marriage up to
                  this date containing the following particulars:--

                  7.1 Personal Information

                      (i) Educational qualifications.

8
    FAO 369/1996 dated 14.01.2015.
                             - 47 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



             (ii) Professional qualifications.

             (iii) Present occupation.

             (iv) Particulars of past occupation,

             (v) Members of the family.

             (a) Dependent.

             (b) Independent.

         7.2 Income

         (i) Salary, if in service.

         (ii) Income      from business/profession, if self
         employed.

         (iii) Particulars of all earnings since marriage.

         (iv) Income from other sources:--

         (a) Rent.

         (b) Interest on bank deposits and FDRs.

         (c) Other interest i.e. on loan, deposits, NSC,
         IVP, KVP, Post Office schemes, PPF etc.

         (d) Dividends.

         (e) Income from machinery, plant or furniture let
         on hire.

         (f) Gifts and Donations.

         (g) Profit on sale of movable/immovable assets.

         (h) Any other income not covered above.

         7.3 Assets

         (i) Immovable properties:--
                             - 48 -
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (a) Building in the name of self and its Fair
         Market Value (FMV):--

         - Residential.

         - Commercial.

         - Mortgage.

         - Given on rent.

         - Others.

         (b) Plot/land.

         (c) Leasehold property.

         (d) Intangible property e.g. patents, trademark,
         design, goodwill.

         (e) Properties  in   the   name       of   family
         members/HUF and their FMV.

         (ii) Movable properties:--

         (a) Furniture and fixtures.

         (b) Plant and Machinery.

         (c) Livestock.

         (d) Vehicles i.e. car, scooter along with their
         brand and registration number.

         (iii) Investments:--

         (a) Bank Accounts - Current or Savings.

         (b) Demat Accounts.

         (c) Cash.
                            - 49 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (d) FDRs, NSC, IVP, KVP, Post Office schemes,
         PPF etc.

         (e) Stocks, shares, debentures, bonds, units and
         mutual funds.

         (f) LIC policy.

         (g) Deposits with          Government   and   Non-
         Government entities.

         (h) Loan given to friends, relatives and others.

         (i) Telephone, mobile phone and their numbers.

         (j) TV, Fridge, Air Conditioner, etc.

         (k) Other household appliances.

         (l) Computer, Laptop.

         (m) Other electronic gadgets including I-pad etc.

         (n) Gold, silver and diamond Jewellery.

         (o) Silver Utensils.

         (p) Capital in partnership firm, sole proprietorship
         firm.

         (q) Shares in the Company in which Director.

         (r) Undivided share in HUF property.

         (s) Booking of any plot, flat, membership in Co-
         op. Group Housing Society.

         (t) Other investments not covered by above
         items.

         (iv) Any other assets not covered above. 7.4
         Liabilities
                             - 50 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (i) OD, CC, Term Loan from bank and other
         institutions.

         (ii) Personal/business loan

         (a) Secured.

         (b) Unsecured.

         (iii) Home loan.

         (iv) Income Tax, Wealth Tax and Property Tax.
         7.5 Expenditure

         (i) Rent and maintenance including electricity,
         water and gas.

         (ii) Lease rental, if any asset taken on hire.

         (iii) Installment of any house loan, car loan,
         personal loan, business loan, etc.

         (iv) Interest to bank or others.

         (v) Education of children including tuition fee.

         (vi) Conveyance including fuel, repair and
         maintenance of vehicle. Also give the average
         distance travelled every day.

         (vii) Premium of LIC, Medi-claim, house and
         vehicle policy.

         (viii) Premium of ULIP, Mutual Fund.

         (ix) Contribution to          PPF,    EPF,   approved
         superannuation fund.

         (x) Mobile/landline phone bills.

         (xi) Club subscription and usage, subscription to
         news papers, periodicals, magazines, etc.
                            - 51 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                      WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (xii) Internet charges/cable charges.

         (xiii) Household      expenses   including   kitchen,
         clothing, etc.

         (xiv) Salary of servants, gardener, watchmen,
         etc.

         (xv) Medical/hospitalisation      expenses.     (xvi)
         Legal/litigation expenses.

         (xvii) Expenditure on dependent family members.
         (xviii) Expenditure on entertainment.

         (xix)    Expenditure    on     travel    including
         outstation/foreign travel, business as well as
         personal.         (xx)      Expenditure         on
         construction/renovation    and    furnishing    of
         residence/office.

         (xxi) Any other expenditure not covered above.
         7.6 General Information regarding Standard of
         Living and Lifestyle

         (i) Status of family members.

         (ii) Credit/debit cards.

         (iii) Expenditure on marriage including marriage
         of family members.

         (iv) Expenditure on family functions including
         birthday of the children.

         (v) Expenditure on festivals.

         (vi) Expenditure on extra-curricular activities.

         (vii) Destination of honeymoon.
                           - 52 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         (viii)    Frequency    of    travel   including
         outstation/foreign travel, business as well as
         personal.

         (ix) Mode of travel in city/outside city.

         (x) Mode of outstation/foreign travel including
         type of class.

         (xi) Category of hotels used for stay, official as
         well as personal, including type of rooms.

         (xii) Category of hospitals opted for medical
         treatment including type of rooms.

         (xiii) Name of school(s) where the child or
         children are studying.

         (xiv) Brand of vehicle, mobile and wrist watch.

         (xv) Value of jewellery worn.

         (xvi) Details of residential accommodation. (xvii)
         Value of gifts received.

         (xviii) Value of gifts given at family functions.
         (xix) Value of donations given.

         (xx) Particulars of credit card/debit card, its limit
         and usage.

         (xxi) Average monthly withdrawal from bank.
         (xxii) Type of restaurant visited for dining out.
         (xxiii) Membership of clubs, societies and other
         associations.

         (xxiv) Brand of alcohol, if consumed.

         (xxv) Particulars of all pending as well as decided
         cases including civil, criminal, labour, income tax,
         excise, property tax, MACT, etc. with parties
         name.
                           - 53 -
                                          NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         8. Both the parties are also directed to file, along
         with affidavit, copies of the documents relating to
         their assets, income and expenditure from the
         date of the marriage up to this date and more
         particularly the following:--

         (i) Relevant documents with respect to income
         including Salary certificate, Form 16A, Income
         Tax Returns, certificate from the employer
         regarding cost to the company, balance sheet,
         etc.

         (ii) Audited accounts, if deponent is running
         business and otherwise, non-audited accounts
         i.e. balance sheets, profit and loss account and
         capital account.

         (iii) Statement of all bank accounts.

         (iv) Statement of Demat accounts.

         (v) Passport.

         (vi) Credit cards.

         (vii) Club membership cards.

         (viii) Frequent Flyer cards.

         (ix) PAN card.

         (x) Applications seeking        job,    in   case   of
         unemployed person.

         9. The affidavit and documents be filed within a
         period of four weeks with an advance copy to
         opposite parties who shall file their response
         within two weeks thereafter.

         11. Both the parties are directed to remain
         present in Court on the next date of hearing
                                 - 54 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



            along with all original documents relating to their
            assets, income and expenditure."

     7.15. By relying on Kusum Sharma's case, his
          submission is that comprehensive directions
          were    issued       mandating         both      parties    in
          matrimonial         proceedings        to     file    detailed
          affidavits of their assets, income, expenditure,
          liabilities, and standard of living, along with
          supporting        documentary         evidence       including
          income tax returns, bank statements, audited
          accounts, and related financial records.

     7.16. Placing reliance on the said decision, learned
          counsel submits that matrimonial litigation,
          particularly            proceedings              concerning
          maintenance, necessarily requires full and frank
          disclosure of financial capacity by both spouses.
          The Hon'ble Delhi High Court recognised that
          accurate adjudication of maintenance claims is
          impossible without reliable material regarding
          income and assets, and accordingly imposed an
          obligation     on     parties    to    disclose      detailed
          financial information.

     7.17. It is therefore contended that in matrimonial
          disputes, there is a positive duty cast upon the
          husband      to     disclose    his   true     income      and
                               - 55 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          financial position. Where such disclosure is
          withheld, suppressed, or inadequately made,
          the other spouse cannot be left remediless. In
          such circumstances, it is submitted, the wife is
          entitled to seek access to authentic financial
          documents from the authority in lawful custody
          of such records, including income tax returns
          maintained by the Income Tax Department, for
          the limited purpose of producing the same
          before the competent court.

     7.18. Learned    counsel      further     submits   that   the
          context       of        matrimonial         proceedings
          distinguishes the present case from ordinary
          third-party requests under the
RTI Act
. The
          information        sought     is     not    for   public
          dissemination, nor for general transparency in
          governance, but for enforcement of statutory
          and legal rights arising out of the matrimonial
          relationship. The objective is to enable the
          court to determine a just and fair maintenance.

     7.19. It is therefore urged that when one spouse
          seeks disclosure of income tax returns of the
          other      spouse      in    aid      of   maintenance
          proceedings, such a request cannot be equated
                                     - 56 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


    HC-KAR




               with a demand for disclosure of purely private
               information in the public domain. Rather, it is
               an     effort   to   secure   relevant    evidence     for
               adjudication of legal rights. In that view of the
               matter,      learned    counsel    submits     that    the
               direction issued by the Central Information
               Commission does not warrant interference.

         7.20. He relies upon the decision of the Central
               Information Commission in Neena Bhatnagar
               Mani Vs. Chief Commissioner of Income
               Tax9, more particularly, the extracts as under.

                    "The Appellant reiterated the contents of the RTI
                    application and stated that the desired information
                    was not provided, till date, despite the fact that
                    she was the legally wedded wife of the Third
                    Party. While referring to the decision of the
                    Division Bench of the High Court of MP in the
                    matter of Smt. Sunita Jain vs. Pawan Kumar Jain
                    and others W.A. No. 168/2015 and Smt. Sunita
                    Jain vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and others
                    W.A. No. 170/2015 dated 15.05.2018, the
                    Appellant submitted that the legal position as
                    enunciated in the said judgement would prevail
                    over the decision of stay of the High Court of
                    Karnataka in Writ Petition No. 18778/2017 (GM-
                    RES) since the decision of High Court of Karnataka
                    was binding only on the parties contesting the
                    matter therein. In its reply, the Respondent re-
                    iterated the response of the CPIO/ FAA as also
                    their written submission and contended that a

9
    S.A.No.CIC/CCITB/A/2018/106268-BJ dated 18.6.2019
                           - 57 -
                                         NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         similar matter decided by the Commission was
         challenged by them before the High Court of
         Karnataka in Writ Petition No. 18778/2017 (GM-
         RES) and the Court had passed an interim order
         dated 28.04.2017 directing issue of notice to the
         Respondents and in the meanwhile granted
         interim stay. The Appellant while submitting that
         she was not in receipt of the written submission of
         the    Respondent    provided     her   e-mail   id
         (
[email protected]
) to the Respondent
         in order to forward the written submission to her
         by email for her ready reference.

         The Commission was in receipt of a written
         submission from the Appellant dated 13.06.2019
         wherein while explaining the background of the
         matter it was stated that she was the legally
         wedded wife of Mr. Bhaskar Mani since
         23.02.1992 and had a right to be maintained by
         her husband under the Hindu law which he was
         refusing on the claim that he had no income
         despite Court orders. She further explained that
         she was married for 27 years and was now a
         Senior Citizen with multiple serious illnesses and
         was dependent on her married sisters for the last
         11 years. Hence the information sought became
         life related information necessary to live a life of
         dignity, refusal of which would greatly perpetuate
         her hardship. She further submitted that her
         request for information fell within the ambit and
         scope of the
RTI Act
since the protection of
         privacy was overridden by the huge public interest
         in preventing deserted wives from facing a life of
         destitution and indignity as provided under the
         Hindu Law and the proviso to
Section 8 (1) (j)
.
         While re-iterating her RTI application/ reply of the
         CPIO/ First Appeal and the reply of the FAA, the
         Appellant referred to several judgements to
         submit that maintenance was not merely a legal
                             - 58 -
                                            NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



            right but was part and parcel of basic human
            right. Depending on the financial condition and
            non-availability of support from parents, when
            husband does not maintain a wife, it challenges
            her right to live, and thus the information related
            to maintenance became life related information.
            In support of her contention, the Appellant relied
            on the decision of the High Court of Madhya
            Pradesh in Smt. Sunita Jain vs. Pawan Kumar Jain
            and others W.A. No. 168/2015 and Smt. Sunita
            Jain vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and others
            W.A. No. 170/2015 dated 15.05.2018, decision of
            the High Court of Bombay (Nagpur Bench) in the
            matter of Rajesh Ramachandra Kidile vs.
            Maharashtra SIC and Ors in W.P. No. 1766 of
            2016 dated 22.10.2018, decisions of the
            Commission in CIC/BS/A/2015/002182-BJ dated
            11.05.2017 and CIC/BS/A/2015/002040-BJ dated
            20.04.2017 and CIC/EPFOG/A/2017/175772 in
            support of her contention. Thus, while stating that
            since December, 2014 her husband had used one
            ploy or another to not pay her maintenance due to
            her under law and that arrears on the Court Order
            exceeded Rs. 15 lakhs, the Appellant prayed to
            set aside the order of the CPIO/ FAA (Jt.
            Commissioner) and direct the CPIO/ SPIO to
            provide her the information without further delay."



     7.21. By relying on Neena Bhatnagar Mani's case,
         his submission is that in the said case, the
         Commission was dealing with a similar situation
         where the legally wedded wife had sought
         disclosure of the income tax returns of her
         husband for the purpose of enforcing her claim
         for maintenance. The applicant therein had
                                    - 59 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                    WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          contended that despite subsisting matrimonial
          obligations and court orders, the husband had
          refused to maintain her, asserting lack of
          income, while withholding authentic financial
          particulars.

     7.22. The Commission, in that context, considered
          the plea that maintenance is not merely a
          statutory entitlement but forms an integral
          component of the right to live with dignity. It
          was urged before the Commission that denial of
          financial support, particularly where the wife
          was     dependent              and        without    independent
          means, directly impacted her right to livelihood
          and survival.

     7.23. Learned counsel submits that the Commission
          in    the      said     case      examined          the   interplay
          between the right to privacy and the concept of
          larger public interest under
Section 8(1)(j)
of
          the    RTI       Act.     It      was       observed      that    in
          circumstances           where         a     deserted      wife    is
          deprived of financial support and is unable to
          substantiate her claim due to non-disclosure of
          income details by the husband, the balance
          may     tilt    in    favour         of    disclosure,     as    the
                                - 60 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           information      becomes         intrinsically      connected
           with her right to life and dignity.

     7.24. Learned    counsel      submits        that      maintenance
           cannot be viewed as a mere private dispute
           devoid of public interest. The obligation of a
           husband to maintain his wife is recognised
           under personal laws and statutory enactments.
           When such an obligation is evaded and the wife
           is rendered financially vulnerable, denial of
           access to income-related information would
           perpetuate       hardship        and     undermine          her
           fundamental rights.

     7.25. It   is therefore contended that income tax
           returns,    in   such        a   context,       assume      the
           character of life-related information, as they
           directly   enable       the      court      to      determine
           appropriate maintenance. The disclosure sought
           is   not   for   public      circulation      but    for    the
           enforcement       of      lawful       rights      before    a
           competent court. Accordingly, it is submitted
           that the Central Information Commission rightly
           appreciated these considerations and allowed
           the request, and the writ petition deserves to
           be dismissed.
                                    - 61 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


 HC-KAR




         7.26. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble
               Madhya Pradesh High Court in Smt.Sunita
               Jain Vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd.,10 more
               particularly, paras 10, 11 and 12 thereof, which
               are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                   "The controversy involved in the present writ
                   appeal is whether the information sought is
                   exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act or it is
                   covered by
Section 4(1)(b)(x)
which obliges the
                   public authorities to display on public domain the
                   monthly remuneration received by each of its
                   officers and employees.

                   While dealing with the
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act,
                   we cannot lose sight of the fact that the
                   appellant and the respondent No.1 are husband
                   and wife and as a wife she is entitled to know
                   what remuneration the respondent No.1 is
                   getting.

                   Present case is distinguishable from the case of
                   Girish Ramchandra Deshpande (supra) and
                   therefore the law laid down by their Lordships in
                   the case of Girish Ramchandra Deshpande
                   (supra) are not applicable in the present case.

                   In view of the foregoing discussion, we allow the
                   appeal and set aside the order passed by the
                   Writ Court in W.P. No.341/2008. Similarly, the
                   W.A. No.170/2015 is also allowed and the
                   impugned order passed in W.P. No.1647/2008 is
                   set aside."




10
     W.A.No.170/2015 dated 15.05.2018
                               - 62 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     7.27. By relying on Sunita Jain's case, he submits
          that in the said case, the issue concerned the
          disclosure of the monthly remuneration of a
          husband employed with a public authority. The
          Ho'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court observed
          that while considering the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act, the marital
          relationship between the parties could not be
          ignored. The Court held that a wife is entitled to
          know the remuneration earned by her husband,
          especially when such information is relevant for
          enforcement of her legal rights.

     7.28. The   High   Court          further   distinguished    the
          decision in Girish Ramchandra Deshpande,
          holding that the facts therein were materially
          different and that the ratio of that case would
          not    automatically         apply     in   a   matrimonial
          context where financial disclosure is directly
          connected       with         maintenance        and    legal
          entitlements.

     7.29. On the basis of the said judgment, learned
          counsel submits that where a public authority is
          statutorily obliged under
Section 4(1)(b)(x)
of
          the    RTI    Act      to      disclose     the    monthly
                                   - 63 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


 HC-KAR




               remuneration of its officers and employees,
               such information cannot be shielded under the
               guise of personal privacy under
Section 8(1)(j)
.
               Transparency in respect of income earned from
               public employment carries a distinct character.

         7.30. It is therefore contended that if salary details of
               a public servant cannot be withheld from a
               spouse     under
Section    8(1)(j)
,        a    similar
               approach should inform the interpretation of
               disclosure     obligations     where      the       financial
               capacity of a husband is directly in issue in
               maintenance       proceedings.      Learned         counsel
               submits that the exemption provision cannot be
               applied      mechanically      so    as     to        defeat
               substantive legal rights of a spouse seeking
               maintenance.

         7.31. He relies upon the judgment of the Hon'ble
               Bombay High Court in Rajesh Ramchandra
               Kidile Vs. Maharastra SIC and others11,
               more particularly, paras 7 and 8 thereof, which
               are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                  "7. I would have accepted the contention of the
                  learned counsel for the respondent No.3 had the
                  application been filed on behalf of his estranged

11
     WP No.1766/2016 dated 22.10.2018
                           - 64 -
                                          NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                      WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



         wife of the Petitioner. A plain reading of this
         application, a copy of which is available at Page
         16, would show that the application has been
         filed in his own capacity by the Advocate and not
         on behalf of his client and so, the argument is
         rejected. It would be necessary now to consider
         the nature of information sought by this
         application.

         8. Perusal of this application shows that the
         salary slips for the period mentioned in the
         application have been sought for by the
         Advocate. As rightly submitted by the learned
         counsel for the Petitioner, the salary slips contain
         such details as deductions made from the salary,
         remittances made to the Bank by way of loan
         installments, remittances made to the Income
         Tax Authority towards part payment of the
         Income Tax for the concerned month and other
         details relating to contributions made to
         Provident Fund etc. It is here that the information
         contained in the salary slips would make the
         salary slips as having the characteristic of
         personal nature. Any information which discloses,
         as for example, remittances made to the Income
         Tax Department towards discharge of tax liability
         or to the Bank towards discharge of loan liability
         would constitute the personal information and
         would encroach upon the privacy of the person.
         Therefore, as held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in
         the case of Girish Ramchandra Deshpande
         (supra), such an information could not be
         disclosed under the provisions of the RI Act. This
         is all the more so when the information seeker is
         a person who is totally stranger in blood or
         marital relationship to the person whose
         information he wants to lay his hands on. It
         would have been a different matter, had the
         information been sought by the wife of the
                                 - 65 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                 WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



             Petitioner in order to support her contention in a
             litigation, which she has filed against her
             husband. In a litigation, wherein the issue
             involved is of maintenance of wife, the
             information relating to salary details no longer
             remains confined to the category of personal
             information of the husband alone and it assumes
             the characteristic of personal information
             concerning both husband and wife, which is
             available with the husband and hence accessible
             by the wife. But, in the present case, as stated
             earlier, the application has not been filed by the
             wife."




     7.32. By relying on Rajesh Ramchandra Kidile's, it
          is submitted that in the said case, the High
          Court was considering a request for salary slips
          of an employee. The Court noted that salary
          slips    ordinarily       contain        details     such    as
          deductions      towards            income          tax,     loan
          repayments, provident fund contributions, and
          other financial particulars which partake the
          character of personal information. On that
          basis,    and   applying          the     ratio    of     Girish
          Ramchandra Deshpande, the Court held that
          such     information           could    not   ordinarily     be
          disclosed under the
RTI Act
when sought by a
          stranger.
                            - 66 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     7.33. However,   learned       counsel     draws    specific
          attention to the significant observation made by
          the High Court that the matter would stand on
          a different footing if the information were
          sought by the wife in aid of litigation concerning
          maintenance. The Court expressly observed
          that in such circumstances, the information
          relating to salary details would no longer
          remain confined to the personal sphere of the
          husband alone but would assume relevance to
          both spouses, particularly when the issue of
          maintenance is directly in question.

     7.34. Learned counsel submits that the present case
          squarely falls within the category contemplated
          by the Bombay High Court. Here, the applicant
          is not a stranger but the legally wedded wife,
          and the information is sought for the limited
          purpose of substantiating her claim in pending
          matrimonial proceedings. The financial capacity
          of the husband being directly in issue, the
          information assumes shared relevance rather
          than remaining exclusively personal.

     7.35. It is therefore contended that the observations
          in Rajesh Ramchandra Kidile fortify the
                                      - 67 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                    WP No. 34625 of 2019


 HC-KAR




               stand of Respondent No.1 that disclosure in
               matrimonial        litigation    stands    on     a   distinct
               footing      and     that      the   Central     Information
               Commission rightly appreciated this distinction
               while directing disclosure.

         7.36. He also relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble
               Apex         Court      in       Girish        Ramchandra
               Deshpande            Vs.        Central        Information
               Commissioner             and         others12,          more
               particularly, paras 2 and 13 thereof, which are
               reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                  "2. We are, in this case, concerned with the
                  question whether the Central Information
                  Commissioner (for short 'the CIC') acting under
                  the
Right to Information Act, 2005
(for short 'the
RTI Act
') was right in denying information
                  regarding the third respondent's personal matters
                  pertaining to his service career and also denying
                  the details of his assets and liabilities, movable
                  and immovable properties on the ground that the
                  information sought for was qualified to be
                  personal information as defined in clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act.

                  13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the
                  courts below that the details called for by the
                  Petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to the
                  third respondent, show cause notices and orders
                  of censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be
                  personal information as defined in clause (j) of


12
     SLP(C).No.27734/2012
                                  - 68 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act. The performance of
                an employee/officer in an organisation is
                primarily a matter between the employee and the
                employer and normally those aspects are
                governed by the service rules which fall under the
                expression "personal information", the disclosure
                of which has no relationship to any public activity
                or public interest. On the other hand, the
                disclosure of which would cause unwarranted
                invasion of privacy of that individual. Of course,
                in a given case, if the Central Public Information
                Officer or the State Public Information Officer of
                the Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger
                public interest justifies the disclosure of such
                information, appropriate orders could be passed
                but the Petitioner cannot claim those details as a
                matter of right."




     7.37. By       relying      on        Girish        Ramchandra
          Deshpande's case, it is submitted that in the
          said decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was
          concerned with whether service-related records
          and asset declarations of a public servant
          constituted "personal information" within the
          meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. The
          Hon'ble        Supreme          Court   held    that    such
          information ordinarily falls within the protected
          category of personal information and cannot be
          disclosed as a matter of right unless larger
          public interest justifies disclosure.
                                 - 69 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     7.38. However,        learned       counsel   emphasises         that
          even in Girish Ramchandra Deshpande, the
          Hon'ble Supreme Court expressly recognised
          that the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
is not
          absolute. The Public Information Officer or the
          Appellate Authority is vested with discretion to
          order disclosure if satisfied that larger public
          interest     warrants          it.    Thus,     the   statute
          contemplates a case-specific evaluation rather
          than a blanket prohibition.

     7.39. On that basis, it is submitted that in the
          present case, the Public Information Officer was
          required to examine whether the request of the
          wife,   made        in     the       context     of   pending
          maintenance          proceedings,             constituted     a
          circumstance warranting disclosure. According
          to learned counsel, when a legally wedded wife
          seeks financial information to substantiate her
          claim      for     maintenance,           an      entitlement
          recognised under statutory and personal laws,
          the matter transcends a mere private curiosity
          and implicates her right to livelihood and
          dignity.
                                       - 70 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                   WP No. 34625 of 2019


 HC-KAR




         7.40. It    is   therefore     contended       that    the    Public
               Information Officer ought to have exercised his
               statutory discretion in a purposive manner,
               balancing privacy with the need to prevent
               injustice. The request, being directly connected
               to the enforcement of maintenance rights,
               could legitimately be regarded as falling within
               the ambit of "larger public interest" in ensuring
               that deserted spouses are not left remediless.
               Learned      counsel       submits     that     the    Central
               Information       Commission            appreciated       this
               dimension and that no error can be attributed
               to its decision directing disclosure.

         7.41. He relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex
               Court       in   Khanapuram              Gandaiah         Vs.
               Administrative Officer and Others13, more
               particularly,     para          6   thereof,    which     are
               reproduced hereunder for easy reference:

                    "6.
Under the RTI Act
"information" is defined
                    under
Section 2(f)
which provides:

                    "information" means any material in any form,
                    including records, documents, memos, e-mails,
                    opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
                    orders, logbooks, contracts, report, papers,
                    samples, models, data material held in any
                    electronic form and information relating to any
13
     SLP No.34868/2009
                              - 71 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



           private body which can be accessed by a public
           authority under any other law for the time being
           in force."

           This definition shows that an applicant under
Section 6
of the RTI Act can get any information
           which is already in existence and accessible to the
           public authority under law. Of course, under the
RTI Act
an applicant is entitled to get copy of the
           opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he
           cannot ask for any information as to why such
           opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been
           passed, especially in matters pertaining to judicial
           decisions. A judge speaks through his judgments
           or orders passed by him. If any party feels
           aggrieved by the order/judgment passed by a
           judge, the remedy available to such a party is
           either to challenge the same by way of appeal or
           by revision or any other legally permissible mode.
           No litigant can be allowed to seek information as
           to why and for what reasons the judge had come
           to a particular decision or conclusion. A judge is
           not bound to explain later on for what reasons he
           had come to such a conclusion."

     7.42. By relying on Khanapuram Gandaiah, it is
         submitted that in the said decision, the Hon'ble
         Supreme     Court     clarified    the   scope   of   the
         expression "information" under
Section 2(f)
of
         the RTI Act. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held
         that an applicant is entitled to seek material
         that is already in existence and accessible to a
         public authority under law. However, the Act
         does not permit a person to seek explanations,
         reasons, or justifications for judicial decisions,
                               - 72 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          as a judge speaks only through his or her
          orders and judgments.

     7.43. Placing reliance on the said principle, learned
          counsel submits that the information sought in
          the present case squarely falls within the
          statutory definition of "information." Income tax
          returns,     assessment      records,           and    related
          documents are existing records held by a public
          authority in material form. The request is not
          for any opinion, reasoning, clarification, or
          explanation;       rather,   it    is     for     copies     of
          documents already available in the custody of
          the Department.

     7.44. It is therefore contended that the objection
          raised by the Petitioner cannot be sustained on
          the ground that the request falls outside the
          definition    of   "information."        The     documents
          sought are tangible records within the meaning
          of
Section 2(f)
, and hence, subject to the
          exemptions provided under
Section 8
, they are
          amenable to disclosure.

     7.45. Learned     counsel     submits        that    once    it   is
          accepted that the material sought constitutes
          "information" under the Act, the only question
                               - 73 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          that remains is whether any valid exemption
          applies. In the present case, it is urged that the
          Central    Information               Commission,         having
          examined      the    statutory          scheme       and     the
          peculiar matrimonial context, rightly directed
          disclosure.

     7.46. Learned   counsel        for        Respondent      No.1,   by
          adverting to the definition of "information"
          under
Section 2(f)
of the RTI Act, submits that
          the   expression      is        of    wide    amplitude.      It
          encompasses         any      material        in    any     form,
          including records, documents, memos, e-mails,
          opinions, advices and the like, and also extends
          to information relating to a private body which
          can be accessed by a public authority under
          any other law for the time being in force.

     7.47. On that basis, it is contended that although the
          husband of Respondent No.1                        is a private
          individual and not a public authority, the
          income tax returns and related financial records
          pertaining to him are in the lawful custody of
          the Income Tax Department. The Department,
          being a public authority within the meaning of
                            - 74 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          the RTI Act, has statutory access and control
          over such material.

     7.48. Learned counsel therefore submits that once
          such information is held by, or accessible to, a
          public authority, it falls within the sweep of
Section 2(f)
and          becomes amenable to     a
          request under the
RTI Act
, subject of course to
          the statutory exemptions. The fact that the
          information concerns a private individual does
          not, by itself, place it beyond the reach of the
          Act.

     7.49. Accordingly, it is urged that the request made
          by Respondent No.1 for copies of the income
          tax returns of her husband was maintainable
          under the
RTI Act
, and the Central Information
          Commission was justified in entertaining and
          allowing the appeal.

     7.50. Learned counsel for Respondent No.1 reiterates
          that in proceedings relating to maintenance,
          determination of the husband's actual income is
          central to a just adjudication. The quantum of
          maintenance necessarily depends upon verified
          financial particulars such as income, assets,
          liabilities and overall financial capacity. Without
                                 - 75 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          reliable documentary evidence, the court is
          constrained      to    proceed        on        approximations,
          often to the prejudice of the claimant spouse.

     7.51. It is submitted that in the present case, the
          husband     has       not      voluntarily       produced    his
          income     tax    returns        or    authentic        financial
          records despite the pendency of proceedings. In
          such circumstances, Respondent No.1 is left
          without any effective means of establishing the
          true income of her husband. According to
          learned counsel, the
RTI Act
provides the only
          viable statutory mechanism through which she
          can access certified records already available
          with the Income Tax Department.

     7.52. On the cumulative strength of the judicial
          precedents relied upon, it is contended that
          where     financial     disclosure         is    necessary    to
          enforce     maintenance            rights,        the   balance
          between privacy and public interest must be
          struck in a manner that advances substantive
          justice. The information sought, namely income
          tax returns, assessment particulars and related
          banking details, is directly relevant to the
          pending proceedings and is not sought for
                                  - 76 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           public dissemination but for limited production
           before the competent court.

     7.53. It   is   therefore      submitted        that,    given      the
           estranged relationship between the parties, the
           non-cooperation         of     the    husband,          and   the
           absence of any alternative mode of obtaining
           authentic    financial         information,       the    Central
           Information Commission acted in the interest of
           justice in directing disclosure. Learned counsel
           urges that no interference under
Article 226
of
           the Constitution is warranted and that the writ
           petition deserves to be dismissed.

8.   Sri Y.V.Ravi Raj, leaned counsel for the Petitioner, in
     rejoinder, would submit that

     8.1. The stand of the Income Tax Department has
           been misunderstood. It is not the case of the
           Department that income tax returns or related
           records can never be produced.

     8.2. The objection, according to him, is only to the
           mode by which such information is sought to be
           obtained.     Learned           counsel     submits           that
           confidential tax information cannot be furnished
           merely on the basis of an RTI application filed
                             - 77 -
                                          NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          by the spouse of the assessee. The statutory
          framework      governing    income   tax   records
          contemplates regulated disclosure and vests
          discretion in specified authorities or in courts of
          competent jurisdiction. It is contended that if a
          competent court, in the course of maintenance,
          matrimonial proceedings or the like, considers it
          necessary to summon the income tax returns of
          the husband, the Department would be bound
          to comply with such judicial direction. In that
          scenario,   the    court    would    exercise   its
          discretion, evaluate relevance and necessity,
          and pass appropriate orders for the production
          of documents.

     8.3. Therefore, the submission is that the proper
          course for Respondent No.1 is to invoke the
          procedural mechanisms available before the
          concerned court for summoning documents,
          rather than resorting to the
RTI Act
. According
          to   learned    counsel,    permitting   disclosure
          through RTI would bypass judicial scrutiny and
          dilute the statutory safeguards attached to
          confidential tax records.
                                  - 78 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




      8.4. On      this premise, it is reiterated that the
               impugned order of the Central Information
               Commission is liable to be set aside.

9.    Heard      Sri   Y.V.Raviraj,       learned   counsel   for   the
      Petitioner,      Sri   Kemparaju,       learned    counsel    for
      respondent No.1, Sri Shanthi Bhushan, learned DSGI
      for respondent No.2 and perused papers.

10.   The points that would arise for consideration are:

         i.       Whether the income tax returns,
                  assessment particulars and related
                  financial   details  of   an   assessee
                  constitute "personal information" under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Right to
                  Information     Act,    2005,    and/or
                  information held in a fiduciary capacity
                  under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the said Act?

         ii.      Whether the husband of Respondent
                  No.1 qualifies as a "third party" within
                  the meaning of
Section 2(n)
of the RTI
                  Act in the context of the RTI application
                  filed by his spouse, and whether the
                  matrimonial relationship has any legal
                  bearing on that characterisation?

         iii.     Whether the disclosure sought by
                  Respondent No.1, in connection with
                  her claim for maintenance in pending
                  matrimonial proceedings, satisfies the
                  test of "larger public interest" so as to
                  override the exemptions under
Section
                  8
of the RTI Act?
                                    - 79 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                 WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          iv.        Whether
Section 138
of the Income-tax
                     Act, 1961, being a special provision
                     governing     disclosure   of  assessee
                     information,    restricts or  regulates
                     disclosure under the
RTI Act
, and how
                     it is to be harmoniously construed with
Section 22
of the RTI Act?

          v.         Whether, in the facts of the present
                     case,   the   appropriate  course   for
                     Respondent      No.1   was   to   seek
                     production of the income tax returns
                     through the competent matrimonial
                     court, rather than by invoking the
                     provisions of the
RTI Act
?

          vi.        Whether the order dated 12.04.2019
                     passed by the Central Information
                     Commission directing disclosure of the
                     information calls for interference under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India?

          vii.       What order?

11.    I answer the above points as follows:


12.    Answer to Point No. (i): Whether the income
       tax returns, assessment particulars and related
       financial details of an assessee constitute
       "personal information" under
Section 8(1)(j)
of
       the Right to Information Act, 2005, and/or
       information held in a fiduciary capacity under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the said Act?

      12.1.    Sri    Y.V.   Raviraj,       learned   counsel   for   the
               Petitioner, contends that the information sought
               by Respondent No.1, namely the income tax
                                 - 80 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           returns, assessment particulars and financial
           disclosures    of     the     assessee,     squarely        falls
           within the protective ambit of
Section 8(1)(j)
of
           the Right to Information Act, 2005. It is
           submitted     that       such        material    constitutes
           personal information, the disclosure of which
           has no relationship to any public activity or
           public    interest    and      would      amount       to    an
           unwarranted invasion of privacy. The right to
           information, though recognised under the
RTI
           Act
, is not absolute and must be balanced
           against the constitutional right                 to privacy.
Section     8(1)(j)
embodies         this    legislative
           balance by carving out an exemption where
           personal    information         is    sought     without       a
           demonstrable larger public interest.

   12.2.   Learned     counsel       further      submits     that     the
           Income Tax Department holds the income tax
           returns and financial particulars of an assessee
           in    a   fiduciary      capacity.       Just     as      asset
           declarations made by Judges were argued in
           Subhash Chandra Agarwal's case to be held
           in confidence by the Chief Justice of India, the
           income tax returns furnished by an assessee
           are   submitted        to     the     Department       under
                                  - 81 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           statutory compulsion with an expectation of
           confidentiality. It is therefore contended that
           such information is held in a fiduciary capacity
           and    attracts   the          exemption     under
Section
           8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act.

   12.3.   In support of his contention, learned counsel
           relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
           Court in Subhash Chandra Agarwal, wherein
           the Hon'ble Supreme Court examined the scope
           of fiduciary obligations under
Section 8(1)(e)
and the nature of confidentiality attached to
           asset declarations. The Court emphasised the
           need to balance the statutory scheme of the
RTI Act
with the constitutional right to privacy
           under Part III of the Constitution.

   12.4.   Learned counsel further relies upon the decision
           of    the   Hon'ble      Supreme       Court    in   Aditya
           Bandopadhyay, where the Hon'ble Supreme
           Court observed that while the
RTI Act
is a
           potent tool to combat corruption and ensure
           transparency,     equal           importance     must    be
           accorded to other public interests such as
           confidentiality        of        sensitive     information,
                              - 82 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           protection   of   fiduciary        relationships,   and
           efficient functioning of public authorities.

   12.5.   Learned counsel also relies upon the decision of
           the   Hon'ble     Supreme          Court   in   Girish
           Ramchandra Deshpande, where the Hon'ble
           Supreme Court categorically held that details
           disclosed by a person in his income tax returns
           are personal information which stand exempted
           from disclosure under clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act, unless a larger public interest is
           established and the competent authority is
           satisfied that disclosure is warranted.

   12.6.   Reliance is also placed on the decision in
           Shailesh Gandhi, wherein the Hon'ble Bombay
           High Court examined the scope of the proviso
           to
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act and held that
           the exemptions carved out under clause (j) of
           sub-section (1) of
Section 8
are substantive
           protections and must be given full effect.

   12.7.   Further reliance is placed on the decision of the
           Hon'ble   Bombay           High   Court,   Aurangabad
           Bench, in Adarsh, where the Court examined
           the scope and interplay of
Sections 8
and
11
of
           the RTI Act and held that where personal
                                 - 83 -
                                            NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           information is sought and there is no larger
           public interest, the exemption under
Section
           8(1)(j)
operates as a bar to disclosure. The
           Court observed that income tax/GST returns
           are protected from disclosure in the absence of
           a larger public interest.

   12.8.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
           No.1, submits that the concept of fiduciary
           relationship cannot be expansively interpreted
           so as to shield all income tax returns from
           disclosure under the
RTI Act
. The mere fact
           that a return is filed with the Income Tax
           Department does not, by itself, create a blanket
           fiduciary protection.

   12.9.   In support of this contention, learned counsel
           relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Gujarat
           High Court in Rajendra Vasantlal Shah,
           wherein the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court held
           that   filing   of    income   tax   returns   by   a
           public/charitable trust, which was subject to
           statutory regulation, could not be treated as
           constituting a fiduciary relationship so as to
           defeat the object of the
RTI Act
. The Court held
           that disclosure of income tax returns was
                            - 84 -
                                            NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         connected with public interest and transparency
         in public functioning.

   12.10. Learned counsel further relies upon the decision
         of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Khanapuram
         Gandaiah, to submit that income tax returns
         are existing records held by a public authority
         in material form and fall within the statutory
         definition of "information" under
Section 2(f)
of
         the RTI Act. The request is not for any opinion,
         reasoning, or explanation but for copies of
         documents already available in the custody of
         the Department.

   12.11. It is further submitted by learned counsel for
         Respondent No.1 that even under the decision
         in   Girish   Ramchandra           Deshpande,     the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court expressly recognised
         that the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
is not
         absolute. The Public Information Officer or the
         Appellate Authority is vested with discretion to
         order disclosure if satisfied that larger public
         interest   warrants        it.   Thus,   the   statute
         contemplates a case-specific evaluation rather
         than a blanket prohibition.
                               - 85 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   12.12. I have considered the submissions advanced by
          both sides on this point and have perused the
          relevant statutory provisions and the judgments
          cited.

   12.13. At the outset, it is necessary to extract the
          relevant statutory provisions.
Section 8(1)(e)
of
          the Right to Information Act, 2005 reads as
          follows:

          "8(1)(e) information available to a person in his
          fiduciary relationship, unless the competent authority is
          satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the
          disclosure of such information;"

   12.14.
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act reads as follows:

          "8(1)(j)   information    which    relates to     personal
          information the disclosure of which has no relationship
          to any public activity or interest, or which would cause
          unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual
          unless the Central Public Information Officer or the State
          Public Information Officer or the appellate authority, as
          the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public
          interest justifies the disclosure of such information:
          Provided that the information which cannot be denied to
          the Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be denied
          to any person."




   12.15. A combined reading of the aforesaid provisions
          reveals that the legislature has carved out two
          distinct   but    overlapping       protections:     one
                                - 86 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         relating to information held in a fiduciary
         relationship under clause (e), and the other
         relating to personal information under clause
         (j). Both exemptions are qualified, in that they
         may     be overridden          where a      larger public
         interest warrants disclosure. Neither exemption
         is absolute in character.

   12.16. Dealing first with the question whether income
         tax returns constitute "personal information"
         under
Section      8(1)(j)
,   the    position   stands
         authoritatively settled by the decision of the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court in Girish Ramchandra
         Deshpande        in     paragraph      14   of   the   said
         judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
         categorically held:

            14. The details disclosed by a person in his
            income tax returns are personal information
            which stand exempted from disclosure under
            clause (i) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act, unless
            involves a larger public interest and the Central
            Public Information Officer or the State Public
            Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
            satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
            the disclosure of such information."

   12.17. This pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme
         Court is binding on all courts and tribunals in
         India and admits of no ambiguity. Income tax
                                   - 87 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         returns, by their very nature, contain intimate
         details     of     an     individual's     financial       affairs,
         sources       of        income,     deductions         claimed,
         investments             made,      and       tax       liabilities
         discharged. Such information is quintessentially
         personal in character. The filing of such returns
         is a statutory compulsion under the
Income-tax
         Act, 1961
, and the assessee furnishes such
         details with a reasonable expectation that the
         same will be used solely for the purposes of tax
         administration and will not be disclosed to third
         parties without lawful authority.

   12.18. The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
         Aditya        Bandopadhyay,                reinforces         this
         position. In paragraph 66 thereof, the Hon'ble
         Supreme Court observed that while the
RTI Act
is a powerful instrument to fight corruption and
         bring      transparency,          equal    importance         and
         emphasis are given to other public interests
         such as "confidentiality of sensitive information,
         fidelity    and     fiduciary      relationships,      efficient
         operation          of      Governments,            etc."      This
         observation underscores the legislative intent
         that    the
RTI      Act
does    not   contemplate
         unrestricted access to all information held by
                               - 88 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         public     authorities.       The    exemptions      under
Section 8
are not mere procedural hurdles but
         reflect substantive policy choices made by
         Parliament to protect competing interests.

   12.19. The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
         Subhash         Chandra         Agarwal,        is    also
         instructive. While the said judgment primarily
         dealt with the question of disclosure of asset
         declarations of Judges, the Constitution Bench
         of   the   Hon'ble     Supreme        Court   extensively
         analysed the scope of
Section 8(1)(j)
in the
         context of the right to privacy. In paragraph
         251, the Hon'ble Supreme Court recognised
         that in interpreting the statutory scheme of the
RTI Act
, the constitutional right to know and
         the constitutional right to privacy of citizens are
         both implicated. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
         held that the question of disclosure must be
         determined by analysing the scheme of the
RTI
         Act
, the role of the exemptions under
Section 8
,
         and the interface between the statutory rights
         and duties under
Section 8(1)(j)
and the
         constitutional rights under Part              III of the
         Constitution.
                              - 89 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   12.20. The   decision   in    Shailesh     Gandhi    is    also
         apposite. The Hon'ble Bombay High Court, in
         paragraph 25, rejected the contention that the
         proviso to
Section 8(1)(j)
could be so widely
         interpreted as to override the main exemption
         provision. The Court held that the exemptions
         under clause (j) of sub-section (1) of
Section 8
are substantive protections that must be given
         full effect. Personal information, particularly
         financial    information     such    as    income    tax
         returns, remains protected unless the statutory
         requirement of larger public interest is clearly
         satisfied.

   12.21. The decision of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court,
         Aurangabad Bench, in Adarsh, is also relevant.
         The Court examined the scope and interplay of
Sections 8
and
11
of the RTI Act and held that
         where    personal      information    is   sought,   the
         procedure under
Section 11
of the RTI Act is
         mandatory. In respect of GST returns, which
         are analogous to income tax returns, the Court
         held that the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
operates as a bar to disclosure in the absence
         of a larger public interest. The Court specifically
         noted that Section 158(1) of the GST Act
                             - 90 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         prohibits giving information of GST returns
         except as provided in sub-section (3).

   12.22. Turning   now    to
Section    8(1)(e)
and     the
         question of fiduciary relationship, the concept
         of "fiduciary relationship" under the
RTI Act
has
         been     the   subject      of   considerable       judicial
         analysis. The expression, in the context of
Section 8(1)(e)
, has been interpreted to mean
         a relationship founded on trust and confidence,
         wherein one party holds information on behalf
         of another with an obligation of confidentiality.

   12.23. In Subhash Chandra Agarwal's case, the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court examined whether the
         Chief Justice of India held asset declarations of
         Judges     in a   fiduciary      capacity.    The    Court
         analysed the nature of the relationship and the
         circumstances under which information was
         furnished. While the Hon'ble Supreme Court did
         not accept that a fiduciary relationship existed
         in that specific context between the Chief
         Justice and the Judges, the Court recognised
         that the concept of a fiduciary relationship is
         fact-dependent and must be assessed in each
         case.
                               - 91 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   12.24. The decision of the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court
         in Rajendra Vasantlal Shah relied upon by
         learned counsel for Respondent No.1, must be
         understood in its proper context. In that case,
         the information sought related to the accounts
         of   a   religious    charitable      trust,    which     was
         subject to statutory audit and regulation under
         the Bombay Public Trust Act. The Court held
         that the filing of income tax returns by such a
         trust could not be treated as constituting a
         fiduciary     relationship.         However,     the      said
         judgment dealt with a public charitable trust,
         not with the income tax returns of a private
         individual. The distinction is material. A public
         trust,   by    its   very       nature,    carries     public
         accountability,      and      its   financial   affairs   are
         subject to statutory scrutiny. The position of a
         private individual who files income tax returns
         in compliance with the
Income-tax Act
stands
         on an entirely different footing.

   12.25. I'am therefore of the view that the relationship
         between the Income Tax Department and an
         individual assessee does partake of the nature
         of a fiduciary relationship to the extent that the
         assessee furnishes detailed personal financial
                               - 92 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         information under statutory compulsion with a
         reasonable expectation that the same will be
         utilised    solely      for   the       purposes    of    tax
         administration. The Department receives and
         retains such information in a position of trust.
         However,      this      Court     recognises       that   the
         characterisation         of      this     relationship    as
         "fiduciary" in the strict legal sense has not been
         conclusively settled by the Hon'ble Supreme
         Court. The decision             in Subhash Chandra
         Agarwal's case shows that the concept of
         fiduciary relationship under
Section 8(1)(e)
is
         to be applied with circumspection and on a
         case-by-case basis.

   12.26. Be that as it may, even if the relationship
         between the Department and the assessee is
         not characterised as strictly fiduciary, it is
         beyond any doubt that income tax returns
         constitute "personal information" within the
         meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. This
         is   the   authoritative        pronouncement        of   the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court in Girish Ramchandra
         Deshpande and this Court is bound by the
         same.      The   fact     that     such    information     is
         personal in nature does not, however, mean
                               - 93 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         that it can never be disclosed. The exemption
         under
Section    8(1)(j)
is   qualified        by   the
         condition that disclosure may be ordered where
         the competent authority is satisfied that a
         larger public interest warrants it. The question
         whether such a larger public interest exists in
         the present case is dealt with under Point (iii)
         below.

   12.27. I answer point No. (i) by holding that the
         Income tax returns, assessment particulars and
         related financial details of an assessee do
         constitute "personal information" within the
         meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Right to
         Information Act, 2005, as authoritatively held
         by   the    Hon'ble        Supreme      Court       in     Girish
         Ramchandra           Deshpande.          The        exemption,
         however, is qualified and not absolute; it may
         be overridden where a larger public interest
         warrants disclosure. As regards
Section 8(1)(e)
,
         while the relationship between the Income Tax
         Department         and        an   individual         assessee
         partakes      of     the      nature     of     a        fiduciary
         relationship to a considerable extent, it is not
         necessary to render a conclusive finding on this
         point, inasmuch as the protection under Section
                                  - 94 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




              8(1)(j) is sufficiently broad to encompass the
              information sought in the present case.

13.    Answer to Point No. (ii): Whether the husband
       of Respondent No.1 qualifies as a "third party"
       within the meaning of
Section 2(n)
of the RTI
       Act in the context of the RTI application filed by
       his spouse, and whether the matrimonial
       relationship has any legal bearing on that
       characterisation?

      13.1.   Sri   Y.V.   Raviraj,       learned   counsel   for   the
              Petitioner, submits that the husband, being an
              assessee     under      the      Income-tax     regime,
              squarely answers the description of a "third
              party" within the meaning of
Section 2(n)
of the
              RTI Act, which defines "third party" to mean a
              person other than the citizen making the
              request for information. Since the applicant is
              Respondent No.1 and the information sought
              pertains to her husband, the husband must
              necessarily be treated as a third party for the
              purposes of the Act. It is further contended that
              the mere fact that the applicant is the spouse of
              the assessee does not dilute the confidentiality
              attached to income tax returns.

      13.2.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
              No.1, submits that Respondent No.1 is the
                                     - 95 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                   WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           legally wedded wife of Sri Zafar Ali. In that view
           of the matter, it is contended that the husband
           cannot be treated as a "third party" vis-a-vis
           his    wife    in   a     strict     or     adversarial      sense,
           particularly        when          the     information       sought
           pertains to issues directly impacting her legal
           rights. The relationship between the parties,
           being matrimonial, carries with it reciprocal
           obligations, including               financial disclosure         in
           appropriate proceedings.

   13.3.   In support of this contention, learned counsel
           relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi
           High     Court      in      Kusum           Sharma,        wherein
           comprehensive               directions          were         issued
           mandating           both          parties     in      matrimonial
           proceedings to file detailed affidavits of their
           assets,       income,       expenditure,           liabilities   and
           standard       of    living,        along     with     supporting
           documentary evidence including income tax
           returns, bank statements, audited accounts and
           related financial records.

   13.4.   Reliance is also placed on the decision of the
           Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court in Smt.
           Sunita Jain, where the Court observed that in
                                 - 96 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           considering      the     exemption        under
Section
           8(1)(j)
, the matrimonial relationship between
           the parties could not be ignored. The Court held
           that a wife is entitled to know the remuneration
           earned by her husband and distinguished the
           decision in Girish Ramchandra Deshpande
           on the ground that the facts were materially
           different in a matrimonial context.

   13.5.   I have considered the rival submissions with
           care. At the outset, it is necessary to extract
           the statutory definition of "third party" under
           the
RTI Act
.
Section 2(n)
reads as follows:

                  "2(n) 'third party' means a person other than
                  the citizen making a request for information
                  and includes a public authority;"

   13.6.   The      statutory       definition      is     plain    and
           unambiguous.         A    "third   party"      means     any
           person other than the citizen making the
           request. The definition does not carve out any
           exception for spouses, family members, or
           persons standing in any particular relationship
           with      the    applicant.        The        language    is
           comprehensive and admits of no qualification
           based on personal or familial relationship.
                              - 97 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   13.7.   In the present case, the RTI application was
           filed   by   Respondent       No.1,      namely     Smt.
           Gulsanober     Bano        Zafar   Ali   Ansari.    The
           information sought pertains to the income tax
           returns of her husband, Sri Zafar Ali Ansari.
           Since the husband is a person other than the
           citizen making the request, he squarely falls
           within the definition of "third party" under
Section 2(n)
. The statutory text leaves no room
           for a different interpretation.

   13.8.   The     submission     of     learned     counsel    for
           Respondent No.1 that the husband should not
           be treated as a "third party" vis-a-vis his wife is
           an argument that has emotional appeal but
           finds no support in the statutory language. The
           legislature, while enacting the
RTI Act
, could
           have excluded spouses or certain categories of
           family members from the definition of "third
           party" but chose not to do so. This Court
           cannot read into the statute a limitation that
           the legislature did not enact.

   13.9.   That said, while the husband is undoubtedly a
           "third party" within the meaning of
Section
           2(n)
, the consequence of such characterisation
                              - 98 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         is not that the information can never be
         disclosed. The      characterisation            as a      "third
         party" triggers the procedural requirements
         under
Section     11
of    the    RTI    Act,    which
         mandates that the Public Information Officer
         shall, before disclosing third-party information,
         issue notice to the concerned third party and
         consider any submission or objection made by
         that party. The procedure under
Section 11
is
         mandatory, as held in Adarsh.

   13.10. The    question      whether            the     matrimonial
         relationship has any legal bearing on the
         characterisation as a "third party" must be
         answered    in     the       negative      insofar      as   the
         definitional aspect is concerned. The definition
         under
Section 2(n)
does not admit of any
         qualification.     However,              the     matrimonial
         relationship may have a bearing on a different
         question   altogether,            namely,       whether      the
         disclosure is warranted in the larger public
         interest under
Section 8(1)(j)
.

   13.11. The relationship between the parties and the
         context in which the information is sought may
         be relevant factors in assessing whether the
                              - 99 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         larger public interest test is satisfied. This
         aspect is addressed under Point (iii).

   13.12. The decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
         Kusum        Sharma,         relied    upon      by   learned
         counsel for Respondent No.1, does not advance
         the case on the specific question of "third
         party"       characterisation.            That        decision
         concerned the power of the matrimonial court
         to direct parties to file affidavits of assets and
         income. The directions issued therein were in
         the   exercise     of   the     court's    jurisdiction      in
         matrimonial proceedings, not in the context of
         an RTI application. The judgment recognises
         the   duty    of   spouses        to   disclose       financial
         information in matrimonial proceedings, but it
         does not deal with the question, whether a
         spouse ceases to be a "third party" under the
RTI Act
.

   13.13. Similarly, the decision of the Hon'ble Madhya
         Pradesh High Court in Smt. Sunita Jain, while
         recognising the entitlement of a wife to know
         the remuneration of her husband, distinguished
         Girish Ramchandra Deshpande on the facts.
         The said decision did not hold that a spouse is
                             - 100 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




            not a "third party" under
Section 2(n)
. Rather,
            it held that the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
must be applied contextually and that in a
            matrimonial context, the balance may tilt in
            favour of disclosure. This is a separate question
            from the definitional one under consideration.

      13.14. I answer Point No.(ii) by holding that the
            husband of Respondent No.1 does qualify as a
            "third party" within the meaning of
Section 2(n)
of the RTI Act. The statutory definition is
            unambiguous     and       does   not   admit   of   any
            exception based on matrimonial or familial
            relationship.      However,            while        the
            characterisation as a "third party" triggers the
            procedural requirements under
Section 11
of
            the RTI Act, the matrimonial relationship may
            have a bearing on the assessment of whether
            larger public interest warrants disclosure under
Section 8(1)(j)
. The marital relationship does
            not alter the statutory characterisation but may
            be a relevant factor in the overall evaluation of
            the competing interests.



14.    Answer to Point No. (iii): Whether the
       disclosure sought by Respondent No.1, in
                                  - 101 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




     connection with her claim for maintenance in
     pending matrimonial proceedings, satisfies the
     test of "larger public interest" so as to override
     the exemptions under
Section 8
of the RTI Act?

   14.1.   Sri   Y.V.     Raviraj,         learned    counsel   for     the
           Petitioner, contends that the disclosure sought
           does not satisfy the test of "larger public
           interest" within the meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. It is submitted that the concept
           of public interest must transcend individual
           disputes and relate to transparency in public
           functioning or accountability in governance. The
           request emanates from a private matrimonial
           dispute and does not subserve any broader
           public    cause.      The        right    to   information    is
           essentially a right to seek information regarding
           the functioning, actions and decisions of public
           authorities and public functionaries, and not a
           mechanism          to      access         private    personal
           information of individuals which happens to be
           in the custody of a public authority.

   14.2.   In support of this submission, reliance is placed
           on Aditya Bandopadhyay and others, where
           the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that while
           the
RTI    Act
is       intended      to   promote
           transparency, equal importance is to be given
                                - 102 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           to competing interests including confidentiality
           and fiduciary relationships. Reliance is also
           placed on Girish Ramchandra Deshpande,
           which held that income tax returns are personal
           information exempted from disclosure unless
           larger public interest is established.

   14.3.   Reliance is further placed on Shailesh Gandhi,
           where the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held that
           the    proviso   to
Section      8(1)(j)
cannot    be
           interpreted so widely as to render the main
           exemption provision otiose.

   14.4.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
           No.1,    contends      that     the    disclosure    sought
           satisfies the test of larger public interest. It is
           submitted that Respondent No.1 is the legally
           wedded wife who has instituted proceedings
           under
Section 12(1)
of the Protection of Women
           from    Domestic         Violence      Act,      2005.    The
           husband, despite carrying on business, has
           neither disclosed his turnover nor produced
           relevant income tax returns. The Courts below
           have     rejected        her    claim      for     enhanced
           maintenance         on        the     ground      that    no
           documentary evidence of the husband's income
                                 - 103 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           was produced. Thus, denial of the information
           would effectively defeat her statutory right to
           seek appropriate maintenance.

   14.5.   Learned counsel submits that maintenance is
           not merely a legal right but forms an integral
           component of the right to live with dignity.
           Where a deserted wife is deprived of financial
           support and is unable to substantiate her claim
           due to non-disclosure of income details by the
           husband, the balance must tilt in favour of
           disclosure,     as      the    information         becomes
           intrinsically connected with her right to life and
           dignity under
Article 21
of the Constitution.

   14.6.   In support of this submission, learned counsel
           relies   upon    the       decision     of   the    Central
           Information Commission in Neena Bhatnagar
           Mani, wherein the Commission was dealing
           with a    similar      situation    where     the    legally
           wedded wife had sought disclosure of the
           income tax returns of her husband for the
           purpose of enforcing her claim for maintenance.
           The      Commission            observed          that      in
           circumstances        where     a      deserted      wife   is
           deprived of financial support, the balance may
                                - 104 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           tilt in favour of disclosure, as the information
           becomes intrinsically connected with her right
           to life and dignity.

   14.7.   Reliance     is     also       placed    on       Rajesh
           Ramchandra          Kidile,     where    the      Hon'ble
           Bombay High Court observed that it would have
           been a different matter had the information
           been sought by the wife of the Petitioner in
           order to support her contention in a litigation
           concerning maintenance. The Court expressly
           observed     that      in     maintenance       litigation,
           information relating to salary details no longer
           remains confined to the personal sphere of the
           husband alone but assumes relevance to both
           spouses.

   14.8.   Reliance is further placed on Smt. Sunita Jain,
           where the Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court
           held that a wife is entitled to know the
           remuneration earned by her husband and that
           the    decision        in     Girish     Ramchandra
           Deshpande           was       distinguishable      in    a
           matrimonial context.

   14.9.   I have given anxious consideration to the rival
           submissions on this crucial point. The concept
                                   - 105 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


 HC-KAR




              of "larger public interest" under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act is not defined in the statute.
              However, it has been the subject of judicial
              interpretation in several authoritative decisions.
              The      expression     implies     an   interest    that
              transcends the private or personal interest of
              the    individual     applicant    and   concerns     the
              welfare, rights or interests of the public or a
              significant section thereof.

       14.10. At the outset, it must be recognised that there
              are two competing constitutional values at play.
              On the one hand, there is the right to privacy,
              which the Hon'ble Supreme Court in K.S.
              Puttaswamy v. Union of India14 (a decision
              not cited by either side but which forms the
              constitutional backdrop) has recognised as a
              fundamental right under
Article 21.
On the
              other hand, there is the right to life and dignity,
              also     guaranteed      under
Article   21
,    which
              encompasses the right of a spouse to seek
              appropriate maintenance and the right to live
              with dignity.




14
     (2017) 10 SCC 1
                              - 106 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   14.11. The facts of the present              case reveal that
         Respondent No.1 is the legally wedded wife of
         Sri Zafar Ali Ansari. She had filed proceedings
         under
Section 12(1)
of the Protection of Women
         from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. In the said
         proceedings, her claim for maintenance at
         Rs.75,000/- per month was rejected and she
         was   awarded       only      Rs.7,000/-        per   month,
         principally   because         there     was     no    specific
         evidence      regarding       the      earnings       of   the
         husband. The appellate court in Criminal Appeal
         No.303/2017 also declined enhancement on the
         same ground. Even this modest amount was
         not regularly paid, resulting in issuance of
         recovery-cum-arrest warrants.

   14.12. The question, therefore, is whether the need to
         secure just maintenance for a deserted wife
         constitutes "larger public interest" within the
         meaning of
Section 8(1)(j)
.

   14.13. This Court recognises that the obligation to
         maintain a spouse is not merely a private
         obligation.    It     is      a     statutory     obligation
         recognised      under             multiple      enactments,
         including Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
                                - 107 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         Procedure, 1973 (now Section 144 of the
         Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023),
Section   18
of      the    Hindu    Adoptions     and
         Maintenance Act, 1956,
Section 12
of the
         Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
         Act, 2005, and corresponding provisions under
         personal laws.

   14.14. The right of a wife to be maintained by her
         husband is a statutory right of considerable
         social     importance.            Non-payment            of
         maintenance, particularly when the husband
         possesses means but wilfully avoids payment,
         is a matter that transcends the individual
         dispute and engages broader societal concerns,
         including the prevention of destitution, the
         protection of the dignity of women, and the
         enforcement of legal obligations.

   14.15. The decision of the Hon'ble Bombay High Court
         in Rajesh Ramchandra Kidile, is particularly
         instructive.   In       paragraph       8,   the   Hon'ble
         Bombay     High         Court    made        a   significant
         observation:

             "In a litigation, wherein the issue involved is of
             maintenance of wife, the information relating to
             salary details no longer remains confined to the
                                 - 108 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



                 category of personal information of the husband
                 alone and it assumes the characteristic of
                 personal information concerning both husband
                 and wife, which is available with the husband
                 and hence accessible by the wife."

   14.16. This     observation        recognises          an    important
         principle:       in    the       context    of    maintenance
         litigation, financial information concerning one
         spouse ceases to be exclusively personal to that
         spouse and acquires a shared character, as
         both spouses have a legitimate interest in such
         information for the just resolution of their rights
         and obligations.

   14.17. The decision of the Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh
         High Court in Smt. Sunita Jain, also supports
         this view. The Court expressly held that while
         dealing with
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act, the
         matrimonial relationship between the parties
         cannot be lost sight of and that a wife is
         entitled to know the remuneration earned by
         her husband. The Court distinguished Girish
         Ramchandra Deshpande on the ground that
         the      facts    in    a    matrimonial          context    are
         materially different.

   14.18. The      decision     of        the   Central        Information
         Commission in Neena Bhatnagar Mani, also
                                   - 109 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         considered a factual matrix strikingly similar to
         the present case. The Commission observed
         that where a deserted wife is unable to secure
         maintenance         due        to     non-disclosure           of   the
         husband's         income,          the    refusal        to   provide
         information becomes life-related and impacts
         her right to live with dignity. The Commission
         allowed disclosure in such circumstances.

   14.19. However, this Court must sound a note of
         caution. The concept of "larger public interest"
         cannot be so expansively interpreted as to
         encompass          every       private        dispute,        however
         genuine      or     sympathetic             the      case     of    the
         applicant     may         be.       There      is    a    distinction
         between a matter of public interest and a
         matter      of      individual           interest,       howsoever
         legitimate.
The RTI Act
is a legislation designed
         to promote transparency and accountability in
         the working of public authorities. It is not a
         substitute        for     discovery         or      production       of
         documents in civil or criminal proceedings. The
         mechanisms              for        securing         production       of
         documents in pending proceedings are well
         established in procedural law.
                            - 110 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   14.20. In   Girish   Ramchandra           Deshpande,       the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Petitioner
         "cannot claim those details as a matter of
         right."   While    the      Court     recognised     the
         discretion of the Public Information Officer or
         the Appellate Authority to order disclosure
         where larger public interest justifies it, the
         Court did not hold that maintenance disputes
         automatically satisfy the larger public interest
         test.

   14.21. In Subhash Chandra Agarwal's case, the
         Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraph 293 made
         a nuanced observation about the nature of
         "public   interest",     noting     that   in   different
         contexts, the justification for transparency and
         disclosure may differ. The Court recognised that
         public interest must be located in the specific
         facts and circumstances of each case.

   14.22. This Court is of the view that while the need for
         a deserted wife to obtain financial information
         of her husband for the purpose of maintenance
         proceedings is a legitimate and sympathetic
         concern, it does not, by itself, satisfy the
         statutory test of "larger public interest" under
                                   - 111 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. The expression
         "larger public interest" postulates an interest
         that extends beyond the individual parties to
         the dispute and concerns the public at large or
         a    significant    section        thereof.    An   individual
         maintenance         dispute,        however      meritorious,
         remains primarily a private matter between the
         spouses.

   14.23. That said, this Court also recognises that there
         is a systemic dimension to the problem. Where
         husbands routinely suppress income to defeat
         maintenance claims and wives are left without
         any effective means of establishing the true
         income, there arises a broader concern about
         access    to justice, gender equity, and                  the
         enforcement         of      legal rights.      This systemic
         dimension may, in appropriate cases, provide
         the basis for a finding of larger public interest.

   14.24. In the present case, however, the Central
         Information Commission did not undertake any
         analysis of whether the larger public interest
         test under
Section 8(1)(j)
was satisfied. The
         Commission appears to have directed disclosure
         by    placing      reliance        upon   an   earlier   order
                            - 112 -
                                             NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                       WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         without    applying    its   mind    to   the     specific
         question of larger public interest. This, in the
         view of this Court, is a material infirmity in the
         impugned order.

   14.25. More importantly, as this Court shall deal with
         in greater detail under Point (v) below, the
         appropriate mechanism for securing production
         of income tax returns in pending maintenance
         proceedings is through the competent court in
         those proceedings, and not through the
RTI
         Act
. The procedural safeguards available in
         judicial proceedings, including the power of the
         court to assess relevance, impose conditions,
         and    protect   confidentiality,     are   far     more
         appropriate than the relatively blunt instrument
         of an RTI application.

   14.26. I answer Point no. (iii) by holding that the
         disclosure sought by Respondent No.1, while
         connected to a legitimate concern in pending
         maintenance proceedings, does not, by itself,
         satisfy the statutory test of "larger public
         interest" under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act so
         as    to   override    the   exemption      protecting
         personal information. The expression "larger
                                    - 113 -
                                                        NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




              public interest" postulates an interest that
              extends beyond           the individual dispute. An
              individual    maintenance                dispute,      however
              meritorious, primarily remains a private matter
              between the spouses. The Central Information
              Commission erred in not applying the larger
              public interest test to the facts of the case.
              However,      this       finding         does       not         leave
              Respondent     No.1        without           remedy,      as     the
              appropriate    mechanism               for    obtaining         such
              information is through the competent court in
              the pending maintenance proceedings.

15.    Answer to Point No. (iv): Whether
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, being a special
       provision governing disclosure of assessee
       information, restricts or regulates disclosure
       under the
RTI Act
, and how it is to be
       harmoniously construed with
Section 22
of the
       RTI Act?

      15.1.   Sri   Y.V.   Raviraj,          learned       counsel      for    the
              Petitioner, contends that
Section 138
of the
              Income-tax Act, 1961 is a special statutory
              provision dealing specifically with disclosure of
              information     relating          to     assessees.         It     is
              submitted that the general provisions of the
RTI
              Act
cannot override this special provision by
              virtue of the well-established principle generalia
                                - 114 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           specialibus non derogant, namely, that a later
           general law does not impliedly override an
           earlier   special     law     unless     there    is   clear
           inconsistency or irreconcilable repugnancy.

   15.2.   In support of this submission, learned counsel
           relies upon the decision in               Girish Mittal,
           wherein the Hon'ble Delhi High Court placed
           reliance on the three-Member Bench decision of
           the Central Information Commission in G.R.
           Rawal. In the said decisions, the interplay
           between the
RTI Act
and
Section 138
of the
           Income-tax Act was specifically considered. The
           reasoning proceeds on the principle that while
           the
RTI Act
is a general enactment,
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act is a special statutory
           provision. Relying upon the maxim generalia
           specialibus non derogant, it was held that the
           special      statutory          regime           governing
           confidentiality of tax information would prevail
           over the general provisions of the
RTI Act
.

   15.3.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
           No.1, does not directly address the question of
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act in his
           submissions.    His      submissions       are   primarily
                                - 115 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           directed towards the larger public interest test
           under
Section 8(1)(j)
and the entitlement of a
           wife to obtain financial information of her
           husband in maintenance proceedings. However,
           the implicit submission is that
Section 22
of the
           RTI Act, which provides that the
RTI Act
shall
           have       effect       notwithstanding         anything
           inconsistent therewith contained in any other
           law for the time being in force, gives overriding
           effect to the
RTI Act
.

   15.4.   I have considered the submissions on this point
           with care. The relevant statutory provisions
           must   be    extracted        and   analysed.
Section
           138(1)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 reads as
           follows:

           Disclosure of information respecting assessees.

           138.    (1)(a) The Board or any other income-tax
           authority specified by it by a general or special order in
           this behalf may furnish or cause to be furnished to-

           (i)     any officer, authority or body performing any
           functions under any law relating to the imposition of
           any tax, duty or cess, or to dealings in foreign
           exchange as defined in section-2(d) of the
Foreign
           Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
(7 of 1947) or

            (ii)   such officer, authority or body performing
           functions under any other law as the Central
           Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary so to
                               - 116 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



           do in the public interest, specify by notification in the
           Official Gazette in this behalf,

           any such information received or obtained by any
           income-tax authority in the performance of his
           functions under this Act], as may, in the opinion of the
           Board or other income-tax authority, be necessary for
           the purpose of enabling the officer, authority or body to
           perform his or its functions under that law.

           (b) Where a person makes an application to the Chief
           Commissioner or Commissioner in the prescribed form
           for any information relating to any assessee [received
           or obtained by any income-tax authority in the
           performance of his functions under this Act], the Chief
           Commissioner or Commissioner may, if he is satisfied
           that it is in the public interest so to do, furnish or cause
           to be furnished the information asked for            and his
           decision in this behalf shall be final and shall not be
           called in question in any court of law.

           (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
           (1) or any other law for the time being in force, the
           Central Government may, having regard to the
           practices and usages customary or any other relevant
           factors, by order notified in the Official Gazette, direct
           that no information or document shall be furnished or
           produced by a public servant in respect of such matters
           relating to such class of assessees or except to such
           authorities as may be specified in the order



   15.5.
Section 22
of the RTI Act reads as follows:
Section 22
.    Act to have overriding effect.

            The provisions of this Act shall have effect
            notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
            contained in the
Official Secrets Act, 1923
(19 of
            1923), and any other law for the time being in
                              - 117 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                           WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR



            force or in any instrument having effect by
            virtue of any law other than this Act.


   15.6.
Section 22
of the RTI Act contains a non
           obstante     clause    that     gives    the
RTI    Act
overriding effect over any other law for the
           time   being    in    force,     to     the    extent      of
           inconsistency. This is a powerful provision that
           reflects the legislative intent to give primacy to
           the right to information.

   15.7.   However, the question is whether
Section 22
completely     overrides
Section    138
of    the
           Income-tax Act, or whether the two provisions
           must be harmoniously construed.

   15.8.   The decision in Girish Mittal, is directly on
           point. The Hon'ble Delhi High Court, relying on
           the three-Member Bench decision of the Central
           Information Commission in G.R. Rawal, held
           that
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act, being a
           special provision dealing with disclosure of
           assessee     information,      operates       as    a    self-
           contained code and cannot be bypassed by
           invoking the general provisions of the
RTI Act
.
           The Court applied the principle expressed in the
                                    - 118 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           Latin   maxim             generalia      specialibus      non
           derogant.

   15.9.   The principle that a general law does not repeal
           a special law by implication is well settled.
           However, this principle must be applied with
           circumspection where the later general law
           contains     an    express        non    obstante      clause.
Section 22
of the RTI Act is an express
           provision giving the
RTI Act
overriding effect.
           The question, therefore, is how to reconcile
Section 22
of the RTI Act with
Section 138
of
           the Income-tax Act.

   15.10. This Court is of the view that the two provisions
           can be harmoniously construed as follows:
Section 22
of the RTI Act gives the Act
           overriding effect, but the
RTI Act
itself, through
Section 8
, provides exemptions from disclosure.
           The exemptions under
Section 8
, particularly
           clauses (e) and (j), already provide sufficient
           protection        for       income      tax   information.
           Therefore, there is no irreconcilable conflict
           between
Section 22
of the RTI Act and
Section
           138
of the Income-tax Act.
The RTI Act
applies
           to   information          held    by    the   Income      Tax
                            - 119 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                          WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         Department, but the exemptions under
Section
         8
provide the necessary safeguards against
         unwarranted disclosure.
Section 138
of the
         Income-tax Act provides an additional layer of
         regulation governing disclosure of assessee
         information through specified channels.

   15.11. In other words, an RTI application seeking
         income tax returns is not barred by
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act per se, as
Section 22
of
         the RTI Act would override to that extent.
         However, the information sought is protected
         by the exemptions under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the
         RTI Act, and disclosure can only be ordered
         upon satisfaction of the larger public interest
         test. The practical effect of Section 138 is that
         it   reinforces   the       confidential    character    of
         assessee     information         and       supports     the
         conclusion that such information is ordinarily
         exempt from disclosure under
Section 8(1)(j)
.

   15.12. I answer point no. (iv) by holding that
Section
         138
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, being a
         special    provision        governing      disclosure    of
         assessee information, does regulate and restrict
         disclosure of income tax information. While
                                   - 120 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                   WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR
Section 22
of the RTI Act gives the Act
              overriding effect, the exemptions under
Section
              8
of the RTI Act, particularly clauses (e) and
              (j), provide sufficient protection for income tax
              information.     The          two    provisions      can     be
              harmoniously construed: the
RTI Act
applies to
              information      held          by    the      Income        Tax
              Department, but the exemptions under
Section
              8
protect confidential tax information from
              unwarranted disclosure.
Section 138
of the
              Income-tax      Act      reinforces        the   confidential
              character of assessee information and supports
              the    conclusion        that       such    information      is
              ordinarily exempt from disclosure under
Section
              8(1)(j)
, unless the larger public interest test is
              satisfied.

16.    Answer to Point No. (v): Whether, in the facts
       of the present case, the appropriate course for
       Respondent No.1 was to seek production of the
       income tax returns through the competent
       matrimonial court, rather than by invoking the
       provisions of the
RTI Act
?



      16.1.   Sri   Y.V.    Raviraj,        learned      counsel   for    the
              Petitioner, in rejoinder, submits that the stand
              of    the    Income    Tax      Department        has      been
                              - 121 -
                                           NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                        WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           misunderstood. It is not the case of the
           Department that income tax returns can never
           be produced. The objection is only to the mode
           by which such information is sought to be
           obtained. Learned counsel submits that if a
           competent court, in the course of maintenance
           or   matrimonial      proceedings,    considers    it
           necessary to summon the income tax returns of
           the husband, the Department would be bound
           to comply with such judicial direction. In that
           scenario,   the     court    would    exercise    its
           discretion, evaluate relevance and necessity,
           and pass appropriate orders for the production
           of   documents.        The   proper    course     for
           Respondent No.1 is to invoke the procedural
           mechanisms available before the concerned
           court for summoning documents, rather than
           resorting to the
RTI Act
.

   16.2.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
           No.1, submits that Respondent No.1 has no
           alternative or effective mechanism to establish
           the true income of her husband except by
           obtaining copies of the income tax returns filed
           by him. The income details are within the
           exclusive knowledge and control of the husband
                             - 122 -
                                               NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           and the Income Tax Department, and denial of
           such information would effectively defeat her
           statutory    right         to      seek         appropriate
           maintenance.

   16.3.   It is submitted that an application was filed
           before the concerned Magistrate seeking a
           direction to the husband to produce his income
           tax returns, but in the final adjudication, the
           said aspect was not effectively addressed. The
           court, observing that there was no specific
           evidence    regarding        the    earnings       of    the
           husband,    rejected       the   claim    for    enhanced
           maintenance and awarded only Rs.7,000/- per
           month. In such circumstances, it is contended
           that the
RTI Act
provides the only viable
           statutory mechanism through which she can
           access certified records already available with
           the Income Tax Department.

   16.4.   I   have    carefully        considered         the     rival
           submissions on this pivotal point. This point
           goes to the heart of the dispute. The question is
           not merely whether the information can be
           disclosed, but what is the appropriate legal
           mechanism for obtaining it.
                               - 123 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




   16.5.   It is well settled that in proceedings relating to
           maintenance, whether under
Section 125
of the
           Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (now Section
           144 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
           2023), the
Protection of Women from Domestic
           Violence Act, 2005
, or under personal laws, the
           court has ample power to summon documents,
           direct   production      of    records,      and     compel
           disclosure of financial information. The court
           adjudicating   a    maintenance           claim    has     the
           inherent   power,      and     indeed      the     duty,    to
           ascertain the true financial capacity of the
           parties in order to fix just and fair maintenance.

   16.6.   The decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
           Kusum      Sharma,            is    a      comprehensive
           illustration of the powers available to the
           matrimonial court. In the said decision, the
           court issued detailed directions requiring both
           parties to file affidavits of their assets, income,
           expenditure, liabilities and standard of living,
           along with supporting documentary evidence
           including income tax returns, bank statements,
           audited accounts, and related financial records.
           The court also directed the parties to remain
           present with all original documents relating to
                                   - 124 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           their assets, income and expenditure. This
           demonstrates that the matrimonial court has
           the necessary jurisdiction and procedural tools
           to compel financial disclosure.

   16.7.   This Court is of the considered view that the
RTI Act
is not the appropriate mechanism for
           obtaining income tax returns of a spouse in the
           context    of         maintenance      proceedings.        The
           following reasons support this conclusion:

         16.7.1.
First,    the      RTI   Act
was      enacted    to
                   promote transparency and accountability
                   in the working of public authorities. Its
                   primary purpose is to enable citizens to
                   access          information       regarding        the
                   functioning of the Government and its
                   instrumentalities. It was not designed as
                   a tool for obtaining evidence in private
                   litigation      between       parties.    While    the
                   definition of "information" under
Section
                   2(f)
is    broad     enough    to    encompass
                   income tax returns, the purpose of the
                   Act       is       directed     towards       public
                   accountability, not towards facilitating
                   private litigation.
                                - 125 -
                                                    NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         16.7.2.   Second,      the      procedural         mechanisms
                   available in judicial proceedings provide
                   far more appropriate safeguards than an
                   RTI application. When a court summons
                   documents,            it     exercises          judicial
                   discretion; it assesses relevance and
                   necessity; it can impose conditions on
                   use   and       disclosure;         it   can    protect
                   confidentiality where required; and it can
                   balance the competing interests of the
                   parties. An RTI application, by contrast,
                   is a relatively blunt instrument that does
                   not permit such nuanced balancing.

         16.7.3.   Third,       the           courts        adjudicating
                   maintenance claims have comprehensive
                   powers     to     compel         disclosure.     Under
Section 91
of the Code of Criminal
                   Procedure, 1973 (now Section 94 of the
                   Bharatiya       Nagarik       Suraksha         Sanhita,
                   2023), a court may issue a summons to
                   produce a document or thing. Under
Order XVI Rule 6 of the Code of Civil
                   Procedure
, 1908, the court may summon
                   any      person       to   produce        documents.
                   Under      Section         165      of   the    Indian
                                   - 126 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                   Evidence Act, 1872 (now Section 168 of
                   the      Bharatiya             Sakshya      Adhiniyam,
                   2023), the court has the power to put
                   questions and order the production of
                   documents. These provisions vest ample
                   authority in the court to compel the
                   Income Tax Department to produce the
                   returns of an assessee.

         16.7.4.   Fourth, when a court issues a summons
                   or    direction           to     the     Income    Tax
                   Department to produce the income tax
                   returns of an assessee, the Department
                   is bound to comply. The submission of
                   learned counsel for the Petitioner in
                   rejoinder that the Department would
                   comply with a judicial direction is noted
                   and accepted. This is also consistent with
Section 138
of the Income-tax         Act,
                   which permits disclosure of assessee
                   information in specified circumstances,
                   including where required by a court of
                   competent jurisdiction.

         16.7.5.   Fifth,    it     is      pertinent     to   note   that
                   Respondent               No.1     did       make    an
                               - 127 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                   application          before     the         concerned
                   Magistrate seeking a direction to the
                   husband     to       produce    his income           tax
                   returns. However, it appears that this
                   aspect was not effectively addressed in
                   the final adjudication. The appropriate
                   course in such a situation is not to resort
                   to the
RTI Act
, but to take further steps
                   within      the         judicial        proceedings
                   themselves, including filing applications
                   for   summoning         documents           from     the
                   Income        Tax       Department,           seeking
                   directions under the court's inherent
                   powers, or pursuing appellate remedies
                   against        orders          declining            such
                   applications.

         16.7.6.   Sixth, this Court is conscious of the
                   practical difficulties faced by a deserted
                   spouse in establishing the income of the
                   other spouse. The power imbalance in
                   matrimonial disputes, particularly where
                   one      spouse        controls       all    financial
                   information, is a recognised problem.
                   However,         the      solution           lies     in
                   strengthening the mechanisms available
                              - 128 -
                                              NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                         WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                  within   the     judicial   process,    not    in
                  deploying the
RTI Act
as a substitute for
                  judicial discovery.

   16.8.   The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
           Khanapuram        Gandaiah,        relied    upon     by
           learned counsel for Respondent No.1, while
           holding that an applicant under the
RTI Act
can
           get   any   information      which    is    already   in
           existence and accessible to the public authority,
           also recognised the limitations of the
RTI Act
.
           The Court held that an applicant cannot use the
RTI Act
to seek explanations or reasons for
           decisions. While this specific limitation is not
           directly applicable here, the broader principle is
           that the
RTI Act
has a defined scope and
           purpose, and cannot be stretched beyond its
           legislative intent.

   16.9.   Having said the above, this Court is mindful
           that the observation of this Court should not be
           construed as denying Respondent No.1 her
           legitimate right to obtain relevant financial
           information for the purpose of her maintenance
           claim. The right of a wife to seek just and fair
           maintenance is a valuable legal right, and the
                                 - 129 -
                                                       NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                 WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




         courts      must           ensure             that     procedural
         inadequacies          do         not     defeat        substantive
         entitlements.         It     is,       therefore,       open      to
         Respondent No.1 to approach the competent
         court in the pending maintenance proceedings
         and   seek       a    direction        to     the     Income     Tax
         Department to produce the income tax returns
         and related financial records of her husband.
         Any      such     application,          if    made,      shall   be
         considered on its own merits by the concerned
         court.

   16.10. I answer Point No.(v) by holding that the
         appropriate course for Respondent No.1 was to
         seek production of the income tax returns
         through     the       competent              matrimonial    court,
         rather than by invoking the provisions of the
RTI Act
.
The RTI Act
is not the appropriate
         mechanism for obtaining income tax returns of
         a   spouse       in    the       context       of     maintenance
         proceedings.            The            courts         adjudicating
         maintenance claims have ample powers to
         summon documents and compel disclosure of
         financial       information,           and      the    procedural
         safeguards available in judicial proceedings are
         far more appropriate than the relatively blunt
                                  - 130 -
                                                      NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                   WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




              instrument of an RTI application. However,
              Respondent No.1 is at liberty to approach the
              competent court in the pending maintenance
              proceedings to seek a direction to the Income
              Tax Department to produce the income tax
              returns and related financial records of her
              husband.

17.    Answer to Point No. (vi): Whether the order
       dated 12.04.2019 passed by the Central
       Information Commission directing disclosure of
       the information calls for interference under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India?

      17.1.   Sri   Y.V.   Raviraj,        learned    counsel   for   the
              Petitioner, submits that the impugned order
              passed by the Central Information Commission
              is unsustainable in law. It is contended that the
              Commission has failed to properly appreciate:
              (a)   the    fiduciary       relationship   between     the
              Income Tax Department and the assessee; (b)
              the   statutory     exemptions           under
Sections
              8(1)(e)
and
8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act; (c) the
              protection     afforded         to     personal   financial
              information under binding precedents of the
              Hon'ble Supreme Court; and (d) the overriding
              effect of the special mechanism under
Section
              138
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. On these
                                 - 131 -
                                                  NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           grounds, it is submitted that the order deserves
           to be set aside and the RTI application filed by
           Respondent No.1 deserves to be rejected.

   17.2.   Sri Kemparaju, learned counsel for Respondent
           No.1, contends that the Central Information
           Commission, having considered the peculiar
           facts and the nature of the request, rightly
           allowed the appeal and directed disclosure. It is
           submitted     that      the    order    of   the   Central
           Information Commission is reasoned, justified,
           and does not warrant interference under
Article
           226
of the Constitution. It is further submitted
           that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.

   17.3.   I have considered the submissions of both sides
           and    have       independently          examined     the
           impugned order of the Central Information
           Commission dated 12.04.2019.

   17.4.   The scope of judicial review under
Article 226
of
           the Constitution in respect of orders passed by
           the Central Information Commission is well
           settled.    The      High      Court     exercises    writ
           jurisdiction not as a court of appeal but as a
           court of limited judicial review. Interference
           with the order of the Commission is warranted
                               - 132 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                              WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           where the Commission has: (a) acted without
           jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction; (b)
           failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in it; (c)
           committed an error of law apparent on the face
           of the record; (d) violated principles of natural
           justice; or (e) arrived at a decision that no
           reasonable body could have arrived at on the
           material before it.

   17.5.   Having examined the impugned order, this
           Court   finds     that       the   Central   Information
           Commission erred in the following respects:

         17.5.1.   First, the Commission appears to have
                   directed disclosure by placing reliance
                   upon an earlier order passed in WP No.
                   18778/2017           (Smt.    Jammalu    Padma
                   Manjari    v.    CPIO      and   DCIT)   without
                   undertaking an independent analysis of
                   the facts of the present case. Reliance
                   on an earlier order, without applying the
                   mind to the specific circumstances of the
                   case at hand, does not constitute a
                   reasoned decision.

         17.5.2.   Second, the Commission failed to apply
                   the larger public interest test mandated
                                  - 133 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                   by
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. The
                   exemption          under
Section       8(1)(j)
is
                   qualified by the condition that disclosure
                   may      be        ordered       only        where      the
                   competent          authority         is   satisfied   that
                   larger public interest warrants it. This
                   satisfaction must be recorded and must
                   be based on an assessment of the facts.
                   The impugned order does not contain
                   any analysis of whether the request of
                   Respondent No.1                satisfies the larger
                   public interest test.

         17.5.3.   Third, the Commission failed to give due
                   weight             to          the         authoritative
                   pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme
                   Court         in         Girish           Ramchandra
                   Deshpande, which categorically held
                   that income tax returns are personal
                   information             exempt        from    disclosure
                   under
Section 8(1)(j)
, unless a larger
                   public    interest         is        established.       The
                   Commission               was     bound         by       this
                   pronouncement              and       ought     to     have
                   addressed why, notwithstanding the said
                                    - 134 -
                                                          NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                     WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                     pronouncement, disclosure was being
                     directed.

         17.5.4.     Fourth, as discussed under Point (v)
                     above, the appropriate mechanism for
                     obtaining income tax returns in the
                     context of maintenance proceedings is
                     through        the           competent     court,        not
                     through the
RTI Act
. The Commission,
                     by directing disclosure through the RTI
                     route, bypassed the judicial process and
                     the safeguards embedded therein.

   17.6.   For the foregoing reasons, this Court is of the
           considered view that the impugned order dated
           12.04.2019 passed by the Central Information
           Commission suffers from errors of law apparent
           on      the    face     of     the      record    and      calls   for
           interference           under
Article    226
of     the
           Constitution.

   17.7.   However, while setting aside the impugned
           order,        this    Court       is    also     mindful     of    the
           legitimate           concern      of     Respondent        No.1     in
           obtaining financial information of her husband
           for the purpose of her maintenance claim. This
           Court does not wish to leave Respondent No.1
                               - 135 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                            WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           without any remedy. Accordingly, while setting
           aside the impugned order, this Court grants
           liberty to Respondent No.1 to approach the
           competent court in the pending maintenance
           proceedings and seek appropriate directions for
           production of the income tax returns and
           related financial records of her husband by the
           Income Tax Department. Any such application
           shall be considered on its own merits by the
           concerned court.

   17.8.   I answer point no. (vi) by holding that the order
           dated    12.04.2019          passed     by   the    Central
           Information Commission directing disclosure of
           the income tax returns and related information
           of the husband of Respondent No.1 calls for
           interference      under
Article    226
of   the
           Constitution. The Commission erred in: (a)
           directing disclosure without applying the larger
           public interest test under
Section 8(1)(j)
; (b)
           failing to follow the binding pronouncement of
           the     Hon'ble    Supreme         Court      in    Girish
           Ramchandra Deshpande; and (c) relying on
           an earlier order without independent application
           of mind. The impugned order is accordingly
           liable to be set aside. However, Respondent
                                 - 136 -
                                                   NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                 WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           No.1    is   granted       liberty      to     approach        the
           competent court in the pending maintenance
           proceedings to seek appropriate directions for
           the production of income tax returns and
           related financial records.

18.   General Directions and Guidelines

      18.1. This Court cannot be unmindful of the practical
           difficulties encountered in a large number of
           proceedings      relating        to     maintenance          and
           alimony      instituted        under    the
Protection       of
           Women from Domestic Violence Act
, Section
           125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
           Hindu     Marriage        Act,    and        allied     statutes.
           Determination        of        maintenance            necessarily
           depends upon a fair and accurate assessment
           of the income, assets, liabilities and overall
           financial    capacity      of    the    parties.       Delay    is
           frequently occasioned because one spouse is
           unable to place on record reliable documentary
           material establishing the true income of the
           other spouse.

      18.2. Such   documents are required not only to
           substantiate     a    claim      for    maintenance,           but
           equally to enable the opposite spouse to rebut,
                                 - 137 -
                                                 NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                               WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




           negate, or contextualise the claim, and to assist
           the court in arriving at a proper and just
           calculation     of    maintenance           or   permanent
           alimony. In the absence of authentic financial
           records, the adjudicating court is compelled to
           proceed       on      conjecture        or       incomplete
           disclosures, which undermines the objective of
           rendering equitable relief.

     18.3. Having held that income tax returns and related
           financial     particulars      cannot       ordinarily   be
           accessed through an application under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
, and that the
           appropriate course for a spouse seeking such
           material is to approach the competent court for
           necessary      directions      to     the    Income      Tax
           Department, this Court is of the considered
           opinion that structured procedural safeguards
           are required.

     18.4. Until an appropriate legislative framework is
           formulated, it is necessary to lay down guiding
           principles to ensure that:

         18.4.1.   genuine claims for maintenance/alimony
                   are     not       defeated       for     want     of
                   documentary proof;
                                - 138 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                             WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




          18.4.2.    exaggerated or unfounded claims can be
                     effectively scrutinised; and

          18.4.3.    courts   are        equipped     with   reliable
                     financial data to determine just and
                     reasonable maintenance or alimony.

       18.5. Accordingly, this Court has framed guidelines
              regulating the procedure to be followed by
              matrimonial courts when applications are made
              seeking production of income tax returns and
              related financial records from the Income Tax
              Department. The said guidelines are annexed to
              and   shall   form    an     integral   part   of   this
              judgment. They are set out separately only to
              facilitate clarity, uniform implementation, and
              ease of dissemination across all subordinate
              courts within the jurisdiction of this Court.

19.    Answer to Point No. (vii): What order?



      19.1.   In view of the findings recorded on Points (i) to
              (vi) above, this Court passes the following
                                     - 139 -
                                                     NC: 2026:KHC:11056
                                                  WP No. 34625 of 2019


HC-KAR




                                          ORDER
i.     The writ petition is partly allowed in the
            following terms:
ii.    The        order   dated          12.04.2019   bearing   File
            No.CIC/CCITB/A/2017/180340-BJ                   passed    by
            the         Central          Information        Commission
            (Respondent No.2) is hereby set aside.
iii.   It    is    declared       that      income    tax   returns,
            assessment particulars and related financial
            details      of    an   assessee       constitute    personal
            information within the meaning of
Section
            8(1)(j)
of the Right to Information Act, 2005,
            and are exempt from disclosure under the said
            provision unless the competent authority is
            satisfied that larger public interest warrants
            disclosure.
iv.    It is held that in the facts and circumstances of
            the present case, the disclosure sought by
            Respondent No.1 through the RTI route does
            not satisfy the test of larger public interest so
            as to override the statutory exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act.
- 140 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     v.     It     is   further     held     that    the   appropriate
            mechanism for obtaining income tax returns
            and financial records of a spouse in the context
            of maintenance proceedings is through the
            competent court adjudicating the maintenance
            claim, and not through the provisions of the
RTI
            Act
.
vi.    Liberty is granted to Respondent No.1 to
            approach the competent court in the pending
            maintenance           proceedings,      namely    Criminal
            Appeal No.303/2017 or any other proceedings
            as may be pending, and file an appropriate
            application seeking directions to the Income
            Tax Department to produce the income tax
            returns and related financial records of her
            husband,       Sri      Zafar    Ali    Ansari,   for   the
            Assessment Years 2012-2017 or such other
            period as may be relevant.
vii.   In the event Respondent No.1 files such an
            application before the competent court, the said
            court shall consider the same on its own merits,
            in accordance with law, and pass appropriate
            orders expeditiously, preferably within a period
- 141 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




            of four weeks from the date of filing of such
            application.
viii. The Income Tax Department is directed to
            comply with any direction that may be issued
            by the competent court for the production of
            the income tax returns and related financial
            records of the assessee, in accordance with the
            provisions of
Section 138
of the Income-tax
            Act, 1961 and other applicable laws.
ix.   There shall be no order as to costs.
SD/-
(SURAJ GOVINDARAJ)
                                  JUDGE

KTY
- 142 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




                         GUIDELINES

                               FOR

     COURTS AND THE INCOME TAX DEPARTMENT
1.    Background and Genesis

     1.1.   In the judgment delivered in Writ Petition
            No.34625 of 2019 (GM-RES) titled Income Tax
            Officer and CPIO v. Smt. Gulsanober Bano
            Zafar Ali Ansari and another, this Court was
            called upon to consider whether the income tax
            returns and financial records of an assessee
            could be disclosed to his spouse under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
.
1.2.   The Court held that while income tax returns
            constitute "personal information" under
Section
            8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act and are exempt from
            disclosure   under       the      said        provision,   the
            appropriate mechanism for a spouse to obtain
            such   financial    information          is     through    the
            competent    Court           adjudicating       maintenance
            proceedings, and not through the
RTI Act
.
1.3.   During the course of the judgment, this Court
            observed that while the right of a wife to seek
            just and fair maintenance is a valuable legal
- 143 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




            right, procedural inadequacies must not defeat
            substantive     entitlements.         It     was    further
            observed      that     the        courts      adjudicating
            maintenance claims have ample powers to
            summon documents and compel disclosure of
            financial information from the Income Tax
            Department,      and         that      the      procedural
            safeguards available in judicial proceedings are
            far more appropriate than the relatively blunt
            instrument of an RTI application.
1.4.   In order to ensure uniformity, clarity and
            effective implementation of the principles laid
            down in the said judgment, and to prevent a
            situation where spouses are left without any
            effective     remedy        for     obtaining      financial
            information necessary for the just adjudication
            of maintenance claims, this Court considers it
            necessary to issue comprehensive guidelines
            for the courts and the Income Tax Department.
2.    Scope and Applicability: These guidelines shall
      apply to:
2.1.   All Magistrate Courts, Family Courts, Sessions
            Courts and Appellate Courts within the State of
            Karnataka adjudicating proceedings relating to
- 144 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




          maintenance and or Alimony under any law,
          including but not limited to Section 144 of the
          Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (
          earlier
Section 125
of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure, 1973),
Section 12
of the Protection
          of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005,
Section   18
of      the    Hindu   Adoptions   and
          Maintenance Act, 1956,
Section 24
and
Section
          25
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and
          corresponding provisions under other personal
          laws.
2.2.   All officers and authorities of the Income Tax
          Department, including but not limited to the
          Central    Processing          Centre,    Centralised
          Processing Centre, Assessing Officers, Income
          Tax Officers, Chief Public Information Officers,
          Commissioner(s) and Chief Commissioner(s) of
          Income Tax, within the jurisdiction of this
          Court.
2.3.   All proceedings in which one spouse seeks
          production, discovery, disclosure or inspection
          of the income tax returns, assessment records,
          financial statements, bank details or any other
          financial records of the other spouse which are
- 145 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




            in the custody or control of the Income Tax
            Department.
2.4.   All proceedings where similar financial records
            are sought from other authorities or institutions
            holding    financial       information            of   a   spouse,
            mutatis mutandis, to the extent applicable.
3.    Object and Purpose: The object of these guidelines
      is four-fold:
3.1. First,     to    provide          a     clear,     efficient    and
            standardised procedural mechanism for spouses
            to obtain income tax returns and financial
            records    of       the   other        spouse      through     the
            competent Court, thereby ensuring that no
            spouse is left without an effective remedy;
3.2. Second,         to    ensure          that   the    Income      Tax
            Department and its officers comply promptly
            and     effectively       with       judicial     directions   for
            production of such records, while maintaining
            appropriate confidentiality safeguards;
3.3. Third, to balance the competing interests of
            privacy of the assessee, the right of the spouse
            to seek just maintenance, and the need for
            effective judicial administration, and
- 146 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     3.4. Fourth, to eliminate procedural delays and
          impediments       that       often    frustrate    the       just
          resolution of maintenance claims due to the
          non-availability of reliable financial information.
4.   Definitions      and     Interpretation:               In        these
     guidelines, unless the context otherwise requires:
4.1. "Applicant Spouse" means the spouse who
          applies to the competent Court for production
          or disclosure of income tax returns and financial
          records of the other spouse;
4.2. "Assessee Spouse" means the spouse whose
          income tax returns and financial records are
          sought to be produced or disclosed;
4.3. "Competent Court" means the Court before
          which maintenance proceedings are pending, or
          the Court having jurisdiction to entertain a
          claim for maintenance;
4.4. "Designated Officer" means the officer of the
          Income Tax Department to whom the Court's
          direction   for    production          of   documents          is
          addressed    or    who         is    designated        by     the
          Department to comply with such directions;
- 147 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     4.5. "Financial        Records"         includes        income       tax
          returns,    assessment            orders,        Form    16/16A,
          Form     26AS/Annual              Information          Statement
          (AIS),      Tax     Deducted             at     Source     (TDS)
          certificates, Profit and Loss accounts, Balance
          Sheets, capital gains statements, bank account
          details as reflected in the returns, and any
          other document or record forming part of the
          assessment file of the assessee maintained by
          the Income Tax Department;
4.6. "Maintenance              Proceedings"             means        any
          proceedings        in      which     one        spouse     claims
          maintenance, alimony, financial support, or
          interim or permanent settlement from the other
          spouse, under any law for the time being in
          force;
4.7. "Production        Order"          means         the    order    or
          direction    issued         by     the        competent    Court
          directing    the        Income      Tax         Department       to
          produce the Financial Records of the Assessee
          Spouse;
4.8. "
RTI Act
" means the
Right to Information Act,
          2005
;
- 148 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     4.9. "
Income-tax Act
" means the
Income-tax Act,
           1961
.
5.   Relevant      Statutory    Provisions:          The    following
     statutory provisions form the foundation of these
     guidelines:
5.1. Powers of Courts to Summon Documents

         5.1.1.    Section 94 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
                   Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (formerly
Section 91
of the Code of Criminal
                   Procedure, 1973): empowers any court
                   or officer in charge of a police station to
                   issue a summons to any person to
                   produce a document or other thing in his
                   possession         which     is         considered
                   necessary or desirable for the purposes
                   of any investigation, inquiry, trial or
                   other proceeding under the Code.
5.1.2.
Order XVI Rule 6 of the Code of Civil
                   Procedure
,         1908:   provides       for   the
                   issuance of summons to persons whose
                   attendance is required to give evidence
                   or to produce documents.
- 149 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




         5.1.3.   Section       168        of     the     Bharatiya
                  Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023( Formerly
Section 165
of the Indian Evidence
                  Act, 1872): confers upon the Judge the
                  power to put questions to a witness or
                  order the production of any document or
                  thing in whatever form, at any stage of
                  any suit, inquiry or proceeding.
5.1.4.
Section 24
of the Hindu Marriage
                  Act, 1955: empowers the Court to order
                  either     spouse        to    pay    maintenance
                  pendente          lite    and        expenses     of
                  proceedings to the other spouse. The
                  Court has an implied power to direct
                  disclosure of financial particulars for the
                  purpose           of      determining           such
                  maintenance.
5.1.5.
Section 20(1)(d)
of the Protection of
                  Women from Domestic Violence Act,
                  2005:      empowers           the    Magistrate   to
                  direct the respondent to pay monetary
                  relief, including maintenance. The power
                  to   fix   just        maintenance      necessarily
- 150 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




                   implies   the        power    to   ascertain     the
                   income and assets of the parties.
5.2. Provisions Governing Disclosure of Income
           Tax Information

         5.2.1.
Section 138
of the Income-tax Act,
                  1961: regulates disclosure of information
                  respecting assessees. It permits the Board
                  or   specified        income-tax     authority     to
                  furnish information to specified officers,
                  authorities or bodies performing functions
                  under any law, subject to the conditions
                  laid down therein.
5.2.2.   Section 138(1)(b): permits disclosure to
                  such officer, authority or body performing
                  functions under any other law as the
                  Central    Government          may    specify     by
                  notification in the Official Gazette, if in its
                  opinion it is necessary so to do in the
                  public interest.
5.2.3.
Section    8(1)(j)
of    the    RTI       Act:
exempts     from        disclosure     information
                  which relates to personal information, the
                  disclosure of which has no relationship to
- 151 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




               any public activity or interest, or which
               would cause unwarranted invasion of the
               privacy    of    the      individual,    unless    the
               competent authority is satisfied that the
               larger     public       interest     justifies    such
               disclosure.
6.   Duty to Enquire into Financial Capacity

     6.1. In every proceeding relating to alimony and/or
          maintenance, the competent Court shall, at the
          earliest opportunity and preferably at the first
          effective hearing, enquire into the financial
          capacity   of   both         parties    and    specifically
          ascertain whether either party wishes to seek
          production of financial records from the Income
          Tax Department or any other authority.
6.2. The Court shall not determine maintenance
          based merely on oral assertions or unverified
          claims regarding income. Where the income of
          either party is disputed, the Court shall suo
          motu consider invoking its powers to summon
          documentary evidence, including income tax
          returns and related financial records.
- 152 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
7.   Procedure upon Application by a Spouse: Where
     the Applicant Spouse files an application seeking
     production of income         tax      returns and financial
     records of the Assessee Spouse from the Income Tax
     Department, the Court shall adopt the following
     procedure:
7.1. On an application being filed, notice of the
           application shall be served on the Assessee
           Spouse,   affording        an    opportunity   to   file
           objections within a period of seven days from
           the date of service.
7.2. The Court shall hear the application, consider
           any objections of the Assessee Spouse, and
           pass a reasoned order within a period of
           fourteen days from the date of filing of the
           application.
7.3. While considering the application, the Court
           shall satisfy itself on the following parameters:
7.3.1.   That the information sought is relevant
                  to the determination of the maintenance
                  claim;
7.3.2.   That the Applicant Spouse has been
                  unable to obtain the information by other
- 153 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




                  reasonable      means,      including    through
                  voluntary disclosure by the Assessee
                  Spouse;
7.3.3.   That the scope of the information sought
                  is proportionate to the needs of the case
                  and is not unduly wide or oppressive;
7.3.4.   That the period for which the records are
                  sought is relevant to the maintenance
                  proceedings; and

         7.3.5.   That appropriate safeguards are in place
                  to    protect   the    confidentiality   of   the
                  information and prevent misuse.
7.4. Upon being satisfied, the Court shall issue a
           Production    Order     in   the   prescribed    format
           addressed to the Designated Officer of the
           Income Tax Department.
7.5. The Production Order shall clearly specify the
           assessment years for which records are sought,
           the specific documents required, the name and
           PAN of the Assessee Spouse, and the date by
           which compliance is required.
- 154 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     7.6. The Production Order shall contain a direction
          that the records be produced in a sealed cover,
          to be opened only by the Court.
7.7. A copy of the Production Order shall be served
          on the Assessee Spouse.
8.   Conditions and Safeguards to be Imposed by
     Courts: While issuing a Production Order, the Court
     shall impose the following conditions.
8.1. Sealed Cover: The Income Tax Department
          shall produce photocopies of the records in a
          sealed cover addressed to the Court, certifying
          that they are the true copies of the originals
          maintained by the Income Tax Department. If
          printed   from    a     database,      the    necessary
          certification   under       the   relevant   laws   shall
          accompany such documents. The records shall
          not be directly furnished to the Applicant
          Spouse.
8.2. Inspection by Parties: Upon receipt, the
          Court shall open the sealed cover in the
          presence of both parties or their advocates and
          afford inspection. The Assessee Spouse shall be
          given an opportunity to identify any information
- 155 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




          that   is   not   relevant       to   the    maintenance
          proceedings and which, in the opinion of the
          Assessee Spouse, ought not to be disclosed.
8.3. Selective Disclosure: The Court shall, after
          hearing both parties, determine which portions
          of the records are relevant to the maintenance
          proceedings       and    shall    disclose    only   such
          relevant portions to the Applicant Spouse.
          Irrelevant information, particularly information
          relating to third parties whose financial details
          may appear in the returns, shall be redacted or
          withheld.
8.4. Undertaking: Before any disclosure is made,
          the Court shall obtain an undertaking from the
          Applicant Spouse (and his or her advocate) that
          the information obtained shall be used solely
          for the purpose of the pending maintenance
          proceedings and shall not be disclosed to any
          third party or used for any other purpose
          whatsoever.
8.5. Prohibition on Copying: The Court may, in its
          discretion, direct that the Applicant Spouse
          shall be entitled to inspect and take notes of
          the relevant financial records, but shall not be
- 156 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




             permitted to retain copies, unless the Court
             considers it necessary for the fair conduct of
             the proceedings. Where copies are permitted,
             the Court shall impose appropriate conditions.
8.6. Return of Records: Upon conclusion of the
             proceedings, or upon the records ceasing to be
             required, the Court shall direct that all records
             furnished by the Income Tax Department be
             returned to the Department or destroyed (if
             photocopy has been produced).
9.   Suo Motu Powers of the Court: The competent
     Court    may,    even   in   the absence of    a formal
     application by the Applicant Spouse, exercise its suo
     motu powers to summon income tax returns and
     financial records from the Income Tax Department
     where the Court considers that the determination of
     a fair and just maintenance is not possible without
     such records. In such cases, the Court shall record
     reasons for exercising the suo motu power and shall
     afford an opportunity to the Assessee Spouse to be
     heard before issuing the Production Order.
10. Directions for        Financial Disclosure by Both
     Spouses
- 157 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




          10.1. As Directed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Rajneesh Vs Neha and Another15
the
                 competent          Court       may,     at        the    earliest
                 opportunity,        direct     both      spouses         to   file
                 affidavits of their respective assets, income,
                 expenditure, liabilities, and standard of living,
                 along with supporting documentary evidence
                 including income tax returns, bank statements,
                 salary     certificates,       audited       accounts,        and
                 related financial records, as may be applicable.
10.2. Where the Assessee Spouse fails to comply with
                 the aforesaid direction or furnishes incomplete
                 or misleading information, the Court shall be
                 entitled to draw an adverse inference against
                 the      Assessee    Spouse       and        to    proceed     to
                 summon the records directly from the Income
                 Tax Department.
11. Obligation to Comply with Judicial Directions:
Upon receipt of a Production Order from a competent
          court, the Designated Officer of the Income Tax
          Department        shall    ensure      prompt        and       complete
          compliance with the same. The judicial direction shall
          be treated as having been issued in the exercise of
          the Court's statutory power to summon documents,
15
(2021 (2) SCC 324)
- 158 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




      and      non-compliance            shall     be     amenable        for
      appropriate proceedings.
12. Designation of Nodal Officers: The Principal Chief
      Commissioner of Income Tax/Chief Commissioner of
      Income Tax having jurisdiction shall designate a
      Nodal Officer, not below the rank of Income Tax
      Officer,               at                  each              Principal
      Commissioner/Commissioner                   charge,     to    receive,
      process and comply with Production Orders issued by
      courts     in   maintenance            proceedings.     The     name,
      designation, office address and contact details of the
      Nodal Officer shall be communicated to all courts
      within the jurisdiction and shall be updated annually.
13.   Procedure for Compliance: Upon receipt of a
      Production      Order,       the       Designated      Officer/Nodal
      Officer shall follow the procedure set out below:
13.1. Acknowledge receipt of the Production Order
            within three working days from the date of
            receipt.
13.2. Retrieve the income tax returns and financial
            records     of    the      Assessee         Spouse      for   the
            specified assessment years from the records
            maintained        by      the      Department,         including
- 159 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




           electronic records available on the Central
           Processing Centre system, the Income Tax
           Business Application (ITBA), the Integrated
           Taxpayer Data Management System (ITDMS),
           or any other system as may be in use.
13.3. Prepare     certified       copies    of   the   relevant
           documents, duly authenticated by the officer
           under his seal and signature.
13.4. Place the certified copies in a sealed cover
           addressed to the Court, clearly marking the
           cover with the case number, the name of the
           Assessee       Spouse,           and       the      words
           "CONFIDENTIAL -- TO BE OPENED ONLY BY
           THE COURT."
13.5. Dispatch the sealed cover to the Court through
           a responsible officer or through registered post
           / speed post / special messenger, ensuring
           proof of delivery.
13.6. File   a   compliance        report    with   the   Court
           confirming the furnishing of the records, along
           with a covering letter listing the documents
           enclosed.
- 160 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
14.   Timeline      for    Compliance:            The     Income   Tax
      Department shall comply with the Production Order
      within the following timelines:
Action                             Timeline



         Acknowledgement of
                                          3 working days
         Production Order



         Retrieval and
                                          14 working days
         certification of records



         Dispatch in a sealed             3 working days after
         cover to the Court               certification



         Filing of compliance             Within 3 working days of
         report                           dispatch



         Total maximum time               21 working days
         from receipt to                  (approximately 30
         compliance                       calendar days)
                              - 161 -
                                                NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
15. Records Not Available or Not Maintained: Where
     the records sought are not available, either because
     no return was filed for the specified assessment year,
     or because the records have been destroyed in
     accordance with the record retention policy of the
     Department, or for any other bona fide reason, the
     Designated Officer shall file an affidavit before the
     Court, clearly stating which records are not available
     and the reasons therefor. The Court shall then decide
     the matter on the basis of the material available and
     may draw appropriate inferences.
16. Objections by the Income Tax Department: If
     the Income Tax Department has any objection to
     complying with the Production Order, whether on the
     ground   of   jurisdiction,       scope,   or   any   statutory
     restriction, such objection shall be raised before the
     Court which issued the Production Order within seven
     working days of receipt. The Department shall not
     unilaterally decline to comply. The objection shall be
     supported by a reasoned application filed by an
     officer not below the rank of Commissioner of
     Income Tax. The Court shall hear the objection and
     pass orders expeditiously.
- 162 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
17.   Handling of RTI Applications by Spouses: Where
      a spouse files an application under the
RTI Act
seeking income tax returns or financial records of the
      other     spouse     in     connection     with     maintenance
      proceedings,        the      Public      Information      Officer
      (CPIO/PIO) of the Income Tax Department shall:
17.1. Process the application in accordance with the
              provisions of the
RTI Act
, including
Sections
              8(1)(e)
,
8(1)(j)
and
11
thereof;
17.2. Inform the applicant, in the order disposing of
              the   RTI    application,     that    the    appropriate
              mechanism for obtaining income tax returns in
              the context of maintenance proceedings is
              through the competent Court, and not through
              the
RTI Act
;
17.3. Provide       the      applicant    with      the   name,
              designation and address of the Nodal Officer
              designated to receive and comply with judicial
              directions; and

      17.4. Where     the       application    discloses     that   the
              applicant is a spouse seeking information in
              connection        with   maintenance        proceedings,
              specifically advise the applicant to file an
- 163 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




           appropriate application before the competent
           Court.
18.   Powers of Appellate Courts: Where the competent
      Court of first instance has declined to issue a
      Production Order, or where the competent Court has
      issued a Production Order but the same has not been
      complied with, the Appellate Court (Sessions Court /
      District Court as the case may be) shall exercise its
      revisional or appellate jurisdiction to:
18.1. Examine whether the Court of first instance
           properly exercised its discretion in declining the
           Production    Order,         having    regard   to     the
           parameters set out above;
18.2. Direct the Court of first instance to issue a
           Production Order where the refusal was not
           justified;
18.3. Directly issue a Production Order in the exercise
           of its appellate or revisional powers where the
           interests of justice so require; and

      18.4. Take appropriate action against the Income Tax
           Department       for        non-compliance      with    a
           Production     Order,        including    initiation    of
           contempt proceedings.
- 164 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
19.   Enhancement         of         Maintenance             Pending
      Appellate Determination: Where the appellate
      Court is satisfied that the maintenance awarded by
      the Court of first instance was inadequate due to the
      non-availability of financial records of the Assessee
      Spouse, and where such records are subsequently
      produced   pursuant      to    a     Production    Order,     the
      appellate Court shall re-assess the maintenance
      quantum in light of the additional material and pass
      appropriate     orders,            including      retrospective
      enhancement where warranted.
20.   SAFEGUARDS          AND              CONDITIONS               FOR
      DISCLOSURE: The following safeguards shall be
      mandatory in every case where income tax returns
      or financial records are produced pursuant to a
      Production Order:
20.1. Sealed Cover Procedure: All records shall be
           transmitted in sealed covers. The seal shall not
           be broken except by the Court.
20.2. Confidentiality Undertaking: The Applicant
           Spouse and his/her advocate shall execute a
           written   undertaking,         on    affidavit,   that   the
           information shall be used solely for the purpose
           of the maintenance proceedings and shall not
- 165 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




          be     disclosed,         published,            shared,   or
          disseminated to any third party.
20.3. Prohibition on Misuse: Any misuse of the
          information     obtained,            including      use   for
          purposes      other           than     the      maintenance
          proceedings,     defamation,             harassment,      or
          initiation of collateral proceedings based on the
          financial   information,         shall     be    viewed   as
          contempt of Court and/or abuse of process.
20.4. Protection    of      Third-Party           Information:
Where the income tax returns or financial
          records contain information relating to third
          parties (such as business partners, associates,
          banks, or other individuals), the Court shall
          ensure that such third-party information is
          redacted or protected from disclosure to the
          extent it is not relevant to the maintenance
          proceedings.
20.5. Limited Retention: Copies of the records, if
          provided to the Applicant Spouse, shall be
          returned to the Court upon conclusion of the
          proceedings or upon the Court so directing.
- 166 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




      20.6. Judicial Record: The records produced by the
            Income Tax Department shall form part of the
            judicial record and shall be subject to the same
            rules of confidentiality and access as other
            court records.
21.   Breach     of    Safeguards:        Any    breach   of   the
      safeguards set out above by the Applicant Spouse or
      his/her advocate shall entitle the Court to:
21.1. Initiate   contempt        proceedings   against   the
            defaulting party;
21.2. Revoke the permission to inspect or retain
            copies of the financial records;
21.3. Draw adverse inference against the Applicant
            Spouse in the maintenance proceedings;
21.4. Award costs to the Assessee Spouse; and

      21.5. Pass such other orders as may be deemed just
            and appropriate.
22.   Non-Compliance by the Assessee Spouse: Where
      the Assessee Spouse fails to              comply with the
      direction of the Court to disclose income and assets,
      the Court shall be entitled to:
- 167 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR
22.1. Draw an adverse inference that the income of
           the Assessee Spouse is at least as stated by the
           Applicant Spouse;
22.2. Issue a Production Order to the Income Tax
           Department suo motu;
22.3. Award costs against the Assessee Spouse;
22.4. Impose     such   other     penalty   as   may    be
           permissible under law.
23.   Non-Compliance          by        the    Income        Tax
      Department: Where the Income Tax Department
      fails to comply with a Production Order within the
      stipulated time without justifiable reasons, the Court
      shall be entitled to:
23.1. Issue a peremptory direction with a further
           timeline;
23.2. Summon the Designated Officer / Nodal Officer
           to appear in person and explain the non-
compliance;
23.3. Initiate proceedings for contempt of Court;
23.4. Report the non-compliance to the Principal
           Chief Commissioner of Income Tax;
- 168 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




      23.5. Award costs against the Department.
24. Applicability       to    Other         Financial         Authorities:
These guidelines shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to
      applications seeking financial records of a spouse
      from other authorities and institutions, including but
      not limited to:
24.1. The Goods and Services Tax (GST) Department,
           for GST returns and assessment records;
24.2. The Employees' Provident Fund Organisation
           (EPFO),      for    provident           fund   balance          and
           contribution statements;
24.3. Banks     and     financial         institutions,     for     bank
           account statements and loan records;
24.4. The   Registrar     of    Companies           /     Ministry    of
           Corporate     Affairs,         for    company        filings    and
           directorship details;
24.5. Any other public authority or institution holding
           financial information of the Assessee Spouse.
25.   Savings Clause: Nothing in these guidelines shall be
      construed as:
- 169 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




      25.1. Limiting or curtailing the inherent powers of
           any court;
25.2. Restricting the right of any party to seek
           production of documents through any other
           lawful mechanism;
25.3. Overriding   any      specific    statutory   provision
           governing     the    production      or   disclosure   of
           documents; or

      25.4. Creating any right to disclosure of financial
           information outside the judicial process or for
           purposes other than maintenance proceedings.
26.   Gender Neutrality: These guidelines are gender-
neutral. They apply equally to applications filed by a
      wife seeking financial information of the husband,
      and to applications filed by a husband seeking
      financial information of the wife. The pronouns used
      in these guidelines are for convenience only and shall
      be construed to include all genders.
27.   Communication and Dissemination: A copy of
      these guidelines shall be:
- 170 -
NC: 2026:KHC:11056
WP No. 34625 of 2019
HC-KAR




     27.1. Circulated to all Magistrate      Courts, Family
           Courts, Sessions Courts and District Courts in
           the State of Karnataka;
27.2. Forwarded to the Principal Chief Commissioner
           of Income Tax, Karnataka and Goa Region, for
           circulation to all offices of the Income Tax
           Department within the jurisdiction.
Sd/-
(SURAJ GOVINDARAJ)
                                     JUDGE


KTY, List No.: 2 Sl No.: 38
