Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 13 of 2018
Citation: citations.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/188899810/

[Cites
40
, Cited by
6
]
Punjab-Haryana High Court
Nhpc Ltd vs Jaiparkash Associates Ltd And Others on 12 September, 2018
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs              -1-

         IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB & HARYANA
                     AT CHANDIGARH

                       (1) FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018
                   Date of Decision: September 12, 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
M/s Jaiparkash Associates Ltd. and Ors.                   ..... Respondents


                       (2) FAO-CARB No.14 of 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
M/s Gammon India Ltd. and Anr.                            ..... Respondents


                       (3) FAO-CARB No.15 of 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
M/s Jaiparkash Associates Ltd. and Ors.                   ..... Respondents
                      (4) FAO-COM No.1 of 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
BGS SGS Soma JV and Anr.                                  ..... Respondents


                        (5) FAO-COM No.2 of 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
BGS SGS Soma JV and Anr.                                  ..... Respondents


                       (6) FAO-COM No.4 of 2018
NHPC Ltd.                                                 ..... Appellant
                                         Versus
Chairman-cum-Managing Director M/s Patel-L&T              ..... Respondent




                               1 of 30
            ::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
 FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                    -2-

CORAM: HONBLE MR. JUSTICE SURYA KANT
       HONBLE MR. JUSTICE SUDIP AHLUWALIA


Present:     Mr. Aman Arora, Advocate for the Appellant
             (In FAO-CARB-13 to 15 of 2018).

             Mr. Puneet Bali, Senior Advocate with
             Mr. Gaurav Chopra & Mr. Paramveer Singh, Advocates
             for the Appellant (in FAO-COM-1, 2 and 4 of 2018).

             S/Shri Arunabh Chowdhary, Vaibhav Tomar & Manju Goyal,
             Advocates for Respondent No.1 (in FAO-COM-1 of 2018).

             S/Shri Sumeet Goel & Manav Bajaj, Advocates for
             Respondent No.1 (in FAO-COM-2 of 2018).

             S/Shri Amitesh Mishra, Niteen Sinha & Alankar Narula,
             Advocates for the Respondent (in FAO-COM-4 of 2018).

SUDIP AHLUWALIA, J.
A common question for determination has arisen in all these Appeals

arising out of similar orders passed by the Special Commercial Court at

Gurugram, whereby the separate Applications Under
Section 34
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short "the Act") filed on behalf

of the Appellant were ordered to be returned in view of the

objections/contentions raised on behalf of Respondents challenging the

territorial jurisdiction of the said Court to entertain those applications.
2.    For the sake of convenience and brevity, the factual background is

being extracted from FAO-COM No.1 of 2018. The Appellant-Corporation

had awarded Contracts in favour of the respective Sets of Respondents for

completion of certain Projects to be accomplished in some of the North-

Eastern States of the Country. However, the disputes arose between the

parties on account of which, the Arbitration was invoked in pursuance of




                               2 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                     -3-

the relevant Clause No.67 of the Agreement, in which it was stipulated as

follows -
".....Arbitration proceedings shall be held at New Delhi/Faridabad,
            India and the language of the Arbitration proceedings and that of all
            documents and communications between the parties shall be
            English."
3.    The parties nominated their respective Arbitrators, who in turn jointly

appointed the Presiding Arbitrator to arbitrate upon the disputes. The final

Award after completion of the Arbitration Proceedings was passed on

3.5.2013, after which the Appellant filed its Objections against the same

Under
Section 34
of the Act before the Civil Court at Faridabad. Those

objection petitions were later on transferred to the Special Commercial

Court, Gurugram on it being constituted under the
Commercial Courts

(Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts)

Act, 2015
. It was resisted on behalf of the Respondent by way of filing of an

application U/S 2 (1) (e) (i) of the Act challenging jurisdiction of the

Civil/Commercial Court, Haryana to entertain the objections, which after

hearing was allowed by the said Court, by holding that it had no territorial

jurisdiction to entertain the proceedings, and therefore, directed return of

the objections to the Appellant in following the provisions of Order VII

Rules 10/11
of the Code of Civil Procedure
for being presented to the Court

of Competent Jurisdiction at Delhi.
4.    The Appellant's side is aggrieved that the Ld. Court below

misconstrued its own jurisdiction and thereby wrongly refused to entertain

its objections Under
Section 34
of the Act. It is the Appellant's contention




                                 3 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs               -4-

that the said Civil/Commercial Court is possessed of Territorial jurisdiction

to entertain any proceedings in the District of Faridabad, which according to

the Appellant was meant to be the appropriate 'Seat of Arbitration' in terms

of the original Agreement between the parties in view of Clause No.67,

reproduced in Para 2 earlier. The appeal has nevertheless been contested on

behalf of the Respondents with a two-fold contention, firstly that the Appeal

itself is not maintainable in view of the Statutory Bar Under
Section 37
of

the Act, and secondly, that actually only the competent Court in New Delhi

is possessed of jurisdiction to entertain the objections Under
Section 34
,

which has also been determined by the Special Commercial Court,

Gurugram, and so there is no illegality or impropriety in its impugned

Order.
5.    The questions which have therefore, arisen before us are -
(I)Whether the present Appeal itself is maintainable in view of
            the bar under
Section 37
of the Act, as urged by the
            Respondents ?,


          (II)If so, whether the finding of the Ld. Court below that in the
            given facts and circumstances, only the competent Court in
            Delhi would have jurisdiction to entertain the dispute, is
            correct or not ?
Our observations Re: Question (I) -
6.   The submission regarding non-maintainability of the instant Appeal(s)

has been stressed on behalf of the Respondents by way of referring to
Sections 5
,
19
and
37
of the Act, which provide as follows -
4 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                    -5-

         "5. Extent of judicial intervention - Notwithstanding anything
         contained in any other law for the time being in force, in matters
         governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except
         where so provided in this Part."
"19. Determination of rules of procedure.-- (1) The arbitral
         tribunal shall not be bound by
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
         (5 of 1908) or the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872).
         (2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the
         procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting its
         proceedings.
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), the
         arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, conduct the proceedings
         in the manner it considers appropriate.
(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (3)
         includes the power to determine the admissibility, relevance,
         materiality and weight of any evidence."
"37. Appealable orders.--
(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no
         others) to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals from
         original decrees of the Court passing the order, namely:--
         [(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under
section 8
;
(b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under
section 9
;
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under
section 34
].
(2) An appeal shall also lie to a Court from an order of the arbitral
         tribunal.--
(a) accepting the plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section
         (3) of section 16; or
(b) granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section
17.
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal
         under this section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take




                                 5 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                 -6-

           away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court." (Emphasis by us)
7.    The emphasis from the Respondents' side is on the submission that

the Act of 1996 by virtue of
Section 19
overrides the ordinary provisions
of

the Code of Civil Procedure
, and that in view of the highlighted portion in

Sub-section (1) (c) of
Section 37
as reproduced above, the impugned order

would have become 'appealable' only in case it had the actual effect of

'setting aside' or 'refusing to set aside' the impugned arbitral award Under
Section 34
. But here according to the Respondents, the impugned order

passed by the Ld. Court below neither has the effect of 'setting aside' nor of

'refusing to set aside' the impugned award Under
Section 34
, since the Ld.

Court below has only confined itself to determining whether or not it is

possessed of the requisite territorial jurisdiction to entertain the objections

U/S 34, and consequently it has had absolutely no occasion to go into the

merits of those objections. So the question of having allowed or disallowed

those objections by way of either 'setting aside' or 'refusing to set aside' the

concerned arbitral award, does not arise at all.
8.    A number of decisions have been cited by the Respondents to support

the above contentions. We proceed to refer to the same by briefly adverting

to the background and nature of impugned orders vis-a-vis the ratio laid

down in each of those citations.
9.
In a recent decision in
'KANDLA EXPORT CORPORATION &

ANR. VS. M/S OCI CORPORATION & ANR.
' 2018(2) SCALE 368, the

Apex Court has held that where an appeal as envisaged U/S 50 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act
is not maintainable, the same can also not be




                               6 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs             -7-

held maintainable U/S 13(1) of the
Commercial Courts (Commercial

Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts) Act, 2015
.
10.
In
'FUERST DAY LAWSON LIMITED VS. JINDAL EXPORTS

LIMITED
' (2011) 8 Supreme Court Cases 333, similarly it was held that

where an order is not appealable U/S 50, no Letters Patent Appeal against

the same would also lie.
11.   The same was the decision in the older case of
'UNION OF INDIA

V. MOHINDRA SUPPLY COMPANY
' 1962 SCR (3) 497, which was

however, passed in the context of the pre-amendment
Arbitration Act, 1940
,

in which, the relevant provision for appeal was contained in
Section 39
,

now falling U/S 50 of the
Amended Act
.
12.   In 'Smt.
Sudershan Chopra and Others Vs. Vijay Kumar Chopra

and Others
' 2002 SCC OnLine P&H 376, a Division Bench of this Court

in complying with the direction of the Supreme Court was required to

decide the objections as to maintainability of the aforesaid Company

Appeal, and it came to the conclusion that the aforementioned appeal

against an arbitral award which was entertained by the Company Law Board

in exercise of its power Under
Sections 397
/
398
of the Companies Act, was

similarly non-maintainable in view of the bar Under
Section 37
.
13.
In
'HARMANPRIT SINGH SIDHU VS. ARCADIA SHARES &

STOCK BROKERS PVT. LTD.
' 234 (2016) DELHI LAW TIMES 30

(DB), a Division Bench of Delhi High Court had set aside the order of the

Single Bench, which was restricted to the extent of condoning the delay of

55 days in re-filing of the Objection Petition U/S 34 of the Act, and it was




                               7 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs               -8-

held that the (Letters Patent) Appeal against such order of condonation of

delay was not maintainable.
14.
In
'MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI AND OTHERS

VS. INTERNATIONAL SECURITY & INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

LTD.
' (2004) 3 Supreme Court Cases 250, the appeal of the Respondent

in the original Arbitration Proceedings against the Division Bench Order

dismissing its first appeal, which had been directed against the Judgment

and Decree dated 17.1.2001, whereby the arbitral Award had been made a

Rule of the Court, was dismissed as being time barred, since it was filed

after a delay of 230 days, and it was held by the Apex Court that it was not

even available to be heard and decided as a Cross Objection.
15.   In 'MAHANAGAR TELEPHONE NIGAM LIMITED VS.
APPLIED ELECTRONICS LIMITED' (2017) 2 Supreme Court Cases

37, the Supreme Court after having taken note of the controversy as to

whether
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 would also be applicable to the

proceedings under the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act
, where the Delhi High

Court had opined that the Cross Objections preferred by the Respondent

were maintainable and had been entertained after condonation of delay, and

so the Apex Court deemed it fit to refer the controversy for re-consideration

by a Larger Bench.
16.   In our opinion however, the argument raised on behalf of the

Respondents, though apparently attractive, is but actually misconceived and

untenable. It is to be noted that none of the above cited cases had dealt with

a situation, in which a Court in the context of dealing with the objections




                               8 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                 -9-

filed before it U/S 34 in the first instance, had itself gone on to hold that it

was not competent/possessed of Territorial jurisdiction to entertain the

same, which is the crux of the dispute in the case at hand.
17.   No doubt, the scope for Judicial intervention in proceedings under the
Arbitration Act
is limited in terms of
Section 5
, and there is also a Statutory

bar to entertaining appeals arising out of an arbitral award except when the

Court concerned has 'set aside' or 'refused to set aside' such award Under
Section 34
. But what happens where the Court under a misconception of

law holds itself incompetent to even consider those objections and then

directs return of the same to the Objector, if actually it happens to be

possessed of jurisdiction to have properly entertained and decided those

objections ? Would that decision to not go into the merits of the objections

under a legal misconception not amount to wrongfully 'refusing to set aside'

the disputed arbitral award ?
18.   We make it clear at this juncture that whether or not the Ld. Court

below in the present case was correct in its finding that it had no Territorial

jurisdiction to entertain the objections is immaterial for deciding the present

Question No.(I), which is limited only to the maintainability of the appeal

itself, and the actual correctness of the decision of the Ld. Court below is to

be considered in deciding Question No.(II) as already noted in the earlier

para 5. The answer to such question No.(II) can either be in the affirmative

or in the negative viz., that the said Court was not possessed of, or actually

possessed of the requisite Territorial jurisdiction. If the ultimate decision

happens to be that the Court in fact was possessed of such jurisdiction, then




                                9 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                  -10-

undoubtedly its refusal to enter into the merits of the objections would be a

culpable denial of the objector's Right to impeach the disputed award Under
Section 34
, and therefore, would certainly amount to having wrongly

'refused to set aside' such award. In such eventuality, the objector certainly

has the scope to invoke the appropriate remedy by way of an appeal against

such implicit 'refusal to set aside' the award by the Court, under a

misconception regarding its own jurisdiction.
19.    We are therefore, not convinced by the assertion of the Respondents

as made in Item 7.1 (Page 22) of their Written Submissions (Part A) to the

effect -
"The provisions of
Sections 5
&
37
of the Arbitration &
            Conciliation Act, 1996 must be given full effect regardless of the
            consequences that may follow. If the appeal is not provided under
            the Statute, a party cannot be heard to complain that it has been
            left remedyless."
Needless to say, such a sweeping conclusion is untenable in view of settled

maxim 'ubi jus ibi remedium' i.e. where there is a right, there must have to

be remedy, more particularly in such a case where the right of the claimant

is denied under any misconception of law. We therefore, conclude that there

is no bar to entertaining the present appeal by us, since the decision of the

Ld. Court below in not going into the merits of the objections, if at all it was

actually possessed of territorial jurisdiction to entertain the same would

amount to an incorrect 'refusal to set aside' a disputed award U/S 34 of the

Act, for which there is certainly no bar to filing of an appeal even U/S 37 of

the Act.
10 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                     -11-

Re: Question (II)
20.   Now we come to the real material question as to whether the

concerned Civil/Commercial Court exercising the territorial jurisdiction

over Faridabad did have such jurisdiction to entertain the objections
u/s 34
of the Act in view of the Arbitration Agreement. To this end, we first

proceed to take note of the citations relied upon by both the sides pertaining

to the question of the Territorial jurisdiction of a Court to entertain any

proceedings arising out of an Arbitration Agreement. The same are set out

in the succeeding Paragraphs and the directly applicable observations in

those citations have been consciously highlighted/emphasized with a view

to accentuate the stress on the relevant points made by the contesting sides.
21.   The decision of the Apex Court in 'BHARAT ALUMINIUM

COMPANY Versus KAISER ALUMINIUM TECHNICAL SERVICES

INC.' (2012) 9 Supreme Court Cases 552 has been relied upon by both the

sides. We therefore, proceed to set out its relevant Paragraphs 75 & 96 to

100 of the same as below -
"75. We are also unable to accept the submission of the learned
           counsel for the appellants that the
Arbitration Act, 1996
does not
           make seat of the arbitration as the centre of gravity of the
           arbitration. On the contrary, it is accepted by most of the experts
           that in most of the National Laws, arbitrations are anchored to the
           seat/place/situs of arbitration. Redfern in Para 3.54 concludes
           that "the seat of the arbitration is thus intended to be its centre of
           gravity." This, however, does not mean that all the proceedings of
           the arbitration have to take place at the seat of the arbitration. The
           arbitrators at times hold meetings at more convenient locations.
           This is necessary as arbitrators often come from different




                               11 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                  -12-

         countries. It may, therefore, on occasions be convenient to hold
         some of the meetings in a location which may be convenient to all.
         Such a situation was examined by the court of appeal in England in
         Naviera Amazonica Peruana S.A. Vs. Compania International de
         Seguros del Peru wherein at p. 121 it is observed as follows :
"The preceding discussion has been on the basis that there is
             only one "place" of arbitration. This will be the place chosen
             by or on behalf of the parties; and it will be designated in the
             arbitration agreement or the terms of reference or the minutes
             of proceedings or in some other way as the place or "seat" of
             the arbitration. This does not mean, however, that the Arbitral
             Tribunal must hold all its meetings or hearings at the place of
             arbitration. International commercial arbitration often involves
             people of many different nationalities, from many different
             countries. In these circumstances, it is by no means unusual for
             an Arbitral Tribunal to hold meetings--- or even hearings--- in
             a place other than the designated place of arbitration, either
             for its own convenience or for the convenience of the parties or
             their witnesses...... It may be more convenient for an Arbitral
             Tribunal sitting in one country to conduct a hearing in another
             country --- for instance, for the purpose of taking evidence.....
             In such circumstances each move of the Arbitral Tribunal does
             not of itself mean that the seat of arbitration changes. The seat
             of arbitration remains the place initially agreed by or on behalf
             of the parties."                            (emphasis supplied)
          These observations were subsequently followed in
Union of India
          v. McDonnell Douglas Corpn
.
96.
Section 2(1) (e)
of the Arbitration Act, 1996 reads as under:
         "2. Definitions - (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise
         requires -
(a) -(d)              *         *              *
(e) "Court" means the Principal Civil Court of Original
         Jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise




                                12 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                  -13-
of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to
         decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if
         the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include
         any civil court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil Court, or
         any Court of Small Causes;"
We are of the opinion, the term "subject-matter of the arbitration"
cannot be confused with "subject-matter of the suit". The term
         "subject-matter" in
Section 2(1)(e)
is confined to Part I. It has a
         reference and connection with the process of dispute resolution. Its
         purpose is to identify the courts having supervisory control over
         the arbitration proceedings. Hence, it refers to a court which
         would essentially be a court of the seat of the arbitration process.
         In our opinion, the provision in
Section 2(1)(e)
has to be construed
         keeping in view the provisions in
Section 20
which give recognition
         to party autonomy. Accepting the narrow construction as projected
         by the learned counsel for the appellants would, in fact, render
Section 20
nugatory. In our view, the legislature has intentionally
         given jurisdiction to two courts i.e. the court which would have
         jurisdiction where the cause of action is located and the courts
         where the arbitration takes place. This was necessary as on many
         occasions the agreement may provide for a seat of arbitration at a
         place which would be neutral to both the parties. Therefore, the
         courts where the arbitration takes place would be required to
         exercise supervisory control over the arbitral process. For
         example, if the arbitration is held in Delhi, where neither of the
         parties are from Delhi, (Delhi having been chosen as a neutral
         place as between a party from Mumbai and the other from
         Kolkata) and the tribunal sitting in Delhi passes an interim order
         under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act, 1996, the appeal against
         such an interim order under
Section 37
must lie to the Courts of
         Delhi being the Courts having supervisory jurisdiction over the
         arbitration proceedings and the tribunal. This would be
         irrespective of the fact that the obligations to be performed under
         the contract were to be performed either at Mumbai or at Kolkata,




                            13 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                   -14-

         and only arbitration is to take place in Delhi. In such
         circumstances, both the Courts would have jurisdiction, i.e., the
         Court within whose jurisdiction the subject-matter of the suit is
         situated and the courts within the jurisdiction of which the dispute
         resolution i.e. arbitration is located.
97. The definition of
Section 2(1)(e)
includes "subject-matter of
         the arbitration" to give jurisdiction to the courts where the
         arbitration takes place, which otherwise would not exist. On the
         other hand,
Section 47
which is in
Part II of the Arbitration Act,
         1996
dealing with enforcement of certain foreign awards has
         defined the term "court" as a court having jurisdiction over the
         subject-matter of the award. This has a clear reference to a court
         within whose jurisdiction the asset/person is located, against
         which/whom the enforcement of the international arbitral award is
         sought. The provisions contained in
Section 2(1)(e)
being purely
         jurisdictional in nature can have no relevance to the question
         whether Part I applies to arbitrations which take place outside
         India.
98. We now come to
Section 20
, which is as under:-
"20. Place of arbitration - (1) The parties are free to agree on
         the place of arbitration.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the
         place of arbitration shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal
         having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the
         convenience of the parties.
(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the
         Arbitral Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties,
         meet at any place it considers appropriate for consultation among
         its members, for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for
         inspection of documents, goods or other property."
A plain reading of
Section 20
leaves no room for doubt that where
         the place of arbitration is in India, the parties are free to agree to
         any "place" or "seat" within India, be it Delhi, Mumbai etc. In the




                             14 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                   -15-

         absence of the parties' agreement thereto,
Section 20(2)
authorizes
         the tribunal to determine the place/seat of such arbitration.
Section
         20(3)
enables the tribunal to meet at any place for conducting
         hearings at a place of convenience in matters such as consultations
         among its members for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties.
99.   The fixation of the most convenient "venue" is taken care of
         by
Section 20(3)
.
Section 20
, has to be read in the context of
Section 2(2)
, which places a threshold limitation on the
         applicability of Part I, where the place of arbitration is in India.
         Therefore,
Section 20
would also not support the submission of the
         extra-territorial applicability of Part I, as canvassed by the learned
         counsel for the appellants, so far as purely domestic arbitration is
         concerned.
100. True, that in an international commercial arbitration, having
         a seat in India, hearings may be necessitated outside India. In such
         circumstances, the hearing of the arbitration will be conducted at
         the venue fixed by the parties, but it would not have the effect of
         changing the seat of arbitration which would remain in India. The
         legal position in this regard is summed up by Redfern and Hunter,
         The Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration
         (1986) at p. 69 in the following passage under the heading "The
         Place of Arbitration":
"The preceding discussion has been on the basis that there
               is only one "place" of arbitration. This will be the place
               chosen by or on behalf of the parties; and it will be
               designated in the arbitration agreement or the terms of the
               reference or the minutes of proceedings or in some other way
               as the place or "seat" of the arbitration. This does not mean,
               however, that the Arbitral Tribunal must hold all its meetings
               or hearings at the place of arbitration. International
               commercial arbitration often involves people of many
               different nationalities, from many different countries. In these




                             15 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                    -16-

               circumstances, it is by no means unusual for an Arbitral
               Tribunal to hold meetings - or even hearings - in a place
               other than the designated place of arbitration, either for its
               own convenience or for the convenience of the parties or
               their witnesses.... It may be more convenient for an Arbitral
               Tribunal sitting in one country to conduct a hearing in
               another country - for instance, for the purpose of taking
               evidence..... In such circumstances, each move of the Arbitral
               Tribunal does not of itself mean that the seat of arbitration
               changes. The seat of the arbitration remains the place
               initially agreed by or on behalf of the parties."
This, in our view, is the correct depiction of the practical
          considerations and the distinction between "seat" [
Sections 20(1)
and
20(2)
] and "venue" [
Section 20(3)
]. We may point out here
          that the distinction between "seat" and "venue" would be quite
          crucial in the event, the arbitration agreement designates a foreign
          country as the "seat"/"place" of the arbitration and also select
          the
Arbitration Act, 1996
as the curial law/law governing the
          arbitration proceedings. It would be a matter of construction of the
          individual agreement to decide whether:
(i) the designated foreign "seat" would be read as in fact
              only providing for a "venue" / "place" where the hearings
              would be held, in view of the choice of the Arbitration Act,
              1996 as being the curial law - OR
(ii) the specific designation of a foreign seat, necessarily
              carrying with it the choice of that country's Arbitration /
              curial law, would prevail over and subsume the conflicting
              selection choice by the parties of the
Arbitration Act, 1996
.
Only if the agreement of the parties is construed to provide for the
         "seat" / "place" of Arbitration being in India -- would
Part I of
         the Arbitration Act, 1996
be applicable. If the agreement is held to
         provide for a "seat" / "place" outside India, Part I would be
         inapplicable to the extent inconsistent with the arbitration law of




                             16 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                    -17-

           the seat, even if the agreement purports to provide that the
Arbitration Act, 1996
shall govern the arbitration proceedings."
22.   The next reliance is from the Respondents' side on the decision of the

Supreme Court in 'INDUS MOBIL DISTRIBUTION PVT. LTD. Versus

DATAWIND INNOVATIONS PVT. LTD. AND ORS.' (2017) 7 SCC

678, in which it was observed -
"If the dispute cannot be amicably resolved by such officers
             within thirty (30) days from the date of referral, or within such
             longer time as mutually agreed, such dispute shall be finally
             settled by arbitration conducted under the provisions of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act
1996 by reference to a sole
             arbitrator which shall be mutually agreed by the parties. Such
             arbitration shall be conducted at Mumbai, in English language.
13. This Court reiterated that once the seat of arbitration has
              been fixed, it would be in the nature of an exclusive jurisdiction
              clause as to the courts which exercise supervisory powers over
              the arbitration. (See para 138)".
14.
In
Reliance Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2014) 7
             SCC 603, this statement of the law was echoed in several
             paragraphs. This judgment makes it clear that "juridical seat"
is nothing but the "legal place" of arbitration. It was held that
             since the juridical seat or legal place of arbitration was London,
             English courts alone would have jurisdiction over the
             arbitration thus excluding Part I of the Indian Act. (See paras
             36, 41, 45 to 60 and 76.1 and 76.2). This judgment was relied
             upon and followed by
Harmony Innovation Shipping Limited v.
             Gupta Coal India Ltd.
(2015) 9 SCC 172 (See paras 45 and 48).
In
Union of India v. Reliance Industries Ltd.
(2015) 10 SCC 213,
             this Court referred to all the earlier judgments and held that in




                              17 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                     -18-

              cases where the seat of arbitration is London, by necessary
              implication
Part I of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
is excluded as the supervisory jurisdiction of courts over the
              arbitration goes along with "seat".
19. A conspectus of all the aforesaid provisions shows that the
              moment the seat is designated, it is akin to an exclusive
              jurisdiction clause. On the facts of the present case, it is clear
              that the seat of arbitration is Mumbai and Clause 19 further
              makes it clear that jurisdiction exclusively vests in the Mumbai
              courts. Under the Law of Arbitration, unlike
the Code of Civil
              Procedure
which applies to suits filed in courts, a reference to
              "seat" is a concept by which a neutral venue can be chosen by
              the parties to an arbitration clause. The neutral venue may not
              in the classical sense have jurisdiction -- that is, no part of the
              cause of action may have arisen at the neutral venue and neither
              would any of the provisions of
Sections 16
to
21
of CPC be
              attracted. In arbitration law however, as has been held above,
              the moment "seat" is determined, the fact that the seat is at
              Mumbai would vest Mumbai courts with exclusive jurisdiction
              for purposes of regulating arbitral proceedings arising out of
              the agreement between the parties.             (Emphasis added)
23.   Thereafter, the Respondents' side has cited a Division Bench decision

of the Delhi High Court being 'NHPC LIMITED Versus HINDUSTAN

CONSTRUCTION LTD.' 221(2015) DELHI LAW TIMES 256 (DB), in

which matter, the appeal incidentally was filed by the present Appellant

itself, and the High Court held -
6. So, clearly, the Supreme Court in BALCO (supra) held that both
              Courts would have jurisdiction, that is, the Court within whose
              jurisdiction the "subject-matter of the suit" is situated and the
              Courts within the jurisdiction of which the dispute resolution
              (arbitration) is located. The seat of arbitration in the present




                               18 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                   -19-

                case was New Delhi and, going by the decision in BALCO
                (supra), this court would clearly have jurisdiction despite the
                fact that no part of the cause of action arose in New Delhi. Of
                course, the Courts where part of the cause action arose would
                also have jurisdiction but as the first petition [OMP 369/2014
                under
Section 34
] was filed in this Court, only this Court, in
                view of the provisions of
Section 42
of the said Act, would,
                thereafter, have jurisdiction."              (Emphasis added)
24.      Another relevant reliance from the Respondents' side is on the Single

Bench decision of this Court in
'Harish Goyal v. CITI Group Wealth

Advisers India Pvt. Ltd.
', 2015 SCC OnLine P&H 17853, in which it was

held -
"9. Since, I have already noticed above that the Arbitrator was
                appointed by the respondent under the Rules and Regulations of
                the National Stock Exchange and arbitration proceedings had
                already taken place in Delhi, I am of the view that the
                jurisdiction to entertain the objections will be only of Delhi
                Court ......................"               (Emphasis added)
25.      The sum and substance of the contentions so raised on behalf of the

Respondents in seeking to challenge the Territorial jurisdiction of the

Designated Court for Faridabad/Haryana can thus be summarized as

follows-
(i)That the competent Court to entertain any disputes arising
                out of Arbitration Agreement would be the one under whose
                supervisory jurisdiction the arbitration proceedings were
                held by the Tribunal;
(ii) That even though the competent Court within the meaning




                                      19 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                    -20-

              of
Section 2(e)
happens to be the one with jurisdiction to
              decide the questions 'the subject-matter of the arbitration' if
              the same had been subject-matter of the suit, still in view of
              the   over-riding     provisions   of    the
Arbitration    and
              Conciliation Act, 1996
which in itself is a complete Code as
              against the ordinary provisions
of the Code of Civil
              Procedure
, 1908 or the
Commercial Courts (Commercial
              Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
              Courts) Act, 2015
, the disputes arising out of Arbitration
              would appropriately have to be entertained in the Court
              concerned under the
Arbitration Act
itself; and,
(iii)That once the arbitral proceedings in pursuance of the
             original Agreement had all been conducted by the Arbitral
             Tribunal in Delhi, which was one of the two places
             identified for the purpose of Arbitration under Clause 67(3),
             the competency of the Court in Faridabad which otherwise
             was also mentioned as another place of arbitration,
             automatically stood ousted.
26.   The Appellant's reliance is on the decision of the Apex Court in

'ENERCON (INDIA) LIMITED AND OTHERS Versus ENERCON

GMBH AND ANOTHER' (2014) 5 Supreme Court Cases 1, the relevant

extracts of which are set out below -
"41. Mr. Nariman submitted that the interpretation proposed by the
           respondents that the venue London must be construed as seat is
           absurd. Neither party is British, one being German and the other
           being Indian. He submits that the respondents have accepted that the
           choice of law of the underlying agreement is Indian. But, if 'venue of
           arbitration' is to be interpreted as making London the seat of
           arbitration it would: (a) make the
English Act
applicable when it is
           not chosen by the parties; (b) would render the parties' choice of the




                              20 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                  -21-
Indian Arbitration Act, 1996
completely nugatory and otiose. It
         would exclude the application of
Chapter V of the Indian Arbitration
         Act, 1996
i.e. the curial law provisions and
Section 34
of the Indian
         Arbitration Act, 1996. On the other hand, interpretation propounded
         by the Appellants would give full and complete effect to the entire
         clause as it stands.
97. This now clears the decks for the crucial question i.e. is the
         'seat' of arbitration in London or in India. This is necessarily so as
         the location of the seat will determine the courts that will have
         exclusive jurisdiction to oversee the arbitration proceedings.
         Therefore, understandably, much debate has been generated before
         us on the question whether the use of the phrase "venue shall be in
         London" actually refers to designation of the seat of arbitration in
         London.
98. We find much substance in the submissions of Mr. Nariman that
         there are very strong indicators to suggest that the parties always
         understood that the seat of arbitration would be in India and
         London would only be the "venue" to hold the proceedings of
         arbitration. We find force in the submission made by the learned
         Senior Counsel for the appellants that the facts of the present case
         would make the ratio of law
laid down in
Naviera Amazonica
         Peruana S.A. (supra) applicable in the present case. Applying the
         closest and the intimate connection to arbitration, it would be seen
         that the parties had agreed that the provisions of the
Indian
         Arbitration Act, 1996
would apply to the arbitration proceedings.
         By making such a choice, the parties have made the curial law
         provisions contained in Chapters III, IV, V and VI of the Indian
         Arbitration Act, 1996 applicable. Even Dr. Singhvi had submitted
         that Chapters III, IV, V and VI would apply if the seat of arbitration
         is in India. By choosing that
Part I of the Indian Arbitration Act,
         1996
would apply, the parties have made a choice that the seat of
         arbitration would be in India.
Section 2(2)
of the Indian Arbitration




                                21 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                       -22-

             Act, 1996 provides that Part I "shall apply where the place of
             arbitration is in India". In BALCO, it has been categorically held
             that
Part I of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996
, will have no
             application, if the seat of arbitration is not in India. In the present
             case, London is mentioned only as a "venue" of arbitration which,
             in our opinion, in the facts of this case can not be read as the
             "seat" of arbitration."                              (Emphasis added)
27.   In 'YOGRAJ INFRASTRUCTURE LIMITED                             Versus SSANG

YONG         ENGINEERING            AND      CONSTRUCTION               COMPANY

LIMITED' (2011) 9 Supreme Court Cases 735, the Supreme Court

observed -
"39. Mr. Routray then proceeded to the next important question as
             to whether choice of the "seat of arbitration" by the parties confers
             exclusive jurisdiction on the courts of the seat of arbitration to
             entertain matters arising out of the contract. The learned counsel
             submitted that choice of the seat of arbitration empowered the
             courts within the seat of arbitration to have supervisory jurisdiction
             over such arbitration. Mr. Routray has referred to various decisions
             of the English courts which had laid down the proposition that even
             if the arbitration was governed by the law of another country, it
             would not entitle the objector to mount a challenge to the award in a
             country other than the seat of arbitration. It is not necessary to refer
             to the said judgments for a decision in this case.
45. As far as applicability of
Section 42
of the 1996 Act is
             concerned, the Jabalpur Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
             had held that by express agreement parties had ousted the
             jurisdiction of the Indian courts, while the arbitration proceedings
             were subsisting. Accordingly, the jurisdiction of the Indian courts
             stood ousted during the subsistence of the arbitration proceedings
             and, accordingly, it is only the laws of arbitration as governed by




                                 22 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                     -23-

           the SIAC Rules which would govern the arbitration proceedings
           along with the procedural law, which is the law of Singapore."
Of course, the appeal was finally dismissed by the Supreme Court in

view of the specific Agreement between the parties that the Arbitration

proceedings would be conducted in accordance with the Singapore

International Arbitration Centre (SIAC) Rules, on account of which there

could remain no scope to challenge the proceedings under the Indian Law.
28.   As such, the contentions from the Appellant's side can be summarized

as follows -
i) That in the present case, Delhi which had been chosen
                  as a place for arbitration along with Faridabad, can at
                  best be treated as having been only the 'venue' of
                  arbitration, which was chosen by the Tribunal and / or
                  the parties only for reasons of convenience, and the
                  choice of such venue does not automatically make it the
                  exclusive 'seat of arbitration', nor in any manner can
                  negate the competency of the Court at Faridabad which
                  was also agreed by the parties to be one of the
                  arbitration places alongwith Delhi;
ii) That even in view of the Judgment rendered in
'Bharat
                  Aluminium Company
(Supra), it has been settled by
                  the Supreme Court that both the Courts would have
                  jurisdiction i.e., the Court within whose jurisdiction the
                  subject-matter of the suit is situated, and the courts
                  within the jurisdiction of which the dispute resolution
                  i.e. arbitration is located.
29.   Before coming to a final decision on the question No.(II) at this stage,

we deem it appropriate to take note of the fact that in 'NHPC LIMITED'




                                  23 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                -24-

(Supra) mentioned in Para 22 earlier relied upon by the Respondents, the

Division Bench of Delhi High Court had itself held that not only the Delhi

High Court had jurisdiction in view of the decision in BALCO (Supra),

even though, no part of the cause of action had arisen in New Delhi, but of

course, the other Courts where the part of the cause of action arose, would

also have jurisdiction, which however, would get curtailed the moment the

first Petition was filed in the Delhi High Court, after which the exclusive

jurisdiction would be retained there. This reliance of the Respondents is ex

facie a double edged weapon. We say so for the reason that undoubtedly,

the Court at Faridabad would also have had jurisdiction to entertain the

application, since the Agreement between the parties, which itself is a part

of cause of action, was admittedly executed at Faridabad. Now in the

present case, it is the Commercial Court, Haryana exercising the Territorial

jurisdiction over Faridabad, in which the 'first petition' U/S 34 of the Act

was filed by the Appellant and therefore, from that stage, only the said

Court would have exclusive jurisdiction to entertain the matter as observed

by the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. We therefore, have no

hesitation in observing that this particular reliance from the Respondents'

side ironically supports the Appellant.
30.   Regarding the decision in
Harish Goyal
(Supra) mentioned in Para

23, it needs to be noted that in the said case, in terms of the Agreement

between the parties according to Clause 5.2, which has been reproduced in

Para 2 of the Single Judge's Judgment of this Court in Chandigarh, it was

specifically mentioned that Delhi would be 'seat of arbitration' for the States




                              24 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                -25-

of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttranchal, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab,

Jammu & Kashmir, Chandigarh (where the Appellant was based) and

Rajasthan. In view of the specific Agreement regarding the exclusive 'seat

of arbitration' at Delhi for the State/UT of Chandigarh, there was in any

case, no scope for the Court at Chandigarh to entertain the objections.

Consequently, this decision of the Ld. Single Judge of this Court again does

not help the Respondents.
31.   As already noted earlier, the decision in BALCO (Supra) has been

relied upon by both the sides and undoubtedly in the said case, the Apex

Court had held that not only the Court under whose Territorial jurisdiction,

the arbitral proceedings were held, would have jurisdiction to entertain the

objections, but also the Court in which a part of the cause of action had

arisen. The pending question before us at this stage therefore, gets confined

for a determination as to whether in the given facts and circumstances, and

in view of the original Agreement, in which two places for Arbitration had

been mentioned, out of which one of the places undisputedly also empowers

the local Court to entertain the proceedings, since in any case a part of cause

of action (by way of the Agreement itself) had arisen, and incidentally

where even the first application after completion of the arbitral proceedings

was filed, can be regarded as having been divested of its jurisdiction as the

arbitral proceedings themselves were held in the other place? In other

words, whether there is any indication that holding of proceedings

necessarily conferred upon New Delhi, the status of 'seat of arbitration' and

not just as the 'arbitral venue' ?
25 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                     -26-
32.   Having carefully considered the import of the above mentioned

decisions relied upon by both the sides, we proceed to record our final

observations concerning this question in the context of the facts and

circumstances of the present case in the following Paragraphs.
33.   It is to be considered first of all as to where the arbitral proceedings in

the case had commenced as according to
Section 21
of the Act, which

provides -
"21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings. -Unless otherwise
             agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in respect of a
             particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that
             dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by the respondent."
34.   Now in the present case, the request for reference to Arbitration was

undisputedly made by the Claimant/Respondent and therefore, the arbitral

proceedings in terms of
Section 21
automatically commenced when such

request for reference to arbitration was 'received by the Respondent'. Here

the 'Respondent' would mean none other than the present Appellant, who

was approached by the Claimant/present Respondent invoking the reference

to arbitration. Undeniably, the Registered Office of that 'Respondent'

(Appellant) happens to be in Faridabad, and therefore, when the request for

such reference was received by it (i.e. in Faridabad), the arbitral proceedings

are deemed to have commenced on that very date itself in terms of
Section

21
, which would also necessarily imply that the same commenced only at

the place where the request was received on the relevant date.
35.   In such circumstances, unless there had been any failure between the

parties 'to agree on the place of arbitration', which in any case, had already




                                26 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                -27-

been agreed upon in the original Agreement itself as being Faridabad/New

Delhi, there could have been no scope for the Arbitral Tribunal to

'determine the place of arbitration' within the meaning of
Section 21(2)
, and

therefore, the choice of Delhi for conducting the hearings without explicitly

recording that by virtue of such choice, Faridabad no longer remained as the

place of Arbitration, would clearly go to indicate that Delhi could not have

been anything more than the choice of a 'venue' for the purpose of

convenience, having been considered appropriate for consultation among

its members within the meaning of
Section 20(3)
of the Act.
36.
In this backdrop, the effect of our highlighted observations in the

beginning of
Para 98 of the Judgment of 'ENERCON (INDIA) LIMITED

AND OTHERS
' (Supra), would become a little more clear. The Supreme

Court had observed -
"98. We find much substance in the submissions of Mr. Nariman
           that there are very strong indicators to suggest that the parties
           always understood that the seat of arbitration would be in India
           and London would only be the "venue" to hold the proceedings of
           arbitration."
37.   As such, there is a little doubt in holding that for determining what

was or is the appropriate 'seat of arbitration', what the parties entering into

agreement had understood or intended, would be of essence in the dispute.

In other words, the final decision needs to be arrived at only after analyzing

what must have been the intentions behind the parties' agreeing to

mentioning of two different places in the original agreement. Undoubtedly,

Faridabad happens to be the natural choice of the Appellant, since its Head




                              27 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs                -28-

Office and Administrative Set up is based there, and so it would certainly

have preferred that any judicial recourse arising out of the arbitral

proceedings be conducted in that place which was most suitable to it. On the

other hand, the Respondents' side would appear to have their own vital

reasons for choosing Delhi as the place for such judicial recourse. However

admittedly, no part of the cause of action towards 'subject-matter of the

Suit', did actually take place in Delhi, since the alleged breaches in terms of

the agreement occurred in the North-Eastern State(s) where the Project was

meant to be completed, and the original agreement, which itself is a part of

the cause of action, was signed in Faridabad. As already noted in the last

two Paragraphs, while the arbitral Tribunal held its proceedings in Delhi, it

nowhere observed that by doing so, the choice of Faridabad as another

place of Arbitration, which had been also agreed upon by the parties before

hand, stood negated.
38.   This is not to suggest that there was any bar to invoking of the

judicial intervention in New Delhi where the proceedings were held. But the

fact of the matter is that no occasion whatsoever arose for either side to

invoke the supervisory control of the appropriate Court in New Delhi during

pendency of the arbitral proceedings, and after announcement of the final

Award, the arbitral Tribunal itself became functus officio. Consequently,

there can be no conceivable justification to hold that a challenge to the final

Award could not be made at either of the two places agreed upon by the

parties in their original Agreement, more so when in terms of
Section 21
as

reproduced earlier, those proceedings are deemed to have commenced at




                              28 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs               -29-

Faridabad where the request for reference to Arbitration was received, and

ultimately it was the competent Court for Faridabad itself, in which the first

ever petition concerning the arbitral proceedings had been filed, and in any

case the said Court undoubtedly also had the jurisdiction to entertain the

'subject-matter of the Suit' itself.
39.   We therefore, conclude by observing that in a case where more than

one place has been so agreed upon by the parties for the purpose of
Arbitration and the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
applies in all

those places, then in the absence of any specific/overt assertion by the

parties subsequently, or even by the arbitral Tribunal, holding its

proceedings at only one of those places to the effect that such place/venue

would henceforth be treated as the exclusive seat of arbitration, neither of

the contesting parties can be debarred from approaching the Court of its

choice in terms of the original Agreement, where the proceedings have

finally terminated after pronouncement of the arbitral Award, and

supervisory control of the Court under whose jurisdiction the proceedings

were held, has not been actually invoked at any earlier stage.
40.   For the aforesaid reasons, we find that the Ld. Commercial Court has

erred in holding that it is not possessed of Territorial jurisdiction to

entertain the objections U/S 34 of the Act filed by the Appellant. The

impugned Order passed by it is therefore, set aside. The Appeals

consequently stand allowed with a liberty to the Appellant to pursue its

objections again before the said Commercial Court for Faridabad at

Gurugram, which is directed to dispose off the same on merits as




                                29 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
FAO-CARB No.13 of 2018 along with connected cases with CMs           -30-

expeditiously as possible, and preferably within a period of four months

from the date of communication of this Order.
(SURYA KANT)               (SUDIP AHLUWALIA)
                                JUDGE                         JUDGE

September 12, 2018
AS/Bhumika


      1. Whether speaking/reasoned ?            Yes
      2. Whether reportable ?                   Yes




                               30 of 30
::: Downloaded on - 08-10-2018 07:28:57 :::
