Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 32 of
                         2019
Citation: SCC (India) Ltd.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/191783160/

[Cites
18
, Cited by
3
]
Delhi High Court
M/S T.K. Engineering Consortium Pvt. ... vs The Director (Projects) Rites Ltd. & ... on 8 March, 2021
Author:
Vibhu Bakhru
Bench:
Vibhu Bakhru
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                         %                                   Judgment delivered on: 08.03.2021

                         +      ARB.P. 553/2020

                         M/S T.K. ENGINEERING CONSORTIUM PVT.
                         LTD.                                                    ..... Petitioner

                                                   Versus

                         THE DIRECTOR (PROJECTS) RITES LTD.
                         & ANR.                                               ..... Respondents

                         Advocates who appeared in this case:
                         For the Petitioner              : Mr Rituraj Biswas, Ms Sujaya
                                                         : Bardhan, Mr Rituraj Choudhary and
                                                         : Mr Mayan Prasad, Advocates.
                         For the Respondents             : Mr G. S. Chaturvedi and
                                                         : Mr Shrinkar Chaturvedi, Advocates
                                                         : for RITES Ltd.
                                                         : Mr Ripu Daman Bhardwaj, CGSC
                                                         : for R-3.

                         CORAM
                         HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU

                                                     JUDGMENT
VIBHU BAKHRU, J
1.     The petitioner, T.K. Engineering Consortium Pvt. Ltd. (hereafter
                         'TKE'), is a company incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956
and
                         is engaged in providing Road Construction and other Engineering
                         services.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                             Page 1 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
2.     TKE has filed the present petition under
Section 11
of the
                         Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereafter the 'A&C Act'), inter
                         alia, praying that an arbitral tribunal be constituted to adjudicate
                         disputes that have arisen between the parties in relation to the Contract
                         Agreement dated 27.02.2017 for "Development of Integrated Check
                         Post at Dawki (Meghalaya) along Indo-Bangladesh Border".
3.     RITES Ltd. (hereafter 'RITES') had issued a Notice Inviting
                         Tender (NIT) on 01.08.2016 for "Development of Integrated Check Post
                         at Dawki (Meghalaya) along Indo-Bangladesh Border". TKE submitted
                         its bid pursuant to the aforesaid tender. The same was accepted and,
                         RITES issued a Letter of Award (LoA) dated 30.09.2016, on behalf of
                         respondent no.3 (Land Ports Authority of India), awarding the contract
                         to TKE. Thereafter, RITES also entered into the Contract Agreement
                         dated 27.02.2017 (hereafter 'the Agreement').
4.     TKE claims that the site in question was handed over on
                         18.11.2016. It immediately mobilized resources (men and machinery)
                         and commenced excavation work. TKE claims that the execution of the
                         works was hampered by RITES and/or for reasons attributable to it,
                         resulting in TKE suffering losses to the extent of ₹2,37,23,39,473/-. It
                         also claims that the work was stopped by the Border Guards of
                         Bangladesh (BGB) as it objected to any activity within forty metres of
                         the International Border. In addition, the forest department also objected
                         to setting up of the camp sites. There were also substantial delays on the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                               Page 2 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
part of RITES as it did not provide the necessary drawings and fronts
                         within the stipulated time for carrying out the work.
5.     On 07.01.2019, RITES issued a notice under Clause 3(ii) of the
                         General Clauses of the Contract (GCC) of the Agreement, calling upon
                         TKE to expedite the work failing which it would terminate the
                         Agreement. TKE responded to the said notice by its letter dated
                         09.01.2019 pointing out the reasons for the delay in execution of the
                         works.
6.     Notwithstanding the above, RITES terminated the Agreement by
                         a letter dated 17.01.2019. TKE challenged the termination letter dated
                         17.01.2019 before the High Court of Meghalaya by filing a petition
                         under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, being W.P. (C) 10/2019:
M/s T.K. Engineering Consortium Pvt. Ltd. v. The Union of India & Six
                         Others. The said petition was dismissed by an order dated 09.09.2019.
                         Aggrieved by the same, TKE filed a Special Leave Petition - SLP
                         (Civil) No. 26816 of 2019 - in the Supreme Court of India. The Supreme
                         Court, disposed of the said Special Leave Petition, by an order dated
                         22.11.2019 observing that "it would be appropriate for the petitioner to
                         avail of the alternative remedy by filing arbitration petition or civil suit,
                         as it may be advised". The Supreme Court also made it clear that the
                         observations made by the High Court, while disposing of the Writ
                         Petition, would not be taken into consideration by the arbitrator or the
                         Civil Court, wherever the claims are filed.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                  Page 3 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
7.     On 07.12.2019, TKE requested the Engineer-In-Charge (EIC) to
                         review the decision of terminating the Agreement and permit it to finish
                         the work or in the alternative, compensate TKE for the damages incurred
                         by it. The EIC rejected the said application by a letter dated 31.12.2019.
8.     TKE sent a letter dated 08.01.2020, in terms of Clause 25(1) of
                         the Agreement, appealing against the decision of the EIC. However, the
                         Appellate Authority (that is, the Executive Director (B&A), RITES
                         Ltd.) did not render a decision within a period of thirty days as
                         contemplated under the Agreement.
9.     Thereafter, by a notice dated 06.03.2020, TKE invoked the
                         arbitration clause under the Agreement. It suggested names of three
                         persons and, requested the Director (Projects), RITES to concur on the
                         appointment of any one of them as an arbitrator. TKE claims that the
                         same was necessary since RITES could not appoint an arbitrator, in view
                         of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Perkins Eastman Architects
                         DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd.
: Arbitration Application no. 32 of
                         2019, decided on 26.11.2019.
Submissions
10.    Mr Chaturvedi, learned counsel appearing for RITES opposed
                         the present petition on, essentially, three fronts. First, he submitted that
                         there was no notice invoking arbitration and the notice dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                 Page 4 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
06.03.2020, merely challenged the right of the Appointing Authority to
                         appoint the arbitrator.
11.    Second, he submitted that in terms of the arbitration clause, no
                         person other than the one appointed by the Appointing Authority could
                         act as an arbitrator. Since it is TKE's stand that the Appointing
                         Authority could not appoint an arbitrator, the parties could not be
                         referred to arbitration. He relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court
                         in Newton Engineering and Chemicals Limited vs. Indian Oil
                         Corporation: (2013) 4 SCC 44, in support of his contention.
He further
                         contended that the said decision was approved by the Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd. vs Energo Engineering Projects Ltd.
: (2017) 8 SCC 377.
12.    Third, he submitted that TKE had concealed that it had
                         approached the Meghalaya High Court and had elected to agitate the
                         dispute before a Civil Court. Further, the High Court had also rejected
                         TKE's claim on merit.
13.    Mr Biswas, learned counsel appearing for TKE countered the
                         aforesaid contentions. He relied upon the decision of this court in
B.E.
                         Billimoria & Co. Ltd v Rites Ltd. and Ors.
: Arb. P. 716/2016, decided
                         on 31.01.2017 and submitted that the issues raised by RITES are
                         covered by
the said decision
.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                               Page 5 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
Reasons and conclusion
14.        At the outset, it is necessary to refer to Clause 25 of the GCC, in
                         terms of which the parties had agreed to refer the disputes arising in
                         relation to the Agreement, to arbitration. The said Clause is set out
                         below: -
"CLAUSE 25
                               Settlement of Disputes & Arbitration
                                     Except where otherwise provided in the Contract all
                                     questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
                                     specifications, design, drawings and instructions
                                     herein before mentioned and as to the quality of
                                     workmanship or materials used on the work or as to
                                     any other question, claim, right, matter or thing
                                     whatsoever in any way arising out of or relating to the
                                     Contract,     designs,    drawings,    specifications,
                                     estimates, instructions orders or these conditions or
                                     otherwise concerning the works or the execution or
                                     failure to execute the same whether arising during the
                                     progress of the work or after the cancellation,
                                     termination, completion or abandonment thereof shall
                                     be dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
1)          If the Contractor considers any work demanded
                                           of him to be outside the requirements of the
                                           Contract, or disputes any drawings, record or
                                           decision given in writing by the Engineer on any
                                           matter in connection with or arising out of the
                                           Contract or carrying out of the work, to be
                                           unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15 days
                                           request the Engineer-in-Charge shall give his
                                           written instructions or decision within a period
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                    Page 6 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
of one month from the receipt of the
                                           Contractor's letter.
If the Engineer-in-Charge fails to give his
                                           instructions or decision in writing within the
                                           aforesaid period or if the Contractor is
                                           dissatisfied with the instructions or decision of
                                           the Engineer-in-Charge, the Contractor may,
                                           within 15 days of the receipt of the Engineer-in-
                                           Charge decision, appeal to the Appellate
                                           Authority specified in Schedule 'F' who shall
                                           afford an opportunity to the Contractor to be
                                           heard, if the latter so desires, and to offer
                                           evidence in support of his appeal. The Appellate
                                           Authority shall give his decision within 30 days
                                           of receipt of Contractor's appeal. If the
                                           Contractor is dissatisfied with this decision, the
                                           Contractor shall within a period of 30 days from
                                           receipt of the decision, give notice to the
                                           Appointing Authority specified in Schedule 'F'
                                           for appointment of arbitrator failing which
the
                                           said decision
shall be final binding and
                                           conclusive and not referable to adjudication by
                                           the arbitrator.
2)            Except where the decision has become final,
                                           binding and conclusive in terms of Sub Para (1)
                                           above, disputes or difference shall be referred
                                           for adjudication through arbitration by a sole
                                           arbitrator appointed by the Appointing
                                           Authority. The selection of Arbitrator by the
                                           Appointing Authority will be governed by the
                                           fact whether the dispute is (i) between two
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                    Page 7 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
Public Sector Enterprises or (ii) between a
                                           Public Sector Enterprise and a Government
                                           Department or (iii) Otherwise.
In case the dispute does not fall under item (i) or
(ii) of this Para the Appointing Authority, shall
                                           appoint the sole Arbitrator. Within 30 days of
                                           receipt of notice from the Contractor to refer the
                                           dispute for Arbitration, the Appointing
                                           Authority stipulated in Schedule F shall send to
                                           the Contractor a list of three serving officers of
                                           RITES of appropriate status depending on the
                                           total value of claim, who have not been
                                           connected with the work under the Contract. The
                                           Contractor shall, within 15 days of receipt of this
                                           list select and communicate to the Appointing
                                           Authority, the name of one officer from the list
                                           who shall then be appointed as the Sole
                                           Arbitrator. If the Contractor fails to
                                           communicate his selection of name within the
                                           stipulated period, the Appointing Authority shall
                                           without delay, select one officer from the list and
                                           appoint him as the Sole Arbitrator.
3)            In case the dispute falls under item (i) or (ii) of
                                           Sub Para (2) above, the Appointing Authority
                                           shall refer the dispute for Arbitration by one of
                                           the Arbitrators in the Department of Public
                                           Enterprises to be nominated by the Secretary to
                                           the Govt. of India in charge of the Department
                                           of Public Enterprises.
The Arbitration &
                                           Conciliation Act
1996 shall not be applicable to
                                           the Arbitration in such a case. The Award of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                     Page 8 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
Arbitrator shall be binding upon the parties to
                                           the dispute, provided however that any party
                                           aggrieved by such award may make a further
                                           reference for setting aside or revision of the
                                           Award to the Law Secretary, Department of
                                           Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice, Govt.
                                           of India. Upon such reference, the dispute shall
                                           be decided by the Law Secretary or the Special
                                           Secretary/Additional Secretary when so
                                           authorized by the Law Secretary, whose
                                           decision shall bind the parties finally and
                                           conclusively. The Parties to the dispute will
                                           share equally the cost of Arbitration as intimated
                                           by the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator shall make a
                                           speaking Award and the Award may be
                                           published on plain paper. In the event of the Sole
                                           Arbitrator dying, neglecting or refusing to act or
                                           being unable to act for any reason, it shall be
                                           lawful for the Secretary to the Govt. of India in
                                           charge of the Department of Public Enterprises
                                           to nominate another person in place of the
                                           outgoing Arbitrator to act as Sole Arbitrator. The
                                           new Arbitrator as appointed shall as far as
                                           practicable proceed from the stage where it was
                                           left by the outgoing Arbitrator.
It is a term of this Contract that the party
                                           invoking arbitration shall give a list of disputes
                                           with amount claimed in respect of each such
                                           dispute along with the notice for appointment of
                                           arbitrator and giving reference to the rejection
                                           by the Appellate Authority of the appeal in the
                                           form at Annexure 'F'. It is a term of this Contract
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                     Page 9 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
that "Excepted matters" or matters where the
                                           decision of the Engineer-in-Charge or any
                                           higher authority has been stipulated as "Final
                                           and Binding" in various Clauses of Contract,
                                           stand specifically excluded from the purview of
                                           Arbitration Clause.
It is also a term of this Contract that no person
                                           other than a person appointed by such
                                           Appointing Authority as aforesaid should act as
                                           arbitrator and if for any reason that is not
                                           possible, the matter shall not be referred to
                                           arbitration at all. It is also a term of this Contract
                                           that if the Contractor does not make any demand
                                           for appointment of arbitrator in respect of any
                                           claims in writing as aforesaid within 120 days of
                                           receiving the intimation from the Engineer-in-
                                           Charge that the final bill is ready for payment,
                                           the claim of the Contractor and the Employer
                                           shall be deemed to have been waived and
                                           absolutely barred and the Employer shall be
                                           discharged and released of all liabilities under
                                           the Contract in respect of these claims."
15.    The contention that TKE has not invoked the arbitration clause
                         is, plainly, unmerited. The notice dated 06.03.2020 clearly indicates
                         that the same is a "Notice of Intention to commence Arbitration under
                         Clause 25(1) of the General Conditions of Contract". Merely because
                         TKE has not called upon the Appointing Authority (Executive Director
                         of RITES) to appoint an arbitrator, but instead, suggested that RITES
                         concurs on appointment of an arbitrator, cannot be construed to mean
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                        Page 10 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
that TKE has not invoked the arbitration clause. It is also relevant to
                         note that on 13.03.2020, TKE sent another notice seeking to correct an
                         error that had crept in the said notice inasmuch as, TKE had wrongly
                         calculated the total amount of its claims as ₹237,23,39,473.14/- instead
                         of ₹57,11,47,927.91/-. The said notice also clearly indicates that the
                         earlier notice dated 06.03.2020 was a "Notice of Intention to commence
                         Arbitration under Clause 25(1) of GCC".
16.    Concededly, RITES had not taken any steps for ensuring that an
                         arbitral tribunal be constituted pursuant to the notice served by TKE. In
                         fact, it had not responded to TKE's notice dated 06.03.2020 (as
                         corrected by a letter dated 13.03.2020). Thus, TKE cannot be faulted
                         for preferring the present application under
Section 11
of the A&C Act.
17.    The next question to be addressed is whether the parties can be
                         referred to arbitration in view of TKE's stand that the Appointing
                         Authority, cannot appoint an arbitrator.
18.    The respondents do not dispute that in view of the decision of the
                         Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd.
(supra) and
Perkins
(supra), the
                         Appointing Authority cannot appoint an arbitrator. Thus, the import of
                         the contentions advanced on behalf of RITES is that in view of the
                         aforesaid decisions, the arbitration agreement stands frustrated since the
                         third sub-paragraph of paragraph (3) of Clause 25 of the GCC expressly
                         provides that no person other than a person appointed by the Appointing
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 11 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
Authority should act as an arbitrator and, if the same is not possible, the
                         matter cannot be referred to arbitration.
19.     Clause 25 of the GCC, undisputedly, embodies an arbitration
                         agreement and the parties have agreed to refer their disputes (except the
                         excepted matters), to arbitration. The controversy relates to the
                         procedure for appointment of the arbitrator under the said Clause, which
                         provides that the matters would be referred to a Sole Arbitrator
                         appointed by the Appointing Authority. And, the same would be from
                         a list of three serving officers of RITES of appropriate status, as may be
                         provided by the Appointing Authority and as selected by TKE. As
                         mentioned above, this is no longer permissible in view of
Section 12(5)
of the A&C Act read with the Seventh Schedule of the A&C Act. A
                         serving employee of RITES would be disqualified as RITES is an
                         interested party in the disputes that have arisen and thus, its employee
                         cannot be appointed as an arbitrator. However, this part of the
                         arbitration clause is not inseverable and, does not in any manner dilute
                         the agreement between the parties to refer the disputes to arbitration.
                         Thus, the said part of the arbitration clause is required to be treated as
                         severable and since it falls foul of
Section 12(5)
of the A&C Act, the
                         procedure insofar as it requires that the disputes be referred to one of
                         the three serving officers, as suggested by the Appointing Authority, is
                         liable to be ignored. This was also the view of this Court in
B.E.
                         Billimoria & Co.
(supra).
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 12 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
20.    The next aspect of the matter is whether the disability of the
                         appointing authority to appoint an arbitrator would frustrate the
                         arbitration agreement.
21.    After      enactment   of   the
Arbitration   and   Conciliation
                         (Amendment) Act, 2015
, certain persons are ineligible to act as
                         arbitrators in circumstances that are set out in the Seventh Schedule of
                         the A&C Act. Although such persons are ineligible to act as arbitrators,
                         the parties can waive the said objection after disputes have arisen.
                         Therefore, per se, it is not impossible for such persons to act as
                         arbitrators. They can do so if objections to their independence and
                         impartiality are waived of in writing, in terms of the proviso to
Section
                         12(5)
of the A&C Act.
22.    The Appointing Authority is an Executive Director of RITES and
                         in view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd.
(supra) and
Perkins
(supra), the Appointing Authority cannot appoint an arbitrator,
                         without the written consent of TKE after disputes have arisen. However,
                         this Court is of the view that the same does not mean that the arbitration
                         clause itself stands nullified. The term that no person other than the
                         person appointed by Appointing Authority should act as an arbitrator,
                         is no longer valid, in view of the aforementioned decisions of the
                         Supreme Court. The next limb of the said term that in case it is not
                         possible for such person to act as an arbitrator, the matter would not be
                         referred to arbitration is intended to ensure that the arbitration is
                         conducted only by an arbitrator appointed by the Appointing Authority.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 13 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
This term cannot be read as a standalone term but must be read in
                         conjunction with the term of the contract requiring the Appointing
                         Authority to appoint an arbitrator. However, since the said term has
                         been rendered inoperative by virtue of the amendments introduced in
Section 12
of the A&C Act by the
Arbitration and Conciliation
                         (Amendment) Act, 2015
as interpreted by the Supreme Court in
TRF
                         Ltd.
(supra) and
Perkins
(supra), the said term must also considered as
                         rendered inoperative rather than as a term that invalidates the arbitration
                         agreement.
23.    It is important to bear in mind that the decisions of the Supreme
                         Court in
TRF Ltd
(supra) and
Perkins
(supra) were rendered in the
                         context of the amendments to
Section 12
of the A&C Act as introduced
                         by the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
.
24.    Sub-section (1) of
Section 12
of the A&C Act was substituted
                         and Sub-section (5) of
Section 12
of the A&C Act was introduced in
Section 12
of the A&C Act. The said Sub-sections read as under:
"12. Grounds for challenge.--
(1) When a person is approached in connection with his
                                possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in
                                writing any circumstances,--
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past
                                or present relationship with or interest in any of the parties
                                or in relation to the subject matter in dispute, whether
                                financial, business, professional or other kind, which is
                                likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
                                independence or impartiality; and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                   Page 14 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient
                                time to the arbitration and in particular his ability to
                                complete the entire arbitration within a period of twelve
                                months.
Explanation 1.--The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule
                                shall guide in determining whether circumstances exist
                                which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence
                                or impartiality of an arbitrator.
Explanation 2.--The disclosure shall be made by such
                                person in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule.]
                                  *           *             *             *         *
                                (5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary,
                                any person whose relationship, with the parties or counsel
                                or the subject matter of the dispute, falls under any of the
                                categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be
                                ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator:
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes
                                having arisen between them, waive the applicability of this
                                sub-section by an express agreement in writing."
25.
The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
was
                         enacted pursuant to the recommendations made by the Law
                         Commission of India in its Report No. 246. The said Report had, inter
                         alia, highlighted the necessity to introduce statutory provisions for
                         ensuring neutrality of arbitrators. The Law Commission of India was
                         guided by the 'IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
                         Arbitration' to set out circumstances, which would give rise to
                         justifiable doubts as to the impartiality and independence of arbitrators.
                         The Fifth and Seventh Schedule of the A&C Act which were introduced
                         in the A&C Act were based on the orange and red lists of the said
                         Guidelines.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                  Page 15 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
26.    The Law Commission had highlighted that independence and
                         impartiality of arbitrators was critical to the entire process of arbitration.
                         The legislative intent of introducing the said statutory amendments was
                         to ensure that arbitration is conducted by an arbitral tribunal, which is
                         not only impartial and independent but is also perceived to be such.
27.
In
Voestalpine Schienen GMBH v. Delhi Metro Rail
                         Corporation Limited
: (2017) 4 SCC 665, the Supreme Court had noted
                         the recommendations made by the Law Commission of India in its 246th
                         Report and had explained the legislative intent of introducing the
                         statutory amendments in
Section 12
of the A&C Act. Paragraph no. 20
                         of
the said decision
encapsulates the Court's view regarding the
                         importance of independence and impartiality of the arbitrators and
                         Paragraph no. 25 explains the object of amending
Section 12
of the
                         A&C Act. The said paragraphs are set out below:
"20. Independence and impartiality of the arbitrator are
                                  the hallmarks of any arbitration proceedings. Rule
                                  against bias is one of the fundamental principles of
                                  natural justice which applied to all judicial and quasi-
                                  judicial proceedings. It is for this reason that
                                  notwithstanding the fact that relationship between the
                                  parties to the arbitration and the arbitrators themselves
                                  are contractual in nature and the source of an arbitrator's
                                  appointment is deduced from the agreement entered into
                                  between the parties, notwithstanding the same non-
                                  independence and non-impartiality of such arbitrator
                                  (though contractually agreed upon) would render him
                                  ineligible to conduct the arbitration. The genesis behind
                                  this rational is that even when an arbitrator is appointed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                   Page 16 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
in terms of contract and by the parties to the contract, he
                                  is independent of the parties. Functions and duties
                                  require him to rise above the partisan interest of the
                                  parties and not to act in, or so as to further, the particular
                                  interest of either parties. After all, the arbitrator has
                                  adjudicatory role to perform and, therefore, he must be
                                  independent of parties as well as impartial. The United
                                  Kingdom Supreme Court has beautifully highlighted this
                                  aspect in Hashwani v. Jivraj [Hashwani v. Jivraj, (2011)
                                  1 WLR 1872 : 2011 UKSC 40] in the following words:
(WLR p. 1889, para 45)

                                           "45. ... the dominant purpose of appointing an
                                           arbitrator or arbitrators is the impartial resolution of
                                           the dispute between the parties in accordance with
                                           the terms of the agreement and, although the
                                           contract between the parties and the arbitrators
                                           would be a contract for the provision of personal
                                           services, they were not personal services under the
                                           direction of the parties."
xxxx                          xxxx                xxxx
25.
Section 12
has been amended with the objective to
                                  induce neutrality of arbitrators viz. their independence
                                  and impartiality. The amended provision is enacted to
                                  identify the "circumstances" which give rise to
                                  "justifiable doubts" about the independence or
                                  impartiality of the arbitrator. If any of those
                                  circumstances as mentioned therein exists, it will give
                                  rise to justifiable apprehension of bias.
The Fifth
                                  Schedule to the Act
enumerates the grounds which may
                                  give rise to justifiable doubts of this nature. Likewise,
                                  the Seventh Schedule mentions those circumstances
                                  which would attract the provisions of sub-section (5) of
Section 12
and nullify any prior agreement to the
                                  contrary. In the context of this case, it is relevant to
                                  mention that only if an arbitrator is an employee, a
                                  consultant, an advisor or has any past or present business
                                  relationship with a party, he is rendered ineligible to act
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                       Page 17 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
as an arbitrator. Likewise, that person is treated as
                                  incompetent to perform the role of arbitrator, who is a
                                  manager, director or part of the management or has a
                                  single controlling influence in an affiliate of one of the
                                  parties if the affiliate is directly involved in the matters
                                  in dispute in the arbitration. Likewise, persons who
                                  regularly advised the appointing party or affiliate of the
                                  appointing party are incapacitated. A comprehensive list
                                  is enumerated in Schedule 5 and Schedule 7 and
                                  admittedly the persons empanelled by the respondent are
                                  not covered by any of the items in the said list."
28.
In
TRF Ltd.
(supra), the Supreme Court had concluded that a
                         person who is ineligible by operation of law to act as an arbitrator would
                         also be ineligible to nominate another person to act as an arbitrator. The
                         said decision was founded on the express language and legislative intent
                         of
Section 12(5)
of the A&C Act.
29.
In
Perkins
(supra), the Supreme Court, following the decision in
TRF Ltd.
(supra) interpreted the provisions of
Section 12(5)
of the
                         A&C Act, in an expansive manner and held that even in cases where
                         the power to appoint an arbitrator was vested with the person who was
                         otherwise ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator, it would be
                         impermissible for him to exercise the same in view of the ineligibility
                         referred to in TRF Ltd. Thus, a person who is ineligible to act as an
                         arbitrator, would also not be eligible to appoint anyone else as an
                         arbitrator. It is relevant to refer to the following observations made by
                         the Court in
the said decision
:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                  Page 18 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
"But, in a case where only one party has a right to
                                nominate a sole arbitrator, its choice will always have an
                                element of exclusivity in determining or charting the
                                course for dispute resolution. Naturally, the person who
                                has an interest in the outcome or decision of the dispute
                                must not have the power to appoint a sole arbitrator. That
                                has to be taken as the essence of the amendments brought
                                in by the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
                                2015
(Act III of 2016) and recognised by the decision of
                                the Court in TRF."
30.    Considered in the light of the aforesaid object of introducing the
                         amendments under
Section 12(5)
of the A&C Act, the contention that
                         the Arbitration Clause must be construed to either exist in derogation of
                         the legislative intent or not at all, must be rejected. Considering that
                         RITES had agreed that the subject disputes are required to be referred
                         to arbitration, it could not be heard to contend that the said arbitration
                         would either be conducted in a manner which may compromise the
                         fundamental requirement of an independent and an impartial process or
                         not at all. While the plain language of the arbitration clause does read
                         to mean that if it is impossible for the arbitrator appointed by the
                         Appointing Authority to act as such, the disputes would not be referred
                         to arbitration but considering in the context of the entire clause, this
                         term has to be construed as only adjunct to the procedure that requires
                         the Appointing Authority to appoint an arbitrator. It must, therefore,
                         perish if the said procedure is contrary to law. Once it is held that the
                         Appointing Authority is ineligible to appoint an arbitrator, the adjunct
                         to that clause that no other person should act as an arbitrator and the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 19 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
arbitration must not be held without such person acting as an arbitrator,
                         must also be held to be invalid.
31.    In the present case, the Appointing Authority is concededly,
                         ineligible to act as an arbitrator by virtue of
Section 12(5)
of the A&C
                         Act.
In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd.
(supra),
                         he cannot nominate another person to act as an arbitrator. However,
                         that cannot be construed to mean that the entire arbitration agreement
                         would be frustrated.
32.    The foundation of an arbitration agreement is the willingness of
                         the parties to have the inter se disputes adjudicated by an independent
                         and impartial arbitrator. A condition imposed that disputes cannot be
                         referred to arbitration except on the condition that only one party retains
                         the authority to determine the mandate of the arbitral tribunal, would
                         militate against the said fundamental premise that arbitration is an
                         alternate mechanism for a just and fair adjudication of disputes.
33.    It is also necessary to bear in mind that the legislative policy is to
                         encourage arbitration, thus, any interpretation that would nullify an
                         arbitration clause must be avoided.
In
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd.
                         v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc. & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 641, the
                         Supreme Court had expressly observed that as under:
"96. Examined from the point of view of the legislative
                                  object and the intent of the framers of the statute, i.e., the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                    Page 20 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
necessity to encourage arbitration, the Court is required
                                  to exercise its jurisdiction in a pending action, to hold the
                                  parties to the arbitration clause and not to permit them to
                                  avoid their bargain of arbitration by bringing civil action
                                  involving multifarious cause of action, parties and
                                  prayers."
34.    In view of the legislative intent, it is necessary to construe the
                         arbitration clause in a manner so as to sustain the same. Therefore, the
                         terms and conditions that fall foul of the Statute must, insofar as
                         possible, be severed.
35.    It is also relevant to note that in
Perkins
(supra), the controversy
                         also centered around an arbitration clause, which expressly provided
                         that no person other than a person appointed by the Chairman cum
                         Managing Director of HSCC should act as an arbitrator.
36.    The controversy can also be addressed from another perspective
                         and that is the power of the court to derogate from the procedure as
                         contemplated under the arbitration clause.
37.
In
North Eastern Railway and Ors. v. Tripple Engineering
                         Works
: (2014) 9 SCC 288, the Supreme Court observed that the
                         principle that the court must appoint an arbitrator as per the contract
                         between the parties had seen a significant erosion. The relevant extract
                         of
the said decision
is set out below:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                   Page 21 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
"6. The "classical notion" that the High Court while
                                exercising its power under
Section 11
of the Arbitration
                                and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter for short "the
                                Act") must appoint the arbitrator as per the contract
                                between the parties saw a significant erosion in ACE
                                Pipeline Contracts (P) Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum Corpn.
                                Ltd. [ACE Pipeline Contracts (P) Ltd. v. Bharat
                                Petroleum Corpn. Ltd., (2007) 5 SCC 304] , wherein this
                                Court had taken the view that though the contract between
                                the parties must be adhered to, deviations therefrom in
                                exceptional circumstances would be permissible.
A more
                                significant development had come in a decision that
                                followed soon thereafter in
Union of India v. Bharat
                                Battery Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. [Union of India
v. Bharat
                                Battery Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd., (2007) 7 SCC 684] wherein
                                following a three-Judge Bench decision in Punj Lloyd
                                Ltd. v. Petronet MHB Ltd. [Punj Lloyd Ltd. v. Petronet
                                MHB Ltd., (2006) 2 SCC 638] , it was held that once an
                                aggrieved party files an application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act to the High Court, the opposite party would lose
                                its right of appointment of the arbitrator(s) as per the terms
                                of the contract. The implication that the Court would be
                                free to deviate from the terms of the contract is obvious.
7. The apparent dichotomy in
ACE Pipeline [ACE
                                Pipeline Contracts (P) Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum Corpn.
                                Ltd.
, (2007) 5 SCC 304] and Bharat Battery Mfg. Co. (P)
                                Ltd. [Union of India v. Bharat Battery Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd.,
                                (2007) 7 SCC 684] was reconciled by a three-Judge
                                Bench of this Court in
Northern Railway Admn., Ministry
                                of Railway v. Patel Engg. Co. Ltd. [Northern Railway
                                Admn.
,
Ministry of Railway v. Patel Engg. Co. Ltd.
,
                                (2008) 10 SCC 240] , wherein the jurisdiction of the High
                                Court under
Section 11(6)
of the Act was sought to be
                                emphasised by taking into account the expression "to take
                                the necessary measure" appearing in sub-section (6) of
Section 11
and by further laying down that the said
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                  Page 22 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
expression has to be read along with the requirement of
                                sub-section (8) of
Section 11
of the Act.
38.    The aforesaid passages were referred to by the Supreme Court in
                         its later decision in
Union of India v. U.P. State Bridge Corpn. Ltd.
:
(2015) 2 SCC 52 although in a different context.
In
Voestalpine
                         Schienen GMBH
(supra), the Supreme Court referred to various other
                         decisions including the aforesaid decision and observed that:
"there are a number of
judgments rendered by the
                               Supreme Court
prior to amendment of
Section 12
of the
                               A&C Act "where courts have appointed the arbitrators,
                               giving a go-by to the agreed arbitration clause in certain
                               contingencies and situations, having regard to the
                               provisions of unamended
Section 11(8)
of the Act which,
                               inter alia, provided that while appointing the arbitrator,
                               Chief Justice, or the person or the institution designated by
                               him, shall have regard to the other conditions as are likely
                               to secure the appointment of an independent and impartial
                               arbitrator."
39.    At this stage, it is also relevant to refer to the decision of the
                         Supreme Court in Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. & Ors. v. M/s Raja
                         Transport (P) Ltd.: (2009) 8 SCC 520. The said decision was rendered
                         in an appeal against an order passed by the Chief Justice of the
                         Uttaranchal High Court in an application filed under
Section 11(6)
of
                         the A&C Act appointing a former Judge of that Court as the Sole
                         Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                 Page 23 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
40.    It is necessary to note that
the said decision
was rendered prior to
                         the enactment of the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
                         2015
. The Chief Justice of the Uttaranchal High Court accepted the
                         respondent's application for appointment of an independent arbitrator
                         for essentially two reasons. First, that the Director (Marketing) of the
                         appellant was an employee and it was presumed that he would not act
                         independently or impartially. And second, that the appellant had failed
                         to act as was required under the agreed procedure.
41.    In the aforesaid context, the Supreme Court framed the following
                         questions for its consideration:
"(i) Whether the learned Chief Justice was justified in
                               assuming that when an employee of one of the parties to
                               the dispute is appointed as an arbitrator, he will not act
                               independently or impartially?
(ii) In what circumstances, the Chief Justice or his
                               designate can ignore the appointment procedure or the
                               named arbitrator in the arbitration agreement, to appoint an
                               arbitrator of his choice?
(iii) Whether respondent herein had taken necessary steps
                               for appointment of arbitrator in terms of the agreement,
                               and the appellant had failed to act in terms of the agreed
                               procedure, by not referring the dispute to its Director
                               (Marketing) for arbitration?"
42.    Insofar as the first question is concerned, the Supreme Court held
                         that a person being an employee of one of the parties cannot per se be a
                         bar to his appointment as an arbitrator. And, the learned Chief Justice
                         was not justified in his assumption of bias. This decision would not hold
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 24 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
good after the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
had
                         come into force.
43.    Insofar as the second question is concerned - that is, whether the
                         Chief Justice could ignore the procedure and appoint an arbitrator of his
                         own choice - the Court held that in cases where there is material that
                         creates a reasonable apprehension that the person mentioned in the
                         arbitration agreement as an arbitrator is not likely to act independently
                         or impartially, or if the named person is not available, then the Chief
                         Justice or his designate may, after recording reasons for not following
                         the agreed procedure of referring the disputes to the named arbitrator,
                         appoint an independent arbitrator in accordance with
Section 11(8)
of
                         the A&C Act.
44.    It is material to note that the arbitration agreement which fell for
                         consideration before the Supreme Court
in that case
also provided that
                         "no person other than the Director, Marketing or a person nominating
                         by such Director, Marketing of the Corporation as aforesaid shall act
                         as Arbitrator". The Court held that the said condition would interfere
                         with the power of the Chief Justice under
Section 11(8)
of the A&C Act
                         to appoint a suitable person as an arbitrator in appropriate
                         cases. Therefore, the said portion of the clause was liable to be ignored
                         as being contrary to the A&C Act.
45.    The Supreme Court held that a Court could appoint an
                         independent arbitrator in cases where it found that the arbitrator named
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 25 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
in the arbitration agreement or to be appointed as per the procedure as
                         agreed under the arbitration agreement, would not be impartial or
                         independent. This reasoning has resonated in several decisions
                         delivered thereafter.
46.    This principle would hold good equally in the context of the
                         present case. After the enactment of the
Arbitration and Conciliation
                         (Amendment) Act, 2015
, it is statutorily recognized that circumstances
                         as set out in Schedule Seven of the A&C Act would render a person
                         ineligible to act as an arbitrator on account of justifiable doubts as to his
                         impartiality and independence. Plainly, under such circumstances, the
                         Court would have the power under
Section 11
of the A&C Act to
                         appoint an independent and impartial arbitrator. As held in Indian Oil
                         Corporation Ltd. (supra) even in cases where the arbitration agreement
                         provides for a procedure for appointment of an arbitrator, a court could
                         appoint an independent arbitrator if there were reasonable grounds to
                         doubt the independence and impartiality of the named arbitrator to be
                         appointed in accordance with the procedure as stipulated under the
                         arbitration agreement.
47.    Thus, the very term which provides that no other person other
                         than the one appointed by the Appointing Authority should act as an
                         arbitrator and in absence of the same, the disputes would not be referred
                         to arbitration, must be held contrary to the basic principles on which an
                         arbitration agreement is founded and therefore, is liable to be ignored.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                  Page 26 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
48.    This Court is also of the view that it is not permissible for the
                         respondents to now contend that the parties cannot be referred to
                         arbitration. This is because this would run contrary to their stand before
                         the High Court of Meghalaya in M/s T.K. Engineering Consortium
                         Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India and Six Ors.: W. P. (C) No. 10/2019.
49.    TKE had filed the said petition challenging the termination letter
                         dated 17.01.2019 issued by RITES whereby the Agreement was
                         terminated. The said case was contested by RITES. One of the grounds
                         on which the said petition was resisted was that there is an arbitration
                         agreement and TKE should be relegated to contractual remedies.
50.    The learned ASG appearing for the respondents in that case had
                         referred to Clause 25 of the Agreement and had contended that the Writ
                         Petition filed by TKE should be dismissed as it had recourse to other
                         remedies. This contention was accepted by the High Court as is
                         apparent from the operative part of its order dated 09.09.2019. Whilst
                         dismissing the petition, the Court had held that TKE would be at "liberty
                         to take recourse to other remedies as provided in the contractual
                         agreement".
51.    Having taken a stand that TKE should take recourse to
                         arbitration, the respondents cannot now be permitted to contend that the
                         arbitration clause is frustrated as the Appointing Authority cannot
                         appoint an arbitrator in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd
(supra) and
Perkins
(supra).
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 27 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
52.    The decision in the case of Newton Engineering and Chemicals
                         Limited (supra) is also of little assistance to the respondents. In that
                         case, the parties had agreed to refer the disputes to ED (NR) of the
                         respondent corporation. When the disputes arose between the parties,
                         the office of the respondent corporation (Indian Oil Corporation) had
                         been reorganized and a post of ED (NR) did not exist. Indian Oil
                         Corporation offered that the disputes be referred to the Director
                         (Marketing), however, that was not acceptable to the appellant therein.
                         It is in the aforesaid context that the Supreme Court held that the
                         disputes could not be referred to arbitration. It is material to note that
                         the said decision was rendered before enactment of the
Arbitration and
                         Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
.
The Supreme Court in
TRF Ltd.
(supra) referred to the aforesaid decision and observed as under:
"The aforesaid decision clearly lays down that it is not open
                                to either of the parties to unilaterally appoint an arbitrator
                                for resolution of the disputes in a situation that had arisen
                                in the said case."
53.    As per law prevailing on the date of
the said decision
, there was
                         no impediment for the parties to agree that an employee of one of the
                         parties be appointed as an arbitrator. Thus, the agreement that disputes
                         be referred to arbitration of an officer holding the designation of ED
                         (NR) was valid and enforceable.
But as that office had ceased to exist,
                         it was necessary for the parties to arrive at an alternative arrangement,
                         which they were unable to do so.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                 Page 28 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
54.    In the facts of the present case, there is no dispute as to the
                         existence of the arbitration agreement. As held above, TKE had invoked
                         the said arbitration clause but the parties have been unable to concur on
                         appointment of an arbitrator. In this view, this Court considers it
                         apposite to allow the present petition.
55.    Accordingly, it is proposed that Justice (Retd.) Pradeep
                         Nandrajog, former Chief Justice of the High Courts of Rajasthan and
                         Maharashtra (Mobile No.- 9818000130), be appointed as a Sole
                         Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes that have arisen between the parties
                         and which fall within the scope of the arbitration clause as set out
                         hereinbefore.
56.    The arbitrator may furnish his consent and disclosure as required
                         under
Section 12(1)
of the A&C Act before the next date of hearing.
57.    List on 19.03.2021




                                                                           VIBHU BAKHRU, J

                         MARCH 8, 2021
                         RK
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed         ARB.P. 553/2020                                                Page 29 of 29
By:DUSHYANT
RAWAL
