Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 90 OF 2012
Citation: SCC 125.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/192030318/

[Cites
12
, Cited by
16
]
Bombay High Court
Nimbus Communications Limited vs Board Of Control For Cricket In India on 27 February, 2012
Author:
D.Y.Chandrachud
Bench:
D.Y.Chandrachud
,
M.S. Sanklecha
PNP                                   1/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


          IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
              ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION




                                                                                 
                   APPEAL (LODG.) NO.90 OF 2012
                               IN




                                                         
            ARBITRATION PETITION (LODG.) NO.43 OF 2012
    Nimbus Communications Limited                                 ..Appellant.




                                                        
         versus
    Board of Control for Cricket in India 
    and another                                                   ..Respondents.
                                WITH



                                            
                     APPEAL (LODG.) NO.91 OF 2012
                              igWITH
                  CHAMBER SUMMONS NO.249 OF 2012
                                 IN
                 ARBITRATION PETITION NO.167 OF 2012
                            
    NEO Sports Broadcast Pvt. Limited                             ..Appellant.
         versus
    Board of Control for Cricket in India 
        


    and another                                                   ..Respondents.
     



                                WITH
                     APPEAL (LODG.) NO.92 OF 2012
                                 IN
                 ARBITRATION PETITION NO.167 OF 2012





    NEO Sports Broadcast Pvt. Limited                            ..Appellant.
          versus
    Board of Control for Cricket in India 





    and another                                                  ..Respondents.
                                           .....
    Mr. Virag Tulzapurkar, Senior Advocate with Mr. Anil Menon i/b Anil 
    Menon   &   Associates   for   the   Appellant   in   APP(L)   90/2012   and   for 
    Respondent No.2 in APP(L) 91/2012 and 92/2012.

    Dr. Virendra Tulzapurkar, Senior Advocate with Mr. H.N. Thakore, Mr. 
    Pranav Sampat, Mr. Rizvi Nasir i/b Thakore Jariwala & Associates for 
    the Appellant in APP(L) 91/0212 and 92/2012.



                                                         ::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
     PNP                                   2/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    Mr. Rafique Dada, Senior Advocate with Mr. T.N.Subramanian, Senior 
    Advocate, Mr. P.R. Raman, Ms. Akhila Kaushik, Mr. Nikhil Sakhardande, 
    Mr.   Indranil   Deshmukh,   Mr.   Rahul   Mascarenhas   and   Mr.   Adarsh 




                                                                                  
    Saxena i/b Amarchand Mangaldas & S.A. Shroff & Co. for Respondent 
    No.1 in all the appeals.




                                                         
                                         ......
                               CORAM :  DR.D.Y.CHANDRACHUD &
                                         M.S. SANKLECHA, JJ.




                                                        
                                              27 February 2012.

    ORAL JUDGMENT (Per DR.D.Y.CHANDRACHUD, J.)  :
Admit.  With the consent of Counsel and at their request the
1.
                             
    Appeals are taken up for hearing and final disposal.
These three appeals arise out of an order passed by a learned 
                            
    Single Judge on 19 January 2012 on an application for ad interim 
    relief in a petition under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
    Act 1996 and from an ad interim order dated 27 January 2012 on a 
           


    Chamber Summons for amendment of the petition under
Section 9
.
Two appeals against the order dated 19 January 2012 and against the 
    order   dated   27   January   2012   have   been   filed   by   the   Second 
    Respondent   to   the   arbitration   petition.     One   appeal   by   the   First 





    Respondent is against the order dated 19 January 2012.
2.    All   the   appeals   have   been   placed   together   by   consent   for 





    hearing  and final  disposal   and since  the issues  are common,  they 
    have   been   disposed   of   by   this   judgment.     For   convenience   of 
    reference it would be appropriate to   refer to the parties as they 
    appear in the arbitration petition under
Section 9
.
3.    On 15 October 2009 a Media Rights Licensing Agreement was
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    3/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    entered into between the Board of Control for Cricket in India (the 
    Petitioner)   and     Nimbus   Communications   Limited   (the   First 




                                                                                   
    Respondent).  Under the agreement, the Petitioner granted to the First 
    Respondent during the period commencing from 1 April 2010 until 31 




                                                           
    March   2014   inter   alia   television   rights,   radio   rights,   and   licensee 
    mobile rights on an exclusive basis in relation to the territory covered 




                                                          
    by   the   agreement.     The   agreement   stipulated   that   the   First 
    Respondent would pay to the Petitioner an amount of Rs.31.25 Crores 
    for every match, be it a one day international, a test match or a 




                                              
    20/20 international match.  The payment terms inter alia stipulated as 
    follows :
"Licensee   specifically   acknowledges   that   Licensor   is   in 
                             
           negotiations with  the ICC  and  the Cricket  Boards  of  various 
           countries to finalise the Future Tours Programme ('FTP') for all 
           bilateral cricket tours by the Indian National Team from April 
           2010 onwards and changes are likely to take place in the above 
           

           schedule   of   Matches.     To   the   extent   any   series   or   Match/ 
           Matches is/are either increased or reduced in any year during 
        



           the   Rights   Period,   the   Rights   Fee   payable   will   be   pro   rata 
           increased for the extra  series  or  Match/Matches, as  the case 
           may   be,   or   decreased   to   the   extent   of   the   series   or 
           Match/Matches reduced, as the case may be, based on the Per 





           Match   Value   stated   above   for   all   the   series   or   Matches   as 
           included   in   the   schedule   below   or   New   series   scheduled   by 
           Licensor.   It being understood and agreed by licensee that if 
           Licensor decides to schedule a Tri series the amount paid per 





           match will remain as per the Per match Value defined above."
4.     Under clause 7.2 the rights fee was to be paid by the licensee, 
    the First Respondent, to the Petitioner in installments and by the due 
    dates indicated in the schedule.   50% of the fee was payable not 
    later than thirty days before the commencement of each series, while 
    the balance was payable within sixty days after the scheduled date of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    4/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the last match of the series.   Clause 13 of the agreement stipulated 
    that the First Respondent shall not assign, sub-contract or otherwise 




                                                                                  
    part   with   the   benefit   of   the   agreement   without   the   prior   written 
    consent of the Petitioner, which was not to be unreasonably delayed.
However, the First Respondent was entitled to assign the rights and 
    benefits  granted   under   the   agreement   to   any   affiliate   without   the 




                                                         
    consent of the licensor, it being agreed that the First Respondent shall 
    remain fully and primarily responsible for and liable to the licensor 
    for the performance of the agreement.  The expression 'affiliate'  was 




                                             
    defined in the agreement as follows :
"Affiliate shall mean any person controlling, controlled by or 
          under   common   control   with   a   specified   person   and,   for   the 
          purposes of this Agreement,  "control"  means the power of a 
                            
          person (directly or indirectly) to direct or cause the direction of 
          the   management   and   polices   of   any   other   person   or   the 
          ownership   (directly   or   indirectly)   of   more   than   fifty   percent 
          (50%) of the equity or capital of, or the voting power in, any 
           


          other person."
5.    Parties therefore contemplated that the First Respondent would 
    be   entitled   to   assign   the   rights   and   benefits   granted   under   the 





    agreement   inter   alia   to   an   entity   which   the   First   Respondent 
    controlled by exercising more than 50% of the voting power in the 
    equity capital.
6.    After   the   execution   of   the   agreement,   on   15   October   2009 
    parties arrived at two addenda respectively on 21 October 2009 and 
    22   August   2011..     As   permitted   by   the   agreement   between   the 
    Petitioner   and   the   First   Respondent,   the   First   Respondent   in   turn 
    entered into an agreement with the Second Respondent, called the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    5/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    Television   Rights   Agreement   on   16   October   2010.     The   agreement 
    stated that the First Respondent had been granted certain exclusive 




                                                                                   
    commercial and media rights by the Petitioner for all international 
    cricket matches organised by the Petitioner in India under a Media 




                                                           
    Rights Agreement.  By the agreement between the First and Second 
    Respondents, the First Respondent granted to the Second Respondent, 




                                                          
    in   consideration   for   a   media   rights   free,   broadcast   rights   for   the 
    territory to the events taking place during the term subject to the 
    conditions set out in the agreement.  The broadcast rights granted to 




                                              
    the   Second   Respondent   comprised   solely   of   the   exclusive   right   to 
                              
    broadcast the event in the territory by means of television rights with 
    a commentary  in English.     Clause 6  of  the agreement  sets  out  a 
                             
    Media   Rights   Fee   payable   to   the   First   Respondent   by   the   Second 
    Respondent,   while   clause   7   spells   out   the   installments   for   making 
    payment.
7.     There is no dispute about the fact that payments which were 
    due and payable by the First Respondent to the Petitioner in 2010-11 





    in respect of the series against Australia and New Zealand were duly 
    paid.   The schedule of matches for 2011-12 included a series each 
    against England and West Indies.  For the series against England an 





    amount of Rs.103.40 Crores was due and payable towards the second 
    installment   on   29   December   2011,   which   has   not   been   paid.     In 
    respect of the series against West Indies, an amount of Rs.63.78 Crores 
    was due and payable on 6 October 2011 towards the first installment 
    and an amount of Rs.137.87 Crores was due and payable against the 
    second installment on 11 February 2012 which was not paid.  A total 
    amount of Rs.305.06 Crores is claimed by the Petitioner as being due
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                   6/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    and payable by the First Respondent.   This claim is in respect of 
    matches which were held and which were telecast by the Second 




                                                                                 
    Respondent.   The First Respondent has not paid the amount which 
    the Petitioner has claimed to be due and payable despite a demand.
8.    At this stage, it may be necessary to advert to the fact that the 




                                                        
    First Respondent had furnished bank guarantees in the amount of Rs.
    1647 Crores to the Petitioner.  The bank guarantees were invoked and 
    it is common ground before  the  Court  that  the  banks  which  had 




                                            
    issued the guarantees have declined to pay.  The Petitioner has filed 
                             
    three suits against three banks which are pending.
9.    An   arbitration   petition   was   filed   before   the   learned   Single 
    Judge   by   the   Petitioner   under
Section   9
of   the   Arbitration   and 
    Conciliation Act 1996.  The reliefs  which were sought in the petition 
           


    were - (i) A direction to the Respondents to deposit all monies which  
        



    they   had   received   from   advertisements   as   consideration   for   the 
    broadcast of advertisements on the television channel during the 2011 





    cricket series under the  Media Rights Licensing Agreement; (ii) An 
    injunction against the Respondents restraining them from calling upon 
    the   advertisers   to   pay   the   amounts   that   may   be   due   to   the 





    Respondents or to either of them for the broadcast of advertisements 
    on television during 2011 cricket series with a further direction to the 
    Respondents   to   call   upon   the   advertisers   to   deposit   the   amounts 
    owed in this Court; (iii) In the alternative, an injunction restraining 
    the   Second   Respondent   from   paying   over   any   sum   to   the   First 
    Respondent with a further direction to deposit the amount in Court;
(iv)  A disclosure of the amounts already received or receivable from
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                     7/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the   advertisers;   and   (v)       A   direction   to   the   First   Respondent   to 
    furnish   security   in   the   form   of   a   deposit   in   cash   to   secure   the 




                                                                                    
    recovery and realisation of the dues payable by the First Respondent 
    to the Petitioner.   During the pendency of the arbitration petition, a 




                                                            
    Chamber Summons has been taken out for amendment.
10.    The   learned   Single   Judge   by   an   ad   interim   order   dated   19 
    January 2012 issued the following directions :
"(i)    Pending the hearing and final disposal of the arbitration 




                                               
           proceedings and the implementation of the award therein, the 
           respondents shall deposit all monies which they have already 
                              
           received from the advertisers as consideration for broadcast of 
           advertisements on the television channel/s owned and operated 
           by the respondents in relation to the 2011 cricket series under 
                             
           the MRLA in this Court.
(ii)   Pending the hearing and final disposal of the arbitration 
           proceedings and the implementation of the award therein, the 
        


           respondents shall call upon the advertisers, listed in Exhibit 'T"
to the petition to deposit the amount owed by them to the 
     



           respondents or  either   one  of   them  towards  consideration  for 
           broadcast of advertisements on the television channel/s owned 
           and operated by the respondents in relation to the 2011 cricket 





           series under the MRLA in this Court.
(iii)     The   respondents   shall   disclose   the   amounts   already 
           received and/or receivable from each of the advertisers listed in 
           Exhibit  'T"  to the petition, towards consideration for broadcast 





           of   advertisements   on   the   television   channel/s   owned   and 
           operated   by   the   respondents   in   relation   to   the   2011   cricket 
           series.
(iv)   The 1st respondent shall, within four weeks from today, 
           furnish security by depositing in this Court, a sum of Rs.305 
           crores.
(v)    Upon receipt of any amounts, the Prothonotary & Senior
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    8/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw
Master shall invest the same in fixed deposit of a Nationalized 
          bank, initially for a period of one year and thereafter for like 
          periods of one year each.
(vi)     Liberty  to  apply  for  enhancement  of  the  security  and 




                                                           
          further orders.
(vii) It is clarified that this order shall operate to an aggregate 
          extent of only Rs.305 crores. For instance, if security is furnished 




                                                          
          under   clause   (iv)   above,   it   will   not   be   necessary   to   deposit 
          further amounts under clauses (i) and (ii) above."
11.   By a separate order that was passed on 27 January 2012, the 



                                             
    learned   Single   Judge   has   issued   the   following   directions   on   the 
                             
    application for amendment :
"Respondent No.1 shall not dispose of, alienate, encumber, part 
                            
          with possession of or create any third party rights in respect of 
          the shares held by respondent No.1 in respondent No.2, without 
          giving the petitioner's advocates notice of at least two weeks. 
          This injunction shall apply in respect of the shares held and the 
        


          accretions   thereto   of   any   nature   whatsoever.     Further   the 
          shareholding   pattern   of   respondent   No.2   shall   also   not   be 
     



          modified without giving the petitioner's advocates notice of two 
          weeks."
12.   The Second Respondent to the arbitration petition has filed two 
    appeals against the orders respectively passed by the learned Single 
    Judge on 19 and 27 January 2012.  The First Respondent has filed an 





    appeal which is confined to the correctness of the order passed by 
    the learned Single Judge on 19 January 2012.   The learned Single 
    Judge was of the view prima facie that an amount of Rs.305 Crores is 
    due and payable by the First Respondent to the Petitioner under the 
    Media   Rights   Licensing   Agreement   dated   15   October   2009.     The 
    learned Judge held that -  (i) There were defaults in the payment of
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    9/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the outstandings by the First Respondent; (ii) The First Respondent is 
    under   financial   distress;   (iii)   The   Second   Respondent   is   a   wholly 




                                                                                   
    owned   subsidiary   of   the   First   Respondent   as   stated   by   the   First 
    Respondent before this Court in a prior arbitration petition; (iv) The 




                                                           
    agreement between the First and Second Respondents was an internal 
    commercial   arrangement   designed   to   implement   the   Media   Rights 




                                                          
    Licensing Agreement between the Petitioner and the First Respondent;
(v) The First Respondent has in fact averred in its arbitration petition 
    that the broadcast business which is being conducted by the Second 




                                              
    Respondent is the business of the First Respondent; (vi) The Petitioner 
                              
    is no longer secured by the bank guarantees because the banks have 
    refused to pay; (vii) There is an admission of liability contained in the 
                             
    balance-sheet of the First Respondent as of 31 March 2010; (viii) The 
    Second   Respondent   being   a   wholly   owned   subsidiary   of   the   First 
    Respondent, the shareholding of the Second Respondent constitutes a 
        


    valuable asset of the First Respondent.   In that view of the matter, 
     



    the   Second   Respondent   being   a   separate   entity   would   make   no 
    difference.  On these findings, the learned Single Judge directed the 





    Respondents to deposit all amounts which may have been received 
    from the advertisers and which may be received hereafter in Court to 
    secure   the   claim   in   arbitration.     The   First   Respondent   has   been 





    directed   to   furnish   security   in   the   amount   of   Rs.305   Crores   by   a 
    deposit in Court.   The learned Single Judge has clarified that the 
    order would operate only to the extent of an aggregate amount of 
    Rs.305 Crores.   Moreover, if the First Respondent complies with the 
    direction to furnish security in the amount of Rs.305 Crores, then it 
    would not be necessary to deposit any further amount out of the 
    revenues earned through advertisements.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                     10/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw
13.    All the three appeals have been heard together.   During the 




                                                                                     
    course of the hearing of the appeals, the extent of the controversy 
    that   arises   in   these   appeals   has   narrowed   down   in   view   of   the 




                                                             
    statement which has been made on behalf of the original Petitioners 
    before the Court.  Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 




                                                            
    Petitioners has stated before the Court that since only an application 
    for ad interim relief was made before the learned Single Judge, the 
    Petitioner does not seek any ad interim relief as against the Second 




                                               
    Respondent at the present  stage, without prejudice to its rights and 
                               
    contentions at the hearing  of   the  arbitration  petition   to  apply  for 
    appropriate   reliefs   as   prayed   both   against   the   First   and   Second 
                              
    Respondents.    During  the  course   of   the  hearing,  it   has  also   been 
    agreed   upon   by   the   learned   counsel   before   the   Court   that   the 
    Chamber Summons for amendment which has been taken out by the 
        


    Petitioner   may   be   allowed.     Accordingly,   by   consent   Chamber 
     



    Summons 249 of 2012 for amendment shall stand allowed and the 
    amendment shall be carried out within a period of one week from 





    today.     Since   it   has   been   clarified   before   this   Court   that   the   ad 
    interim application is not being pressed at this stage as against the 
    Second   Respondent,   that   part   of   the   order   of   the   learned   Single 





    Judge would have to be suitably modified in the final directions that 
    would   be   issued   in   the   appeal.         The   principle   issue   that   now 
    remains for consideration relates to the direction that has been issued 
    by the learned Single Judge calling upon the First Respondent to the 
    arbitration petition to furnish security in the amount of Rs.305 Crores 
    by a deposit of a like amount in Court.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                        11/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw
14.         Learned   Senior   Counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   First 
    Respondent, Nimbus Communications Ltd., submitted that -
(i)
Section 9(ii)(b)
empowers the Court to grant an interim measure 
                of protection to secure the amount in dispute in arbitration.
However,   the   power   which   is   exercised   by   the   Court   under
Section 9(ii)(b)
can be exercised only subject to the conditions 




                                                             
                which are spelt out in
Order 38 Rule 5 of the Code of Civil 
                Procedure
1908 in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court 
                in
Adhunik Steels Limited v. Orissa Manganese and Minerals 




                                                  
                (P) Ltd.1
(ii) The entire basis on which relief has been sought under
Section 
                                 
                9(ii)(b)
as spelt out in paragraph 9 of the arbitration petition is 
                on the hypothesis that the First Respondent may secrete monies 
                receivable from the advertisers in order to obstruct or delay the 
        


                execution of the dues of the petitioner.  The First Respondent, it 
     



                has been urged, has stated on an affidavit and reiterates before 
                the   Court   that   no   amount   is   due   and   receivable   from 





                advertisers   by   the   First   Respondent   and   hence   the   basis   on 
                which relief has been sought under
Section 9
is not existent. 
                Except for this circumstance, no case has been made out for 





                the grant of any order on principles analogous to those set out 
                in Order 38 Rule 5; and
(iii)The   First   Respondent   has   a   substantial   defence   to   urge   as 
                against the claim of the Petitioner on the following grounds :
(a)   The   scheme   of   payment   in   the   Media   Rights   Licensing 
    1 (2007) 7 SCC 125.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                      12/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


            Agreement   contemplated   that   a   series   between   India   and 
            Pakistan would be held in 2011-12 which did not take place;
(b)    In breach of the representations and warranties made by 
            the   petitioner   to   the   First   Respondent   in   clause   9   of   the 




                                                             
            agreement the best possible team was not selected to tour the 
            West Indies and all the top players of the Indian Team were 




                                                            
            rested during the series;
(c)    The addendum to the agreement would require that the 
            guarantee of Rs.1600 Crores would have to be reduced pro rata 




                                               
            upon the cancellation of the series with Pakistan.
As a matter of fact, the Petitioner did not reduce the quantum 
            of  the guarantees  and  proceeded  to  invoke  the  full  amount.
Consequently, even assuming that the Petitioner has a claim as 
            against the First Respondent on account of dues which were 
            payable for the matches   which were telecast   in the series 
        


            against England and West Indies, the First Respondent would be 
     



            entitled to set up a counter claim and/or to set up a claim for 
            damages in the arbitral proceedings.
15.     On the other hand it has been urged on behalf of the original 
    Petitioner by the learned senior counsel that -
(i) The object and purpose of an interim measure of protection 
            under
Section   9(ii)(b)
is   to   secure   the   amount   in   dispute   in 
            arbitration and those provisions are not curtailed or restricted 
            by those contained in
Order 38 Rule 5 of the Code of Civil 
            Procedure
1908.     The   judgment   of   the   Supreme   Court   in
Adhunik Steels
(supra) was specifically in the context of the 
            grant of an interlocutory injunction where the Supreme Court
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                      13/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


             held   that   the   general   principles   relating   to   the   grant   of 
             injunction inter alia in the
Specific Relief Act
would govern;
(ii) The basis on which the Court has been moved under
Section 9
for securing the amount in dispute is that there is an amount 




                                                             
             admittedly due and payable as a result of the fact that the 
             matches in question were telecast and despite the clear terms 




                                                            
             of the agreement payment of Rs.31.25 crores per match has not 
             been   effected.     The   First   Respondent     is   in   grave   financial 
             difficulty and it is on the record of the Court to state that the 




                                                
             main source of revenue generation is the exploitation of the 
                                
             media rights which are traceable   to the agreement with the 
             Petitioner.  The First Respondent is a chronic defaulter suffering 
                               
             from paucity of funds and an order under
Section 9(ii)(b)
is 
             necessary   in   order   to   secure   the   claim   of   the   Petitioner   in 
             arbitration;
(iii)Even a bare perusal of the nature of the defence is sufficient to 
     



             indicate that there is absolutely no substance in the contentions 
             raised.
16.
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 enables a 
    party   to   apply   to   the   Court   either   before   or   during   the   arbitral 





    proceedings or at any time after the making of an award but before 
    it is enforced in accordance with
Section 36
.   Clause (ii) enables a 
    party   to   seek   an   interim   measure   of   protection   in   respect   of   the 
    following matters :
"(a) the   preservation,   interim   custody   or   sale   of   any   goods 
            which are the subject-matter of the arbitration agreement;
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                   14/29                              APPL90-27.2.sxw


          or   thing   which   is   the   subject-matter   of   the   dispute   in 
          arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and 
          authorising   for   any   of   the   aforesaid   purposes   any   person   to 




                                                                                 
          enter upon any land or building in the possession of any party, 
          or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to 




                                                         
          be made, or experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or 
          expedient   for   the   purpose   of   obtaining   full   information   or 
          evidence;
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear 
          to the Court to be just and convenient,
          and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as 
          it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings 




                                            
          before it."
17.
                            
          The provision enunciates that the Court shall have the same 
    power for making orders as it has for the purpose of and in relation 
                           
    to any proceedings before it.   Now it is in this background, that it 
    would   be   necessary   to   consider   the   basic   issue   raised.     The 
    submission of the First Respondent is that when a Court passes an 
        


    order providing for an interim measure of protection for securing the 
     



    amount in dispute in arbitration, the power can be exercised only 
    subject to the restrictions which are spelt out in
Order 38 Rule 5 of 





    the Code of  Civil Procedure
1908.     Order  38 Rule  5 applies  in  a 
    situation where at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied that the 
    defendant (i) is about to dispose of the whole or part of his property 





    or (ii) is about to remove the whole or part of his property from the 
    local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court with intent to obstruct or 
    delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him. 
    In such an event the Court may direct the defendant either to furnish 
    security in such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce the 
    property and place it at the disposal of the Court when required or 
    the value of the same or such portion as may be sufficient to satisfy
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    15/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the decree.  The exercise of the power under Rule 5 of Order 38 is 
    thus conditioned by two requirements, the first being in regard to the 




                                                                                   
    conduct of the defendant, in that he is about to alienate his property 
    or to remove it from the jurisdiction of the Court and the second, the 




                                                           
    intention of the defendant to obstruct or delay the execution of a 
    decree that may be passed against him.  Parliament in the provisions 




                                                          
    of
Section 9(ii)(b)
contemplated an interim measure of protection to 
    secure   the   amount   in   dispute   in   the   arbitration.     The   object 
    underlying the conferment of the power upon the Court is to ensure 




                                              
    that the fruits of an arbitral award which may eventually be passed 
                              
    against the defendant to the claim are not lost to the claimant by a 
    dissipation of the property in the meantime.  The issue as to whether 
                             
    the power which has been conferred on the Court under
Section 9
is 
    hedged in by the specific provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908   came   up   before   a   Division   Bench   of   this   Court   initially   in
National Shipping Company of Saudi Arabia v. Sentrans Industries 
     



    Limited2
.     The   issue   before   the   Court   was   whether   the   power 
    exercisable by the Court under
Section 9(ii)(b)
of passing an interim 





    measure for securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration was 
    restricted   by   the   conditions   of   attachment   before   judgment   as 
    prescribed under Order 38 Rule 5.   Mr. Justice R.M. Lodha   (as the 





    Learned Judge then was) speaking for the Division Bench held that as 
    a   principle   of   law   a   special   provision   of   the   nature   embodied   in
Section 9(ii)(b)
cannot be restricted  by  importing  the  provisions  of 
    Order 38 Rule 5.   The Division Bench held that though the power 
    under
Section   9(ii)(b)
has   not   been   made   subject   to   the   stringent 
    provisions of Order 38 Rule 5, the exercise of the power is guided by 
    2 2004(2) Bom.C.R. 1
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    16/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the paramount consideration that the claimant who obtains an award 
    in his favour before the arbitrator ultimately is able to derive the 




                                                                                    
    fruits of the adjudication in executing the award.  The Division Bench 
    held as follows :
"The order under
section 9(ii)(b)
is in the nature of interim 
          protection   order.     In   a   special   provision   of   the   nature   like 
          section   9(ii)(b),   we   are   afraid,   exercise   of   power   cannot   be 




                                                           
          restricted by importing the provisions of Order 38, Rule 5 of the 
          Code of Civil Procedure as it is.  The legislature while enacting 
          section 9(ii)(b) does not seem to us to have intended to read 
          into it the provisions of Order 38, Rule 5 of the Code of Civil 




                                              
          Procedure  as it is.
......
The provisions of
Order 38, Rule 5 C.P.C
. cannot be read into 
          the   said   provision   as   it   is   nor   can   power   of   the   Court   in 
          passing an order of interim measure under
section 9(ii)(b)
be 
                            
          made subject to  the  stringent  provision  of  Order  38,  Rule 5. 
          The   power   of   the   Court   in   passing   the   protection   order   to 
          secure the amount in dispute in the arbitration before or during 
          arbitral proceedings or at any time of making of the arbitral 
        


          award   but   before   it   is   enforced   cannot   be   restricted   by 
          importing the provisions set out in
Order 38  of C.P.C
. but has 
     



          to be exercised ex debito justitiae and in the interest of justice. 
          The   Court   while   considering   the   application   for   interim 
          protection   under
section   9(ii)(b)
is   guided   by   equitable 





          consideration and each case has to be considered in the light of 
          its   facts   and   circumstances.     The   interim   protection   order 
          contemplated under
section 9(ii)(b)
is granted by the Court to 
          protect the interest of the party seeking such order until the 
          rights are finally adjudicated by the Arbitral Tribunal and to 





          ensure that the Award passed by Arbitral Tribunal is capable of 
          enforcement.     Though   the   power   given   to   the   Court   under
Section 9(ii)(b)
is very vide and is not in any way controlled by 
          the provisions of the Code but such exercise of power, obviously, 
          has to be guided by the paramount consideration that the party 
          having   a   claim   adjudicated   in     its   favour   ultimately   by   the 
          arbitrator is in a position to get the fruits of such adjudication 
          and in executing the Award.  While dealing with the application 
          for direction to the other party to deposit the security of the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    17/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


           amount in dispute in the arbitration, the Court also has to keep 
           in mind the drastic nature of such order and unless a clear 
           case not only on the merits of the claim is made out but also 




                                                                                   
           the   aspect   that   denial   of   such   order   would   result   in   grave 
           injustice to the party seeking such protection order in as much 




                                                           
           as in the absence of such order, the applicant party succeeding 
           before the Arbitral Tribunal may not be able to execute the 
           Award.  The obstructive conduct of the opposite party may be 
           one of the relevant considerations for the Court to consider the 




                                                          
           application under
section 9(ii)(b)
.  The party seeking protection 
           order under
section 9(ii)(b)
ordinarily must place some material 
           before the Court,  besides  the  merits of  the  claim  that  order 
           under
section 9(ii)(b)
is eminently needed to be passed as there 




                                              
           is   likelihood   or   an   attempt   to   defeat   the   Award,   though   as 
           indicated above, the provisions of
Order 38, Rule 5 C.P.C
. are not 
                              
           required to be satisfied.   The statutory discretion given to the 
           Court   under
section   9(ii)(b)
must   be   exercised   judicially   in 
           accordance with established legal principles and having regard 
                             
           only to relevant considerations.  In our view, this is the proper 
           approach for consideration of the application for interim relief 
           under
section 9(ii)(b)
and we hold that the provisions of
Order 
           38, Rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure
cannot be read as it 
        


           is and imported in
section 9
of the Act of 1996.  We also hod 
           without   hesitation   that   the   Court   is   competent   to   pass   an 
     



           appropriate   protection   order   of   interim   measure   as   provided 
           under
section 9(ii)(b)
outside the provisions of
Order 38, Rule 5 
           Code of Civil Procedure
.  Each case under
section 9(ii)(b)
of the 





           Act   of   1996   has   to   be   considered   in   its   own   facts   and 
           circumstances   and   on   the   principles   of   equity,   fair   play   and 
           good conscience."
18.
In   a   subsequent   decision   of   the   Supreme   Court   in
Arvind 
    Constructions   Co.   (P)   Ltd.   v.   Kalinga   Mining   Corporation3
the 
    Supreme Court held that the power under
Section 9
cannot be read 
    as   independent   of   the
Specific   Relief   Act
and   it   could   not   be 
    contended   that   the   restrictions   placed   by   the
Specific   Relief   Act
cannot control the exercise of the power under
Section 9
.  The Court 
    3 (2007) 6 SCC 798.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    18/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    observed that while entertaining an application under
Section 9
, the 
    Court must have the same power for making orders as it has for the 




                                                                                   
    purpose   of   and   in   relation   to   any   proceedings   before   it. 
    Consequently   the   general   rules   that   govern   the   Court   while 




                                                           
    considering   the   grant   of   an   interim   injunction   at   the   threshold 
    would   be   attracted   even   while   dealing   with   an   application   under
Section 9
.  The Court also noted the principle that when a power is 
    conferred under a special statute and is conferred on an ordinary 
    court of the land, without laying down any special condition for the 




                                              
    exercise of that power, the general rules of procedure would apply.
The Supreme Court adverted to the position which was inter  alia 
    taken   by   the   Division   Bench   of   this   Court   that   the   power   under
Section 9
is not controlled by
Order 38, Rule 5 of the Code of Civil 
    Procedure
1908, but left it open to be determined in an appropriate 
    case.
19.
In the decision of the Supreme Court in
Adhunik Steels
(supra) 
    the   Respondent   had   obtained   a   mining   lease   from   the   State 





    Government of Orissa and had an agreement with the appellant for 
    raising manganese ore on its behalf.  The term of the agreement was 
    ten years with an option to renew.  The respondent issued a notice 





    of termination calling upon the appellant to remove itself from the 
    site   contending   that   its   contract   was   in   violation   of   the   Mineral 
    Concession Rules, 1960.  The appellant thereupon moved the District 
    Court under
Section 9
for an injunction restraining the respondent 
    from terminating the contract and from dispossessing it at site.  The 
    District Court allowed the application under
Section 9
.   The High 
    Court in appeal upheld the contention of the respondent that the loss
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                     19/29                                APPL90-27.2.sxw


    if any that may be sustained by the appellant could be calculated in 
    monetary terms and that in view of
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Specific 




                                                                                     
    Relief Act, an injunction could not be granted.  In that view of the 
    matter, the High Court did not consider it fit to enquire into the 




                                                             
    issue of the balance of convenience.   Before the  Supreme Court it 
    was urged on behalf of the appellant that
Section 9
was independent 




                                                            
    of
Order 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908 and the exercise of 
    the power was not subject to the provisions contained in the
Specific 
    Relief   Act
.   The  Supreme   Court   dealt   with  the  submission   in   the 




                                               
    following terms :
"The grant of an interim prohibitory  injunction or an interim 
           mandatory injunction are  governed by well known rules and it 
           is difficult to imagine that the legislature while enacting
Section 
                              
           9
of the Act intended to make a provision which was de hors 
           the accepted principles that governed the grant of an interim 
           injunction.  Same is the position regarding the appointment of 
           a receiver since the Section itself brings in, the concept of 'just 
        


           and convenient' while speaking of passing any interim measure 
           of protection.   The concluding words of the Section, "and the 
     



           court shall have the same power for making orders as it has 
           for the purpose and in relation to any proceedings before it"
also suggest that the normal rules that govern the court in the 





           grant of interim orders is not sought to be jettisoned by the 
           provision.  Moreover, when a party is given a right to approach 
           an ordinary court of the country without providing a special 
           procedure or a special set of rules in that behalf, the ordinary 
           rules   followed   by   that   court   would   govern   the   exercise   of 





           power conferred by the Act."
20.    The Supreme Court noted that the power to grant injunction by 
    way   of   specific   relief   is   covered   by   the
Specific   Relief   Act
1963, 
    injunction being a form of specific relief.
Section 9
, the Supreme 
    Court   noted   does   not   contain   any   special   condition   nor   does   it 
    provide for a special procedure.   The Court noted that whether an
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    20/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    interim measure should be ordered permitting the appellant to carry 
    on mining operations in the face of an attempted termination of the 




                                                                                   
    contract would lead the court to a consideration of the classical rules 
    for the grant of such an interim measure.  This, it was held, had to 




                                                           
    be   considered   based   on   the   well   settled   principles   in   that   behalf. 
    Consequently the Supreme Court held as follows :
"Therefore, on the whole, we feel that it would not be correct 
           to say that the power under
Section 9
of the Act is totally 
           independent of the well-known principles governing the grant 
           of an interim injunction that generally govern the courts in this 




                                              
           connection."
21.
                              
           The Supreme Court directed that while the respondent should 
    not enter into a contract for mining and lifting of minerals with any 
                             
    other entity until conclusion of the arbitral proceedings, there was no 
    justification in preventing it from carrying on the mining operations 
        

    by itself.
22.    The judgment  of   the   Supreme   Court   in  Adhunik   Steels  has 
    noted the earlier decision in Arvind Constructions which holds that 





    since
Section 9
is a power which is conferred under a special statute, 
    but which is exercisable by an ordinary court without laying down a 
    special condition for the exercise of the power or a special procedure, 





    the general rules of procedure of the court would apply. Consequently, 
    where   an   injunction   is   sought   under
Section   9
the   power   of   the 
    Court to grant that injunction cannot be exercised independent of the 
    principles which have been laid down to govern the grant of interim 
    injunctions particularly in the context of the Special Relief Act 1963. 
    The Court, consequently would be obligated to consider as to whether
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                     21/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    there   exists   a   prima   facie   case,   the   balance   of   convenience   and 
    irreparable   injury   in   deciding   whether   it   would   be   just   and 




                                                                                    
    convenient to grant an order of injunction.
Section 9
, specifically 
    provides in sub-clause (d) of clause (ii) for the grant of an interim 




                                                            
    injunction or the appointment of a receiver.  As regards sub-clause (b) 
    of   clause   (ii)   the   interim   measure   of   protection   is   to   secure   the 




                                                           
    amount in dispute in the arbitration.  The underlying object of Order 
    38 Rule 5 is to confer upon the Court an enabling power to require a 
    defendant   to   provide   security   of   an   extent   and   value   as   may   be 




                                               
    sufficient to satisfy the decree that may be passed in favour of the 
                              
    plaintiff.  The exercise of the power to order that  security should be 
    furnished   is,   however,   pre-conditioned   by   the   requirement   of   the 
                             
    satisfaction of the Court that the defendant is about to alienate the 
    property or remove it beyond the limits of the Court with an intent 
    to   obstruct  or   delay  execution   of   the   decree   that   may   be   passed 
        


    against him.
In view of the decisions of the Supreme Court both in 
     



    Arvind Constructions and Adhunik Steels, it would not be possible 
    to   subscribe   to   the   position   that   the   power   to   grant   an   interim 





    measure of protection under
Section 9(ii)(b)
is completely independent 
    of the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908 or that the 
    exercise   of   that   power   is   untrammeled   by   the   Code.     The   basic 





    principle which emerges from both the judgments of the Supreme 
    Court is that though the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 is a 
    special statute,
Section 9
does not either attach a special condition 
    for the exercise of the power nor does it embody a special form of 
    procedure for the exercise of the power by the Court.   The second 
    aspect of the provision which has been noted by the Supreme Court 
    is the concluding part of
Section 9
under which it has been specified
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                          22/29                         APPL90-27.2.sxw


    that the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has 
    for the purpose of and in relation to any proceedings before it.  This 




                                                                                   
    has been interpreted in both the judgments to mean that the normal 
    rules that govern the Court in the grant of an interlocutory order are 




                                                           
    not jettisoned by the provision.  The judgment of the Division Bench 
    of   this   Court   in
National   Shipping   Company
(supra)   notes   that 




                                                          
    though the power by
Section 9(ii)(b)
is wide, it has to be governed by 
    the   paramount   consideration   that   a   party   which   has   a   claim 
    adjudicated in its favour ultimately by the arbitrator should be in a 




                                                    
    position to obtain the fruits of the arbitration while executing the 
                                  
    award. The Division Bench noted that the power being of a drastic 
    nature, a direction to secure the amount claimed in the arbitration 
                                 
    petition   should   not   be   issued   merely   on   the   merits   of   the   claim, 
    unless a denial of the order would result in grave injustice to the 
    party seeking a protective order.  The obstructive conduct of the party 
        


    against whom such a direction is sought was regarded as being a 
     



    material consideration.   However, the view of the Division Bench of 
    this Court that the exercise of power under
Section 9(ii)(b)
is not 





    controlled   by   the   provisions
of   the   Code   of   Civil   Procedure
1908 
    cannot   stand   in   view   of   the   decision   of   the   Supreme   Court   in 
    Adhunik Steels.
23.
In a recent judgment of a learned Single Judge of the Delhi 
    High Court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. AMCIPTY Ltd.4
, the 
    judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in  National Shipping 
    Company was relied upon.  The Delhi High Court observed that the 
    provisions of Order 38, Rule 5 would serve as a guiding principle for 
    4 O.M.P. 417/2011 decided on 1 September 2011.
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    23/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    the exercise of the jurisdiction while dealing with a petition under
Section 9
requiring the respondent to furnish security and the basic 




                                                                                   
    consideration is that the Court should be satisfied that the furnishing 
    of security is essential to safeguard the interest of the petitioner.
24.    A   close   reading   of   the   judgment   of   the   Supreme   Court   in 




                                                          
    Adhunik Steels  would indicate that while the Court held that the 
    basic principles governing the grant of interim injunction would stand 
    attracted to a petition under
Section 9
, the Court was of the view 




                                              
    that the power under
Section 9
is not totally independent of those 
                              
    principles.  In other words, the power which is exercised by the Court 
    under
Section 9
is guided by the underlying principles which govern 
                             
    the exercise of an analogous power in
the Code of Civil Procedure
1908.   The exercise of the power under
Section 9
cannot be totally 
    independent of those principles.  At the same time, the Court when it 
        


    decides   a   petition   under
Section   9
must   have   due   regard   to   the 
     



    underlying purpose of the conferment of the power upon the Court 
    which is to promote the efficacy of arbitration as a form of dispute 





    resolution.  Just as on the one hand the exercise of the power under
Section 9
cannot be carried out in an uncharted territory ignoring the 
    basic   principles   of   procedural   law   contained   in
the   Code   of   Civil 





    Procedure
1908, the rigors of every procedural provision in
the Code 
    of Civil Procedure
1908 cannot be put into place  to defeat the grant 
    of relief which would subserve the paramount interests of justice.  A 
    balance has to be drawn between the two considerations in the facts 
    of   each   case.       The   principles
laid   down   in
the   Code   of   Civil 
    Procedure
1908 for the grant of interlocutory remedies must furnish a 
    guide to the Court when it determines an application under
Section 9
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    24/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The underlying basis of 
    Order 38 Rule 5 therefore has to be borne in mind while deciding an 




                                                                                   
    application under
Section 9(ii)(b)
.
25.    Now in this background it would be necessary for the Court to 
    determine as to whether a case has been made out for the grant of 




                                                          
    an ad interim order in terms of
Section 9(ii)(b)
.  Under the agreement 
    dated   15   October   2009   between   the   petitioner   and   the   First 
    Respondent, the First Respondent was under a contractual obligation 




                                              
    during the term of the contract to deposit 50% of the fee payable not 
                              
    later than thirty days before the commencement of each series and 
    the  balance  within  sixty   days  after   the   scheduled   day   of   the  last 
                             
    match of the series.   The agreement between the parties stipulates 
    the   consideration   payable   at   Rs.31.25   crores   for   each   match.     The 
    agreement recognises that the Petitioner was in negotiations with the 
        


    ICC for  bilateral cricket tours of the Indian National Team for April 
     



    2010 and changes were likely to be made in the schedule of matches. 
    Recognising the possibility of a change in schedule, the agreement 





    postulates that to  the extent  to  which matches  were increased or 
    reduced,   the   right   fee   payable   under   the   agreement   would   be 
    modified   on   a   proportionate   basis.     The   contention   of   the   First 





    Respondent based on the cancellation of the Indo-Pak cricket series 
    would therefore prima facie be in the teeth of the specific contractual 
    provision which parties incorporated.  The First Respondent has also 
    sought to set up the plea in its letter dated 29 December 2011 that 
    the   Petitioner   failed   to   perform   its   contractual   obligation   by   not 
    selecting   some   of   the   leading   players   for   the   West   Indies   series. 
    Reliance has been placed on   clause 9.3(c)(iv) to the effect that the
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                  25/29                              APPL90-27.2.sxw


    Petitioner represented and warranted that subject to the ICC future 
    tours   programmes   commitments,   the   Petitioner   shall   procure   the 




                                                                                
    strongest possible Indian player representation in each bilateral BCCI 
    event and use its best endeavours to procure the strongest possible 




                                                        
    international player representation in such events.   Prima facie, the 
    contractual stipulation does not and cannot be read to interfere with 




                                                       
    the selection of  the Indian Cricket Team.   The presence or absence 
    of   a   particular   player   or   of   players   cannot   furnish   the   First 
    Respondent a reason not to pay its dues. The defence which is now 




                                            
    sought to be raised appears to be a feeble attempt not to comply 
                            
    with the contractual obligation to pay.  The addendum to the original 
    agreement dated 22 August 2011 similarly stipulated that the value of 
                           
    a bank guarantee provided by the licensee would stand reduced at 
    the commencement of each year of the rights period or after written 
    confirmation   from  the  licensor   of   the   cancellation   of   any   matches 
        


    whichever was later.  The Indo-Pak series was proposed to be held in 
     



    March 2012.   The termination in the present case took place on 12 
    December 2011, prima facie, prior to the date on which a reduction in 





    the value of the bank guarantee was to take effect.
26.   As the learned Single Judge has noted, and prima facie for the 
    reasons noted above, the Petitioner has made out more than a strong 





    prima facie case that an amount of Rs.305 Crores is due and payable 
    to it by the First Respondent.   The First  Respondent defaulted in 
    making payments despite being called upon to do so.  The issue as 
    to whether an order under
Section 9(ii)(b)
ought to have been passed 
    by the learned Single Judge cannot, however, be founded only on the 
    fact that the Petitioner made out more than a strong prima facie case
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                    26/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    on merits.   The learned Single Judge was moved by the Petitioner 
    specifically with an averment that the First Respondent had admitted 




                                                                                   
    including in its letter dated 12 December 2011 that it was suffering 
    from   a   severe   financial   crunch.     The   First   Respondent,   as   the 




                                                           
    Petitioner pointed out had admitted in its arbitration petition that the 
    main source of revenue generation is through the exploitation of the 




                                                          
    rights   under   the   Media   Rights   Licensing   Agreement   with   the 
    Petitioner.     The   entire   structure   of   business   was   built   around   a 
    business   plan   involving   the   exploitation   of   the   rights   under   the 




                                              
    agreement which now   stands  terminated.    In   the  circumstances, it 
                              
    was urged that the First Respondent does not have the source or 
    means to clear its outstandings for benefits which had already been 
                             
    enjoyed   under   the   agreement.   Now   it   is   in   this   context   that   the 
    Petitioner    has submitted  in   the  arbitration  petition  that  the  First 
    Respondent is unable to fulfill its  obligations due to a paucity of 
        


    funds   and   is   likely   to   utilise   the   funds   which   it   receives   from 
     



    advertisers.     Ultimately   it   has   been   submitted   that   the   First 
    Respondent may utilise the funds which it receives from the Second 





    Respondent with a view to obstruct, defeat or delay the claim of the 
    Petitioner as also an arbitral award that may be passed in its favour. 
    As the learned Single Judge noted it was  necessary to assess the 





    claim of the Petitioner having regard to the distinct possibility of the 
    Respondents facing a financial crisis in the event that they do not 
    succeed in the disputes with the Petitioner.   The submissions which 
    have been urged on behalf of the Petitioner in the arbitration petition 
    must be juxtaposed in the context of the case of the First Respondent 
    in its arbitration petition (Arbitration Petition (Lodg.) No.1425 of 2011) 
    before   this   Court.     Counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   Second
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                 27/29                              APPL90-27.2.sxw


    Respondent has stated before the Court that at present 89% of the 
    share   holding   of   the   Second   Respondent   is   held   by   the   First 




                                                                               
    Respondent directly or directly.  The averments in the petition are to 
    the effect that since 2005, the First Respondent has  entirely invested 




                                                       
    into Indian cricket / BCCI events; the broadcast business is almost 
    completely dependent on media rights from BCCI; the most valuable 




                                                      
    asset of the business of the Second Respondent is the Media Rights 
    Licensing Agreement and if the termination were not to be stayed, it 
    would result in the closure of the business of the Second Respondent.
The First Respondent has also stated that the entire business of its 
                            
    fully owned subsidiary, the Second Respondent, would be destroyed if 
    the termination were allowed to stand.  Hence, in the account of the 
                           
    business by the First Respondent itself, it is evident prima facie that 
    the media rights from BCCI constitute the fulcrum of the business. 
    The   termination   of   that   business,   even   according   to   the   First 
        


    Respondent, would lead to the closure of the Second Respondent, its 
     



    subsidiary.  The shareholding of the First Respondent in the Second 
    Respondent constitutes a valuable asset : its value would be liable to 





    a serious erosion if the business of the Second Respondent is brought 
    to a standstill. There is also merit in the contention of the Petitioner 
    that in the copy of the commercial agreement between the First and 





    Second Respondents that has been placed on the record before this 
    Court, the actual monetary terms have been blanked out, so as to 
    exclude   any   assessment   of   the   terms   of   the   commercial   bargain 
    between   the   First   and   Second   Respondents.     Another   relevant 
    consideration is that in an affidavit dated 10 January 2012 filed by 
    the Second Respondent to oppose the application for ad interim relief, 
    it   has   been   stated   that   the   First   Respondent   has   a   majority
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                      28/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


    shareholding   in   the   Second   Respondent.     However,   the   Second 
    Respondent   is   stated   to   be   at   an   advanced   stage   of   inducting   a 




                                                                                     
    strategic investor in the company, several offers have been received 
    and as a result it is likely that the First Respondent  "will be only a  




                                                             
    minority shareholder going forward."
27.      In   this   view   of   the   matter,   and   having   due   regard   to   the 
    principles which are embodied in Order 38, Rule 5, we are of the 
    view that the learned Single Judge was justified in calling upon the 




                                                
    First Respondent to furnish security in respect of the claim of the 
                                
    Petitioner   in   the  amount   of   Rs.305   Crores.     Having   regard   to   the 
    provisions of Order 38, Rule 5, it would, however, be appropriate to 
                               
    direct the First Respondent to furnish security.   We are of the view 
    that the ends of justice could be met by a direction to the effect that 
    the First Respondent shall within a period of two weeks from today 
        


    furnish   solvent   security   in   the   form   of   a   bank   guarantee   of   a 
     



    nationalised bank in the amount of Rs.305 Crores to the satisfaction 
    of the Prothonotary and Senior Master.
28.      The directions which have been issued by the learned Single 
    Judge shall accordingly stand modified by the following directions :
i) By   consent,   Chamber   Summons   249   of   2012   filed   by   the 
             Petitioner for amending the petition under
Section 9
shall stand 
             allowed.  The amendment shall be carried out within a period 
             of one week from today;
ii) The ad interim order which was passed by the learned Single 
             Judge on 27 January 2012 in the Chamber Summons shall stand
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
PNP                                     29/29                               APPL90-27.2.sxw


            extended for a further period of four weeks from today so as 
            to enable the Petitioner to apply for appropriate relief before 




                                                                                    
            the learned Single Judge in the arbitration petition;
iii) In terms of the statement which has been made by the learned 




                                                            
            senior counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner before the 
            Court,   the   application   for   ad   interim   relief   as     against   the 




                                                           
            Second Respondent is not pressed at this stage, leaving it open 
            to the Petitioner to apply before the learned Single Judge for 
            appropriate reliefs against the Respondents.   Consequently, the 




                                               
            directions   contained   in   the   impugned   order   of   the   learned 
                               
            Single   Judge   as   against   the   Second   Respondent   shall   stand 
            vacated;
iv) The First Respondent shall furnish solvent security in the form 
            of a bank guarantee of a nationalised bank in the amount of 
            Rs.305 Crores to the satisfaction of the Prothonotary and Senior 
        


            Master within two weeks;
v) All the rights and contentions of the parties are kept open to 
            be   urged   before   the   learned   Single   Judge   in   the   arbitration 





            petition.
The Appeals are accordingly disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
(Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.)


                                                          (M.S. Sanklecha, J.)
::: Downloaded on - 09/06/2013 18:13:34 :::
