Title: Search
Court: High Court has passed the following order, which is dated
Date: 2 of 1974
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/192691027/

[Cites
24
, Cited by
16
]
State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
Bses Yamuna Power Ltd. vs Neeraj Kumar on 21 November, 2006
FA-1014/06
  
 
 
  


 
 


 

 IN THE STATE 
COMMISSION:DELHI 
 

(Constituted under
Section 9
of The Consumer Protection Act, 1986) 
 

  
 

Date of Decision: 
21-11-2006 
 

  
 

 FA-1014/2006 
 

(Arising out of Order dated 
04-04-2006 passed by the District Consumer Forum (East), in Complaint Case No. 
1095/2005) 
 

  
 

BSES (Y) Power 
Ltd.                             
 
 

Shakti Kiran 
Building, 
 

Karkardooma, 
 

Delhi.             
                        
                        
                        
            
   . . . Appellant 
 

    Through Ms. Sanjana Bali,
 

        Advocate.
 

            
            
            
                                    
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Versus 
 

  
 

Neeraj Kumar,          
                        
                        
                        
 
 Z-5, Hans Apartments,
 

East Arjun Nagar,           
                        
                        
            
            
. . . 
Respondent 
 

Delhi 110032. 
 

   
 

 CORAM: 
 

   
 

Justice J.D. Kapoor,          
President 
 

Mahesh Chandra, 
Member
1.            
Whether Reporters of local newspapers be allowed to see the judgment?
2.         
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Justice J.D. Kapoor 
(Oral)
1.         
While disposing of a batch of large number of CM (M) / Writ Petitions 
bearing Nos. 819, 1022, 1197, 1305, 1540, 1565, 1567, 1588, 1616, 
1627,1629,1630,1631,1632,1633 and 1634/2006 filed by BSES challenging various 
orders passed by this Commission involving theft of electricity or dishonest 
abstraction of energy (DAE) as contemplated under
Sec. 135
of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, the Delhi High Court has passed the following order, which is dated 
08-11-2006:-
These petitions have been entertained only on 
account of the fact that the Consumer Courts were exercising jurisdiction in 
respect of the disputes relating to theft of electricity or dishonest 
abstraction of electrical energy even though a learned Single Judge of this 
Court in Delhi Vidyut Board v Devendra Singh & Anr, 130 (2006) DLT 156 has 
held that the issue of theft/dishonest abstraction of electrical energy does not 
fall in any of the sub clauses or sub section (c) of
Section 2
of The Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 (for short, the said Act). This court was of the view 
that propriety demands that the Consumer Forums do not exercise jurisdiction 
till the legal proposition propounded in the aforesaid case of Delhi Vidyut 
Board v. Devendra Singh and Anrs case (supra) is good law.
In view of the aforesaid position, it is agreed 
that the Consumer Forums in Delhi will not exercise the jurisdiction in such 
matters in view of the prevalent legal position.  It may be noticed that the State 
Commission is represented through a counsel before the Court today. Ld. Counsel 
for the State Commission also assures that while considering original complaints 
or appeals where the Commission has jurisdiction, the procedure prescribed in 
the said Act shall be adhered to especially in respect of service of notice on 
the opposite party. It is pointed out that in some of the matters, there are 
interim orders and since the Consumer Forums will not be able to proceed with 
these matters now and will have to dispose of the same as having no 
jurisdiction, the affected consumers would like to seek appropriate legal 
remedy. Thus, wherever, as on date, there are certain interim directions, the 
same shall continue to inure for the benefit of the consumers for a period of 30 
days from today.  The petitions 
stand disposed of.
2.         
As is apparent, the High Court was of the view that the Consumer Forum do 
not exercise jurisdiction till the legal proposition propounded by a Single 
Judge of the High Court in Delhi Vidyut Board V/s 
Devinder Singh, 130 (2006) 
DLT 156, is a good law.
3.         
In DVB V/s Devinder Singh (supra), the Delhi High Court held that issue 
of theft/DAE does not fall in any of the sub-clauses of Sub-Sec. (c) of
Sec. 2
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, defining the word complaint and as such no consumer 
dispute lies under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
before any Forum or the 
State or National Commission created under the
Consumer Protection Act, 
1986
.
4.         
Order of the High Court is very brief and the relevant Paras are as 
under:-
3.    It is trite that power of 
the District Forum, State Commission and National Commission in exercise of 
pecuniary jurisdiction (excluding appellate jurisdiction) would be in respect of 
complaints.
Sec. 2(c)
of the Act 
defines the complaints as under:-
(c) complaint means any allegation in writing 
made by the complainant that
(i)           
an unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice has 
been adopted;
(ii)         
the goods brought by him or agreed to be brought by him suffer 
from one or more defects;
(iii)        
the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or 
availed of by him suffer from deficiency in any respect;
(iv)      a trader has charged for the goods mentioned in the complaint a 
price in excess of the price fixed by or under any law for the time being in 
force or displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods;
(v)       goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used, are 
being offered for sale to the public in contravention of the provisions of any 
law for the time being in force requiring traders to display information in 
regard to the contents, manner and effect of use of such goods.
-with a view to obtaining any relief provided by or under 
this Act.
(4) Needless to state that issue of theft/dishonest 
abstraction of electrical energy does not fall in any of the sub clauses of Sub 
Section (c) of
Sec. 2
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
(5) I need not elaborate on the issue. For the 
reason the State Commission, Delhi, vide order dated 06-10-2003 disposing of a 
batch of appeals; led appeal being No. 116/2003, New Delhi Power Limited V/s 
S.B. Roy, has held that the dispute relating to theft/dishonest abstraction of 
electrical energy is not a consumer dispute and no complaint lies under the Act 
before any Forum created under the Act. Additionally, the National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission.
5.         
The decision of the Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in DVB V/s 
Devinder Singh was rendered on 16-12-2005. Recent decision of the Supreme Court 
of India in
Haryana State Electricity Board v. Mam Chand, II
2006 CLT 14 
(SC) has been brought to our notice, where identical question before the 
Supreme Court came up for consideration.
6.         
By way of introduction, the Supreme Court referred to the following 
observations made by it, in
Skypak Couriers Ltd v. Tata Chemicals Ltd. IV
(2000) SLT 494, as to the scope and object of the
Consumer Protection Act, 
1986
:-
This 
law has been enacted for the welfare of consumers and to protect them from their 
exploitation for which the said 1986 Act has made provisions for the 
establishment of Commissions for settlement of consumer disputes and matters 
connected therewith.  The 
Commissions under the Act are quasi-judicial bodies to provide  speedy and 
simple redressal to consumer disputes and for that purpose, they have been 
empowered to give  relief of a specified nature and in an appropriate way 
to, award compensation.
7.         
In Para-4, the Supreme Court formulated the following question for 
determination:-
The 
key question which arises for determination in this civil appeal is  whether 
disputed and complicated questions of fact and law arising under the provisions 
of the
Electricity Act, 2003
concerning assessment of unauthorized use of 
electricity, tampering of meters, interfering with calibration metering of 
electric current resulting in theft of electricity under Sec. 126 and
Sec. 135
of the Electricity Act, 2003, could be decided in a summary manner by the 
Consumer Forum or whether in such cases the complainant should be directed to 
approach the competent authority under the said
Electricity Act, 2003
..
8.         
At the outset, it may be mentioned that
Sec. 135
of the Electricity Act, 
relates to allegations of theft of electricity as well as DAE, through tampering 
of meters or other means, which reads as under:-
Sec.135. Theft of electricity-
(1) Whoever dishonestly,-
(a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection 
with overhead, underground or under water 
lines or cables, or service wires, or 
service facilities of a licensee; or
(b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered 
meter, current reversing transformer, loop connection or any other 
device or method which interferes with 
accurate or proper registration, calibration or metering of electronic current or otherwise results in a manner whereby electricity is stolen or wasted; or
(c) damages or destroys an electronic meter, apparatus, equipment, or wire or causes or allows any 
of them to be so damaged or destroyed as 
to interfere with the proper or accurate metering of electricity, so as to abstract or consumer or use electricity shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
9.
Facts of Haryana Electricity Board
's case, in brief, were that the 
respondent-consumer was having small electric connection. On 24-11-1994, the 
Junior Engineer of the Nigam on inspection found that some seals of meter were 
broken. Notice was issued calling upon the respondent to deposit Rs. 10,050/- as 
electricity bill as per the rules of the Nigam.  However, respondent did not raise any 
dispute whatsoever and rather submitted an application to deposit the said 
amount in two instalments and subsequently filed the complaint before District 
Forum, Ambala, under
Section-12
of the Consumer Protection Act.  The District Forum allowed the complaint 
vide its order dated 07-07-1997 and directed the Nigam to refund the aforesaid 
amount with interest @18% per annum from the date of deposit and also Rs. 500/- 
by way of cost. Nigam preferred appeal before State Commission, Haryana. By a 
non-speaking order and without discussing the contentions of the Board, the 
State Commission dismissed the first appeal.  Feeling aggrieved the Nigam preferred 
Revision Petition before National Commission.  The Revision Petition was dismissed, by 
the National Commission, again by a non-speaking order. Consequently the Nigam 
went to the Supreme Court by way of instant Civil Appeal.
10.       On behalf 
of the Nigam following pleas were raised before the Supreme Court:-
(i) That the assessment of the duty for 
unauthorized use of electricity, tampering of meters, distribution of meters and 
calibration of electric current are matters of technical nature which cannot be 
decided by the Consumer Forum.
(ii) That under the
Electricity Act, 2003
the 
jurisdiction of the Civil Court is excluded. In this connection, reliance was 
placed on Sec. 145 of the said 2003 Act under which the jurisdiction of the 
Civil Court to entertain suits in respect of matters falling under Sec. 126 is 
expressly barred. These are matters of assessment.
(iii)
That the Electricity Act, 2003
is a complete Code by itself and 
therefore in matter of assessment of electricity bills, the Consumer Forum 
should have directed the respondent to move before the competent authority under 
the
Electricity Act, 2003
, read with rules framed thereunder either expressly or 
by incorporation.
11.       Since the 
question before the High Court was whether disputes relating to theft of 
electricity or DAE was a consumer dispute or not and, therefore, what was 
relevant was definition of consumer dispute provided by sub-clause (e) of 
sub-section (1) of
Section 2
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Obviously, 
question of issue relating to theft of electricity or dishonest abstraction of 
energy could not have formed part of definition of complaint as definition of 
complaint has to be confined to services hired or availed by a consumer. 
Since supply of electric energy falls within the definition of service any 
dispute relating to such a service falls within the definition of consumer 
dispute.
12.            
Consumer dispute has been defined by
Section 2 (1)(e)
of the Consumer 
Protection Act as under:-
(e) Consumer dispute means a dispute where the 
person against whom a complaint has been made, denies or disputes the 
allegations contained in the complaint.
13.       While 
allowing the Civil Appeal, the Supreme Court passed the following Order:-
15. In our view, the contentions advanced on behalf 
of the Nigam require deeper consideration by the State Commission. None of the 
above points have been discussed by the State Commission in this case. Disputes 
of this nature are repeatedly arising before this Court. At this stage, we do 
not wish to express any opinion. In our opinion, for the foregoing reasons, the 
civil appeal filed by the Nigam deserves to be allowed and is hereby 
allowed.
16. We accordingly direct the State Commission to 
decide the matter on facts of this case in the light of the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003
read with the rules framed thereunder.
14.       In the 
aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court, at first instance referred to the 
provisions of
Sec. 2(c)(iv)
,
2(d)
,
2(g)
,
2(i)
, and
2(o)
of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 defining the words complaints, consumer, deficiency in 
service, goods and over and above services, and held that supply of 
electrical energy falls under Sub-Sec. (o) of the said Act and, therefore, comes 
within the jurisdiction of the Consumer Forum / Commissions created under the 
1986 Act.
15.       As is 
apparent, the High Court did not discuss as to what is the definition of 
consumer dispute or deficiency in service or services or consumer and 
whether the supply of electricity comes within the ambit of services or 
not.  The High Court only referred 
to the definition of complaint and came to the conclusion that issue of theft 
of electricity/DAE does not fall in any of the sub clauses of sub-section (c) of
Sec. 2
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
16.            
Further, it was in view of the aforesaid provisions that the Supreme 
Court extended the jurisdiction of the Consumer Forum/Commissions to the 
disputes arising under the
Electricity Act, 2003
, including the disputes 
relating to the allegations of theft of electricity/DAE as contemplated by
Section 135
of the Electricity Act, 2003.
17.       Had it been 
the intention of the Supreme Court to oust the jurisdiction of the Consumer 
Forum / Commissions in respect of disputes arising under the
Electricity Act, 
2003
, including the disputes relating to theft of electricity/DAE or assessment 
of bill issued under
Sec. 126
of the Act, the Supreme Court would have accepted 
the contentions of the Board and allowed the appeal and set aside the order of 
the District Forum by holding that these disputes do not fall within the purview 
of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
and, therefore, the jurisdiction of 
Consumer Forum/Commissions created under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
does not extend to these disputes.  So much so, the Supreme Court even went 
to the extent of not expressing its opinion on the questions of law raised by 
the counsel for the Board as
referred above
namely:-
i)     
The assessment of duty or bills raised on the allegation of 
theft of electricity are matters of technical nature which cannot be decided by 
the Forum.
ii)   That the 
jurisdiction of the Civil Court is excluded by
Sec. 126
of the Electricity Act, 
2003.
iii)
That the Electricity 
Act, 2003
is a complete Code by itself and, therefore, the competent authority 
under the
Electricity Act, 2003
alone can entertain such disputes.
18.       The Supreme 
Court left the decision of these questions of law to be taken by the State 
Commission and did not deem it necessary to express any opinion on these 
questions.
19.       We may add 
that none of the contentions of the counsel for the Board raised before the 
Supreme Court is tenable or has any substance.  The first contention of the counsel was 
that the disputes as to the assessment of the duty, unauthorized use of 
electricity, tampering of meter, distribution of meter, calibration of electric 
current etc. relating to the provisions of
Sec. 126
and
135
of the Electricity 
Act, 2003 are technical matters and cannot be decided in a summary manner. The 
Supreme Court has held in
Union of India v. Seppol Ralleyog & Ors
III 
(1999) CPJ 10 (SC) that the Consumer Forum, State Commission and National 
Commission are headed by persons who are or have been District Judges, High 
Court Judges and Supreme Court Judges and have, therefore, wide and vast 
judicial experience in dealing with every and any kind of question and for such 
functionaries there is no complicated question which cannot be decided in a 
summary manner.
20.       As regards 
the contention that under the
Electricity Act, 2003
, the jurisdiction of Civil 
Court is excluded, there is no force, as the Consumer Forum and for that purpose 
the Commissions are not Civil Courts nor the proceedings and pleadings before 
them are governed by
the Code of Civil Procedure
(
CPC
).  These are Forums and Commissions before 
whom complaint under
Sec. 12
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 can be filed 
by a layman without fulfilling the requirements of Rules and Orders governing 
the pleadings and suits to be filed under
C.P.C
. and it is only on the basis of 
the affidavits of the parties, the matters are decided.
21.       Merely 
because these are quasi-judicial bodies and have consumer beneficial 
jurisdiction does not mean that these Forum and/or Commissions come within the 
definition of Civil Court or have the trappings of a Civil Court.
22.       Again, the 
contention that the
Electricity Act, 2003
is a complete code by itself holds 
water like a sieve, as there is no provision in the
Electricity Act, 2003
, which 
takes away the consumer beneficial jurisdiction of the Consumer Forum / State 
Commission or National Commission who are only quasi judicial bodies to provide 
speedy and simple redressal to consumer disputes. There may be a provision for 
creating limited courts for trial of certain offences or civil disputes between 
the parties. So far as the disputes arising under the
Consumer Protection Act
are concerned, these are independent disputes and additional remedy as 
propounded by
Sec.3
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and every allegation 
has to be decided on different criteria and standards and on the basis of 
definition of deficiency in service as defined by
Sec. 2(1)(g)
of the Act.
23.       Thus, the 
crux of the matter is that under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
, the Consumer 
Forum, State Commission or National Commission have been given wide powers which 
the designated courts created under the
Electricity Act, 2003
do not possess. 
These Forums and Commissions have prohibitory, mandatory, futuristic and 
compensation jurisdiction.  They can 
prohibit any party from doing any act, they can direct any party to do a 
particular act, they can direct any party to remove the defect in a product or 
replace the defective product and over and above they have the power to award 
compensation to a consumer on account of actual loss or mental injury or agony 
suffered by him due to negligence of the opposite party or due to sale of a 
defective product or goods etc.  
These powers are categorically and specifically enumerated in
Sec. 14(1)
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
The consumer beneficial jurisdiction of the Forum/State Commission or the 
National Commission created under the Act of 1986 extends to each and every kind 
of dispute arising not only under the
Electricity Act, 2003
but also in respect 
of any other law relating to the services that have been included in the 
definition of service by way of
Sec. 2(1)(o)
of the Act, i.e. banking, 
financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other 
energy, lodging, boarding or both, housing, construction, entertainment, 
amusement or the purveying of news or other information etc.  Disputes relating to and arising under 
the
Electricity Act, 2003
are very limited disputes.
24.       Some time 
back the BSES in a case Appeal No.460/2005 titled as BSES Yamuna 
Power Ltd. Versus Smt. Darshana, decided on 02-02-2006, had contended before 
us that jurisdiction of District Forum and for that purpose State Commission and 
National Commission has been ousted by
Section 154 (2)
of Electricity Act from 
dealing with the offences arising out of allegations of
Sections 135
to
139
of 
the Electricity Act.  These offences 
mainly pertain to direct theft of electricity and dishonest abstraction of 
energy through tampering of meters.
Section 25(v)
of DERC Regulation under the Delhi Electricity Reforms Act, 
according to the counsel, casts obligation on the appellant-Company to raise the 
bills five times the ordinary bill in case of direct theft and theft by 
tampering of meters.
25.       In order to 
appreciate the aforesaid contention in the proper perspective
Section 154
of 
Electricity Act needs to be reproduced:-
S.154
.
Procedure and power of Special Court.-
(1)      Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of 
Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence punishable under
sections 
135
to 139 shall be triable only by the Special Court within whose jurisdiction 
such offence has been committed.
(2)      Where it appears to any court in the course of any 
inquiry or trial that an offence punishable under
sections 135
to 139 in respect 
of any offence that the case is one which is triable by a Special Court 
constituted under the Act for the area in which such case has arisen, it shall 
transfer such case to such Special Court, and thereupon such case shall be tried 
and disposed of by such Special Court in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act.
26.       Bare 
reading of
Section 154
shows that the proceedings under these provisions pertain 
to trial of a person for the offence of theft or the offence punishable
u/s 
135-139
of the Electricity Act 2003.
Special Court as envisaged
u/s 154
means a court which has been specially 
designated for trial of the offences u/s 135-139 for particular area.  The object of bringing
section 154
on 
the Statute Book was to constitute a special court having specified territorial 
jurisdiction where offence
u/s 135
to 139 has been committed.  Otherwise under
Cr.P.C
. any Court of 
Magistrate can try the offences of the nature as envisaged
u/s 135
to
139
of 
Electricity Act irrespective of whether offence has taken place at a place which 
does not fall within its jurisdiction or not.
27.            
Secondly,
Section 154
mainly deals with trial of offences under
Sections 
135
to 139 for the purpose of punishment and that is why non-obstente clause 
mentions as under:-
Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), every 
offence punishable under
Sections 135
to 139 shall be triable only by the 
Special Court within whose jurisdiction such offence has been 
committed.
28.
Section 154
provides that if any court in the course of inquiry or trial 
under Cr. P.C. finds that an offence punishable
u/s 135
to 139 is made out that 
is triable by a special court constituted for the area in which such offence has 
been committed; it shall transfer such a case to the concerned special 
court.  It means that any court 
which means a criminal court shall transfer the case into which it is either 
making inquiry u/s 202/203 of Cr. P.C. or holding trial, finds that the area in 
which offence
u/s 135
to 139 was committed falls within the jurisdiction of 
Special Court created under
Electricity Act
, it shall transfer the said case 
to that court.  Nothing more, 
nothing less.
29.       Thus 
invocation of
Section 154
by the Counsel for the appellant in respect of 
provisions of
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
on the presumption that Consumer 
Fora created under this Act are also Court as envisaged by
Section 154
of 
Electricity Act competent to hold inquiry or trial under
Criminal Procedure Code
for the offences punishable with sentence of fine or imprisonment or both 
arising out of
Section 135
to 139 is highly misconceived, misdirected, 
irrelevant and does not touch upon on any of the remedies available under the
Consumer Protection Act
as these fora are not the Courts that have powers to 
make inquiry or hold trial under Cr. P.C..
Such courts are only criminal courts having powers to sentence the 
accused to imprisonment or fine or both.
Here complainant is Electricity Company.
30.       Thus, from 
every possible aspect we may examine the proposition of law, i.e. whether the 
consumer beneficial jurisdiction of the Forums/State Commissions and National 
Commission is extended to the disputes arising under the
Electricity Act, 2003
, 
including the disputes involving theft of electricity/DAE and for that purpose 
any other kind of dispute arising under this Act or any other Act or law 
relating to above referred services, the jurisdiction of the Consumer 
Forum/Commissions comes into play and is extended to decide these disputes in a 
summary manner for giving relief of a specified nature and in an appropriate way 
to even award compensation.
31.       The word 
compensation in the context of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
has wide 
connotation. It not only takes in its fold the loss suffered by the consumer due 
to the negligence of the Opposite Party or sale of defective goods but also loss 
for mental agony, harassment and emotional suffering and every kind of damage 
arising from the illegal act of service provider or the trader.
32.       None of the 
aforesaid ingredients or elements empowering the Forum/State Commission or 
National Commission to do one or more of the things enumerated in
Sec. 14
of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2006 including the compensatory aspect form part of the
Electricity Act, 2003
or for that purpose any other law made by the Parliament 
in respect of services of banking, financing, insurance, transport, processing, 
supply of electrical or other energy, lodging, boarding or both, housing, 
construction, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other 
information etc.  are there in the
Electricity Act, 2003
and, therefore, it cannot be termed as a Code by itself.
33.       Since as 
per
Art. 141
of the Constitution of India, law laid down and decided by the 
Supreme Court is binding on all the Courts within the territory of India, we are 
of the view that the legal proposition propounded by the Single Judge of the 
Delhi High Court in Devinder Singhs case is no more tenable as the 
Supreme Court has extended the jurisdiction of Consumer Forum / Commissions in 
matters relating to disputes involving theft of electricity/DAE.
34.       The 
aforesaid discussion and ratio of judgment of Supreme Court in Haryana 
Electricity Board lead us to the following conclusions:-
i)                    
That the Consumer Forum / State Commission / National 
Commission created under the Act of 1986 are quasi judicial bodies to provide 
speedy and simple redressal to the consumer and for that purpose they have been 
empowered to grant relief of a specified nature and in an appropriate way to 
award compensation.
ii)                   
Since the supply of electrical energy falls within the 
definition of service as defined by
Sec. 2(o)
of the Act of 1986, any dispute 
arising under the provisions of the
Electricity Act, 2003
including the disputes 
relating to the provisions of
Sec. 135
of the said Act, i.e. theft of 
electricity / DAE is a consumer dispute as defined by
Sec. 2(1)(e)
of 
the Act of 1986.
iii)                 
The Consumer Forum/Commissions have the jurisdiction not only 
to decide every kind of dispute on fact under the
Electricity Act, 2003
but also 
have the jurisdiction to decide any question of law arising from the provisions 
of the
Electricity Act, 2003
including the dispute under
Section 135
of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 relating to allegations of theft of electricity and 
dishonest abstraction of energy (DAE).
Had it not been so, the Supreme Court would not have sent back the case 
to the Commission for deciding the matter on facts in the light of the 
provisions of the
Electricity Act
read with rules framed there under.
For 
that purpose the Consumer Forum/Commissions have also the jurisdiction to decide 
any kind of dispute relating to any law pertaining to the services as defined 
under
Sec. 2(1)(o)
of the Act, for instance, banking, financing, insurance, 
transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, lodging, boarding 
or both, housing, construction, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of 
news or other information etc.
iv)               
Every registered consumer of energy is a consumer as defined 
u/s 2(1) (d) (ii) of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
and therefore has a right 
to challenge the allegations of theft of energy by fraudulent or dishonest 
abstraction, consumption or use of energy notoriously known as FAE or DAE or by 
artificial mean or means not authorized by the licensee or allegation of 
interference with meters or licensees work or improper use or consumption of 
energy as prescribed by
Section-135
of the Electricity Act, 2003  before the Consumer Fora  as denial of or disputing such 
allegations is itself a consumer dispute within the meaning of
Section 2 (1)
(c) of the
Consumer Protection Act
1986.
v)                 
No consumer can be condemned without being afforded an 
opportunity of being heard as this right emanates from the principles of natural 
justice.   Doors of Consumer 
Fora cannot be shut to the registered consumers merely on the basis of 
allegations nor can a consumer be left at the mercy or whim or arbitrariness of 
a provider of service such as of electrical energy.
vi)               
Consumer Forum may dismiss the complaint of a consumer against 
whom there are allegations of theft of energy through dishonest abstraction, 
consumption or use by way of artificial mean or means not authorized by the 
licensee on prima facie view of the matter on the basis of the material produced 
and reply thereto without subjecting the proceedings to undergo any further 
process.
(Justice J.D. Kapoor) 
 

President 
 

  
 

  
 

  
 

(Mahesh Chandra) 
 

Member 
 

  
 

HK
