Title: Search
Court: High Court - Orders
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: AIR 1980 SC 1632 as well as
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1942775/

[Cites
25
, Cited by
103
]
Patna High Court - Orders
Bishundeo Sahu vs State Of Bihar on 20 January, 2011
Author:
Mridula Mishra
Bench:
Mridula Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
               Cr.Misc. No.1257 of 2010
               1. BISHUNDEO SAHU S/O LATE BIRANCHI SAHU
               R/O NORTH HAJIPUR WARD NO.13,NEAR KALI
               ASTHAN,P.S.-          CHITRGUPTA          NAGAR,DIST.-
               KHAGARIA.---PETITIONER
               Versus
               1. THE STATE OF BIHAR
               with
               Cr.Misc. No.2875 of 2010
            1. RAMA SHANKAR PANDEY
            2. ARTI DEVI
            3. ASTHA KUMARI
            4. SMITA KUMARI ALIAS SMITHA KUMARI
            5. SURESH CHANDRA BHATT
            6. GAURI SHANKAR PANDEY-----PETITIONERS
               .
               Versus
               THE STATE OF BIHAR .
               with
               Cr.Misc. No.21131 of 2010
               HARI KUMAR JHA .
               Versus
               STATE OF BIHAR .
                                -----------
            For the Petitioners:- Mr. Rana Pratap Singh, Sr.Advocate &
                                  Mr. Rakesh Kumar,Advocates
            For the State:- Mr. Lala Kailash Bihari Pd, Sr.Adv.

                             ORDER


6   20.01.2011
These matters have been referred by

                 Hon‟ble Single Judge, for deciding the issue, that if

                 the previous anticipatory bail order was for a limited

                 period till submission of the charge-sheet and the

                 accused after grant of anticipatory bail has

                 surrendered before the Court for furnishing bail
2
bond, whether in such cases on submission of

charge-sheet, second anticipatory bail application is

maintainable or the applicant will have to surrender

and obtain an order of bail under Sections 437 or

439 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
. The single

Judge has referred these matters in view of

divergent opinion among the Judges about the

maintainability of the second anticipatory bail

application in such circumstance.
2.        Petitioners in these applications were

granted anticipatory bail till submission of the

charge-sheet. Subsequently when the charge-sheet

was submitted, again they filed application for grant

of anticipatory bail, which gave rise to question

whether in terms of previous order, they are

required to appear and surrender before the Court

below for seeking regular bail or their prayer for

grant of anticipatory bail on the second occasion

could be allowed.
3.     The issue has been framed in view of the

constitution bench decision of Apex Court in the

case of     Guru Baksh Singh Sibia Vs. State of
3
Punjab reported in AIR 1980 SC 1632 as well as

divergent views taken by different Benchs in the

case of Salauddin Abdul Samad Shaikh Vs. State

of Maharashtra reported in (1996) 1 SCC 667, in

the case of
Nirmaljeet Kaur Vs. State of M.P.
as

well as in the case of
Mahendra Prasad Singh Vs.

State of Bihar
reported in 2004(
3) PLJR 491,

Sheochandra Singh Vs. State of Bihar
reported in

2007(4) BBCJ V-66 as well as in the case of

Jagnarayan Yadav alias Babajee and ors. Vs. State

of Bihar, reported in 2010 (2) PLJR 684.
The view

taken in Salauddin‟s case has been followed in all

these cases, with certain observations/modifications

but so far the view taken by the learned single

Judge in the case     of Anirudh Pd. alias
Sadhu

Yadav Vs. State of Bihar
reported in 2006(2) PLJR

676 is concerned, a different view has been taken.
4.
Section 438
was introduced in the
Code of

Criminal Procedure
on recommendation of the Law

Commission in its forty first Reports.
Section 438
Cr.P.C, contemplates an application by a person on

an apprehension of arrest in regard to the
4
commission of non-bailable offence. The object of

the provision under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. was to

give    relief   to       a   person   from        unnecessary

harassment        and         discourage      in     case   of

apprehension of arrest for non- bailable offence.

This privilege could be granted on an application

filed before the High Court or the Sessions Court, if

the Court concerned is satisfied that (i)the person

will not abuse the liberty of anticipatory bail. (ii) The

facts of the case reveal false implication of

applicant in the matters of non-bailable offence. (iii)

The applicant has reasonable apprehension of

being arrested in the case. (iv)                   The person

concerned will not abscond and will make himself

available to face trial and also that the privilege of

anticipatory bail will not be otherwise misused by

person concerned.
5.     Shri Rana Pratap Singh, Senior Advocate,

while addressing the Court on this issue has

referred different decisions, right from AIR 1980 SC

1632 (
Gurubaksh Singh Sibia Vs. State of Punjab
),

up to 2010(2) PLJR 684 (
Jag Narayan Yadav vs.
5
State of Bihar
).
He has submitted that it was for the

first time in the case of
Gurubaksh Singh Sibia
(supra) that the Apex Court has considered the

scope of
Section 438
Cr.P.C, while granting

anticipatory bail and discussed the jurisdiction of

the Court. The view of the Apex Court in Gurubaksh

Singh‟s case was that amplitude of judicial

discretion, given to the High Court and the Court of

Sessions should not be cut down by reading into

statute. It is for the High Court and the Court of

Sessions, to whom the anticipatory bail application

is made to exercise freely their judicial discretion,

on the particular facts and circumstances of the

case and on such conditions as the case may

warrant. The ends of justice will be better served by

trusting these Courts governing the grant of bail,

then by divesting them of their discretion, which the

legislature has conferred upon them, by laying

down inflexible rules of general application. The

view   expressed    by   the   constitution   Bench,

sufficiently indicated that how and in which manner

an application, for anticipatory bail should be
6
considered. The only consideration was the judicial

discretion of the concerned Court depending on the

facts and circumstances of a particular case.
6.        However, in this very decision, the

Constitution Bench has held that provisions of
Section 438
Cr.P.C. cannot be invoked after the

arrest of the accused. Grant of anticipatory bail to

an   accused,    who     is   under   arrest,   involves

contradiction to term of provision under
section 438
Cr.P.C., as the first pre-condition for         granting

anticipatory bail is a reasonable apprehension of

being arrested, on an accusation of having

committed a non-bailable offence. The constitution

Bench also decided that operation of an order

passed under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. necessarily

should not be limited in point of time. The normal

rule should be, not to limit the operation of the order

in relation to period of time.
7. But the view of Apex Court in Gurubaksh

Singh‟s case was changed in
Salauddin Vs. State

of Maharashtra
(1996) 1 SCC 667. In this decision

the view of the Apex Court was that if any person
7
has reason to believe that he may be arrested on

an accusation of having committed non-bailable

offence, the High Court or the Court of Sessions,

may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the event of arrest,

he shall be enlarged on bail, it may include such

conditions, having regard to the facts of the

particular case. It was also held that since

anticipatory bail is granted to any person in

anticipation of arrest in non-bailable case, it does

not mean that the regular Court, which is to try the

offender, should be bypassed and for that reason

the High Court or the Court of Sessions should fix a

outer date for continuation of bail and on the date of

its expiry, petitioner should be directed to move for

regular bail. The anticipatory bail as per decision

was an ad-interim relief till the investigation is going

on. Once investigation is completed and charge-

sheet submitted bringing some tangible evidence

against the accused, he has to surrender before the

Court having jurisdiction for regular bail.
8.       The earlier view of the Apex Court in

(1996) 1 SCC 667 was also upheld in the decision
8
reported in (1998) 9 SCC 348 (
K.L.Verma Vs.

State and another
), where the Apex Court was of

the view that the order of anticipatory bail do not

ensure restraining from arrest till the end of trial but

for a limited duration. The matter should be left for

regular bail, giving sufficient time to the accused to

move regular Court for bail and only in case of

refusal by the Regular Court, to approach Higher

Court.
9.    The view taken in K.L. Verma‟s case did

not find favour in
Bharat Choudhary Vs. State of

Bihar
( 2003) 8 SCC 77. In this case anticipatory

bail of the petitioner had been rejected by the High

Court and appeal was preferred by him before the

Supreme Court. The Apex Court was inclined to

grant bail to the petitioner Bharat Chowdhary but a

serious objection was raised by the counsel

appearing for the State. The objection of the State

Counsel was that since trial court had taken

cognizance of the offence,
section 438
Cr.P.C.

cannot be made applicable for granting anticipatory

bail and only remedy available to the appellant is to
9
approach trial Court, surrender before it and apply

for regular bail. The objection raised by the State

Counsel, however was not found acceptable to the

Supreme Court and it was held that object of
Section    438
Cr.P.C.      was    to   prevent   undue

harassment of the accused persons on account of

pre-trial arrest. While granting anticipatory bail, the

consideration of gravity of the offence should an

important factor. Simply because cognizance has

been taken, these things in itself cannot be

construed     as         prohibition   against   grant   of

anticipatory bail.
10.    The Apex Court‟s again reverted back to

the findings recorded in Salauddin case (Supra) in

Nirmaljeet Kaur‟s case. The view of the Apex Court

in this case was also that anticipatory bail should

be granted for a limited duration, so as to enable

the accused to move the regular Court for bail, in

terms of
Section 439
Cr.P.C. Such limited duration

may extend to the date on which bail application

filed by the accused is disposed of or even few

days thereafter to enable the accused to move
10
higher Court.    This view was not accepted by

another Bench of the Apex Court in K.L.Verma‟s

case (Supra). However in        Nirmaljeet Kaur Vs.

State of M.P (2004) 7 SCC 558, also the view taken

in 1996(1) SCC 667 was affirmed, holding that a

person who had been granted anticipatory bail

under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. for a limited period, has

to move regular court for bail under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. But in this case a new theory was

propounded that after bail is not granted within that

period, he has to surrender so that application

under
section 439
Cr.P.C. can be taken for

disposal. High court, cannot during the pendency of

the application under Section 439       Cr.P.C., by a

blanket order extend the ad-interim anticipatory bail,

so as to enable the accused to obtain bail under

Section 439 Cr.P.C.
11.    Observation of the Supreme Court in

K.L.Verma‟s case was that even after expiry of the

limited period of anticipatory bail, for a few days ad-

interim relief can be granted to the accused to move

higher Court. This view was held per in curium as
11
the decision was without giving reference to the

requirement of Section 439 Cr.P.C.
12. Similar view has also been taken in the

decision reported in 2009 (2) BBCJ 119, where it

has been held that protection in terms of
Section

438
Cr.P.C is for a limited duration, during which

one has to move to the regular Court for bail in

terms of
Section 439
Cr.P.C. Mandate of
Section

439
Cr.P.C. is that the applicant has to be in

custody. The distinction between order under
Sections 438
and
439
Cr.P.C. shall be rendered

meaningless and redundant, if the protective

umbrella under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is extended

beyond the required period.
13. The view taken in the decision reported in

2006(2) PLJR 676 (
Anirudh Prasad vs. State of

Bihar
), is on the line of decision reported in

Gurubaksh Singh‟s case as well as Bharat

Choudhary‟s case, where it has been held that

mere submission of the charge-sheet does not

denude the Court, the power to grant anticipatory

bail. As a proposition of law, it cannot be said that in
12
a case, in which once the anticipatory bail is given

till submission of charge-sheet, another application

cannot be entertained, based on the premise that

later, on investigation, fresh materials come.
14.   On perusal of all these decisions what

transpires, that the scope of
Section 438
Cr.P.C.

has      been    considered   differently   in   different

decisions.      In most of the cases the view of the

Apex Court is that an accused cannot be granted

anticipatory bail from the stage of investigation, till

the stage of trial, since it is a protection given to the

accused from harassment, in a case where the

investigation is in the initial stage. But once the

accused is charge-sheeted and material evidence

has been collected against him, he will have to

surrender before the Trial Court and pray for regular

bail.
15.   What I find that scope of
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is to give relief to an accused who

anticipates his arrest in connection with non-

bailable offence. The Court is empowered in

exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. to
13
grant him bail in anticipation of arrest. That arrest

can be before submission of charge-sheet or after

submission of the charge-sheet or after the

cognizance has been taken in the case. If the Court

has applied its juridical mind and is of this view that

the person concerned despite being named as

accused in a non-bailable offence is capable of

granting anticipatory bail for the reason that (i) there

is no chance of misuse of privilege of bail by him (ii)

There is no apprehension of his absconding (iii) no

chance of tampering with the evidence and (iv) will

present himself for facing trial, in such cases, even

if charge-sheet is submitted or cognizance is taken,

anticipatory bail can be granted. Anticipatory bail

which was granted earlier to an accused will not

come to an end, and it will continue till conclusion of

the trial, unless the order granting anticipatory bail

is either cancelled by a judicial order, or the

accused has been taken into custody, simply

because the charge-sheet is submitted, it does not

mean that the person who was granted anticipatory

bail, has come beyond the protective umbrella of
14
section 438 Cr.P.C.
16. Only distinction in between
Sections 438
and
439
Cr.P.C. is that bail granted in exercise of

jurisdiction under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is before the

arrest of the accused and under
Section 439
Cr.P.C, it is granted when the accused has either

surrendered or has been taken into custody. The

privilege which is given to the accused under both

the sections are the same, but only distinction is of

stage.
17.       On account of certain changes and

amendment brought in
Section 438
Cr.P.C., in case

of grant of anticipatory bail, the petitioners-accused

has to surrender before the Court concerned. In

case where anticipatory bail has been granted for a

limited period, till submission of the charge-sheet,

the petitioner again has to make a fresh prayer for

bail, since, already on earlier occasion he had to

surrender before the concerned Court and had

furnished bail bond, so on submission of charge-

sheet, the first pre-requisite for grant of anticipatory

bail i.e. the person concerned must not have been
15
arrested or surrendered before any Court, is not

available to him. He has lost the requisite criteria of

granting anticipatory bail
,
in that case
except the

surrendering before the competent Court for grant

of regular bail, he is left with no other option.
18. A similar matter was considered in case of

bailable offence. A person who is named as

accused for bailable offences and granted bail by

the police on execution of bail bond. Subsequently

on completion of investigation, if the charge-sheet is

submitted for non-bailable offence or despite

submission of charge-sheet for bailable offence,

cognizance is taken by the Magistrate for non-

bailable offence, which he can make prayer for

anticipatory bail. This issue was considered and

decided in the case of
Mahendra Pd. Singh vs.

State of Bihar
( 2004 (3) PLJR 491).                In this

decision it was held that once the bail had been

granted and bail bond executed, at a later stage, if

the offence is treated as non-bailable, the applicant

cannot file his application for grant of anticipatory

bail. The only remedy available to him is to
16
surrender before the concerned Court. The Court

concerned will grant him bail without taking into

custody, considering his conduct while on police

bail and also that he has not misused the privilege

of bail.
19.   In case of non-bailable offences also,

similar view can be taken, in case anticipatory bail

was granted for a limited period till submission of

the charge-sheet. Since the accused has already

surrendered before the Court below for grant of

anticipatory bail and has executed bail bond, as

such at his instance another anticipatory bail

application can not be maintainable. He will have to

surrender and pray for regular bail under
Section

439
of the Code of Criminal procedure. The Court

concerned, instead of taking      him into custody,

considering the previous order of anticipatory bail

passed in his favour and also that he has not

misused the privilege or his conduct is such that

despite submission of charge-sheet or order taking

cognizance, he is capable of granting bail, will grant

him bail. In case where the anticipatory bail granted
17
for limited period has been misused, the concerned

Court will have discretion, either to grant or refuse

the    bail.
In   case    of   non-bailable   offence,

Anticipatory bail, if granted for limited period, the

Court concerned will pass order in similar manner

as
laid down in
the case of
Mahendra Pd. Singh
(supra). In no case, second anticipatory bail

application at the instance of such accused person

is maintainable.
20.       So far petitioners in these Criminal

Miscellaneous applications are concerned, they are

also directed to surrender before the concerned

Court within four weeks from the date of this order.
In case these petitioners will surrender and file their

applications for bail under
Section 439
of the Code

of Criminal Procedure, the concerned Court will

pass an order in the similar manner as has been

decided in the case of
Mahendra Prasad Singh vs.

State of Bihar
reported in 2004(3) PLJR 491.
21.      These petitioners will be granted bail

without taking them        into custody as there is no

allegation against them that during the limited
18
period of anticipatory bail or the provisional bail

order passed during pendency of these applications

by the High Court, they have misused the privilege

of bail.
22. These applications are allowed.
(Mridula Mishra,J.)
23.        Dharnidhar Jha, J.-   I had the privilege of

going through the order proposed by my esteemed

sister Smt. Mishra, J., on the reference made by the

learned Single Judge by order dated 12.5.2010,

jointly passed in Cr. Misc. petition No. 1257 of 2010

and Cr. Misc. petition No. 2875 of 2010. It appears

that subsequently another petition bearing Cr. Misc.

No. 21131 of 2010 was also referred to the larger

Bench by an order passed on 7.7.2010 by the same

learned Judge who had passed the order of

reference on 12.5.2010.
24.         Considering the matter and

the issue which was referred and placed before us

for decision in spite of having deeply been benefited

by the erudite order proposed by my esteemed

Sister, I want to express my own opinion on the
19
issue.
25.       The three petitions had been filed by the

accused persons           of three different cases, as

indicated in the orders of reference, who had been

granted anticipatory bail by competent courts for a

particular duration, i.e., up to the submission of the

charge-sheet.     On      the     charge   sheets      being

submitted, the original court of jurisdiction took

cognizance of the offence on those basis and issued

summons for appearance of the accused persons.

Because the accused of those three cases were on

bail under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. for that limited

period,   they    filed   fresh    petitions   before    the

respective Sessions Judges, namely, of Khagaria,

Buxar     and    Patna,    but    those    petitions    were

dismissed by different orders passed in the fresh

petitions preferred by the accused persons. Those

accused persons preferred three Cr.Misc. petitions

in this Court which were listed before the learned

Single Judge. The learned Single Judge, finding that

the petitioners were placing before his Lordship the

decision of this Court reported in 2006(2) P.L.J.R.
20
676 Anirudh Prasad Yadav alias
Sadhu Yadav Vs.

State of Bihar
to buttress their submission that their

petitions were very much maintainable in spite of the

three decisions of this Court reported in 2004(3)

P.L.J.R. 491, Mahendra Singh Vs. State of Bihar,

2007(4) B.B.C.J. V-66 Sheo Chandra Singh and

anr. Vs. State of Bihar and 2010(2) P.L.J.R. 684 Jag

Narayan Yadav alias
Babajee Yadav Vs. State of

Bihar
taking a contrary view, found that there was a

conflict of opinion on the maintainability of such

petitions amongst the Judges of this Court and, as

such, directed listing of the three petitions before a

larger Bench so as to ironing out the differences in

opinion of the Court on similar issue. This was how

the three petitions were placed before us for

reconsideration.
26.   On perusing the order of reference dated

12.5.2010 passed jointly in Cr. Misc. No. 1257 of

2010 and Cr. Misc. No. 2875 of 2010 what appears

is that the learned Judge was rather referring the

issue to a larger Bench for deciding the correctness

of the above decisions by noting as to whether an
21
accused who had been granted anticipatory bail

under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. for a limited period, i.e.,

up to the submission of the charge sheet, could he

be entitled to maintain a similar petition under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. before the competent court

again after submission of the charge sheet.
27.   While    enacting    the
Code     of   Criminal

Procedure
, 1973, the      legislature was considering

the 41st Report of the Law Commission which had

proposed introduction of the provision in the Code

enabling the court to grant anticipatory bail. The

relevant suggestion was appearing in paragraph

39.9 of its Report. The Law Commission, at the

same time, was also presenting a draft Section for

consideration. It was pointing out, "the necessitity for

granting anticipatory bail arises mainly because

some influential persons try to implicate their rivals

in false case for the purpose of disgracing them or

for other purposes by getting them detained in jail

for some time. In the recent times, with the

accentuation of the political rivalry, this tendency is

showing signs of steady increase. Apart from false
22
cases, where there are reasonable grounds          for

holding that a person accused of an offence is not

likely to abscond, or otherwise misuse his liberty

while on bail, there seems no justification to require

him first to submit to the custody, remain in prison

for some days and then apply for bail."

28        The report of the Law Commission was

accepted by the Parliament. While amending Cr.

P.C., 1898, it introduced a new provision vide
Section 438
Cr. P.C. What is the crux in matters of

granting anticipatory bail has been pointed out time

and again and it has consistently been noted by

different decisions, probably, the first which was

coming from this Court in 1974 P.L.J.R. 516 Sk.

Nizamuddin Vs. State of Bihar and anr. In that case

S.K.Jha,J. ( as his Lordship then was) was pointing

out in paragraph 4 of the report as to what could be

the import of the terms like „accusation‟ and „reason

to believe‟ besides the meaning of other terms like

„suspected of the commission of any non-bailable

offence.‟ While considering the ambit and scope of

the section his Lordship was further considering the
23
comparative scope and ambit of
Section 438
Cr.

P.C. with
Sections 437
and
439
Cr.P.C. and was

holding as under:
"It was submitted that
             whereas
Section 437
speaks
             of bail to be granted to „any
             person      accused       of     or
             suspected of the commission
             of any non-bailable offence‟
             and
Section 439 (1)
speaks of
             such bail to „any person
             accused of an offence and in
             custody‟,
Section 438(1)
on the
             contrary     speaks       of    an
             anticipatory bail to „any person
             having reason to believe that
             he may be arrested on an
             accusation        of        having
             committed      a     non-bailable
             offence‟. Stress has been laid
             by learned counsel on the
             difference between the words „
             accused‟ and „may be arrested
             on an accusation‟ and it is
             sought to be contended that by
             implication it must be held that
             the Legislature intended to
             preclude     a    case       where
             accusation has already been
             made from the operation of
Section 438
. Learned counsel
             wants me to read after the
             word „accusation‟ in
Section
             438(1)
„likely to be made‟. In
             other      words,     the     term
             „accusation‟ is sought to be
             qualified by the term „likely to
             be made‟ and not covering a
             case of accusation already
             made. I am afraid, this
             contention cannot be held to
24
be tenable in law. Where the
term „accusation‟, has been
used in
Section 438(1)
, it must
in the fitness of things include
an accusation made as such
as an accusation likely to be
made. So far as
Sections 437
and
439
are concerned, the
terms         „accusation‟      or
„suspected of the commission
of any non-bailable offence‟
had to be used as they were
dealing with the cases of
persons already arrested or
detained and in custody. In
Section 438
, on the other
hand, the person approaching
the Court of Session or the
High Court is neither arrested
nor detained nor in custody. A
person may have „reason to
believe that he may be
arrested on account of an
accusation‟ which has already
been made against him of
having committed a non-
bailable offence. Such a
person may also have reason
to believe that he may be
arrested on an accusation
likely to be made of having
committed        a    non-bailable
offence. I see no reason to
restrict the language of
Section
438
to only such cases where
accusation is only likely to be
made and not to cases where
accusation has already been
made, for it is seldom, if at all
there be any such case, where
a     person       without    any
accusation being made against
him shall have reason to
believe that he may be
25
arrested. The very object of the
              legislation will be frustrated if
              such a narrow construction be
              put upon the language of
Section 438
as learned
              counsel for the petitioner wants
              me to put."
29.        The Supreme Court also considered the

scope and ambit of
Section 438
Cr. P.C. in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia Vs. State of Punjab
reported in A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 1632 and while so

doing was pointing out the distinction between an

ordinary order of bail and order of anticipatory bail.

It was pointed out that „distinction between an

ordinary order of bail and an order of anticipatory

bail is that whereas the former is granted after

arrest and, therefore, is release from custody of

the police, the latter is granted in anticipation of the

arrest and is, therefore, effective at the very

moment of arrest. Police custody is an inevitable

concomitant of arrest for non-bailable offence. An

order of anticipatory bail constitutes, so to say, an

insurance against police custody following upon

arrest for offence and offences in respect of which

the order is issued. In other words, unlike a post-
26
arrest order of bail, it is a pre arrest legal process

which directs that if the person in whose favour it is

issued, is thereafter arrested on the accusation in

respect of which the direction is issued, he may be

released on bail. Thus, a petition under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. could be maintainable only when a person

reasonably believes him being arrested on an

accusation of having committed a non-bailable

offence. As soon as the person is arrested, there is

no scope for him to take resort to the remedy under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. He is left only with the

remedies which could be available to him under
Sections 437
and
439
Cr. P.C.‟
30.         While    passing     the   judgment     in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra) the Supreme Court

was also considering as to what could be the

duration for which such an order of bail could be

made. The learned Single Judge has also referred

to those observations of the Supreme Court in his

order. Considering the context and the issue, I also

want to reproduce the relevant part of the Supreme

Court observation in paragraph 38 of the report
27
which appears at page 1649:-
"There was some discussion
          before us on certain minor
          modalities regarding the passing of
          bail orders under
S.438(1)
. Can an
          order of bail be passed under that
          section without notice to the public
          prosecutor? It can be. But notice
          should issue to the public prosecutor
          or the Government Advocate
          forthwith and the question of bail
          should be re-examined in the light of
          the respective contentions of the
          parties. The ad interim order too
          must conform to the requirements of
          the section and suitable conditions
          should be imposed on the applicant
          even at that stage. Should the
          operation of an order passed under
Section 438(1)
be limited in point of
          time? Not necessarily. The Court
          may, if there are reasons for doing
          so, limit the operation of the order to
          a short period until after the filing of
          an F.I.R. in respect of the matter
          covered by the order. The applicant
          may in such cases be directed to
          obtain an order of bail under
S. 437
or 439 of the Code within a
          reasonably short period after the
          filing of the F.I.R. as aforesaid. But
          this need not be followed as an
          invariable rule. The normal rule
          should be not to limit the operation
          of the order in relation to a period of
          time."
Thus, as per the observation of the Supreme

Court the order of    bail under
Section 438
28
Cr.P.C. may be for the      whole period of the

case or may be for a limited stage of the case.
31.        Subsequently, in several decisions right

from (1996) 1 S.C.C. 667 Salauddin Abdul Samad

Shaikh V State of Maharashtra the Apex Court was

considering   the    same      question   which   was

considered by the Constitution Bench of the

Supreme Court in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia
(supra)

regarding the duration of the period for which such

an order of anticipatory bail could be existing.
In

Salauddin Abdul Samad Shaikh(supra) it was held :
"When the Court of Session or the
          High Court is granting anticipatory
          bail, it is granted at a stage when the
          investigation is incomplete and,
          therefore, it is not informed about the
          nature of evidence against the
          alleged offender. It is, therefore,
          necessary that such anticipatory bail
          orders should be of a limited duration
          only and ordinarily on the expiry of
          that duration or extended duration,
          the court granting anticipatory bail
          should leave it to the regular court to
          deal with the matter on              an
          appreciation of evidence placed
          before it after the investigation has
          made progress or the charge-sheet
          is submitted."
It was further held in that judgment as under:
"Ordinarily    the     court    granting
29
anticipatory bail should not substitute
          itself for the original court which is
          expected to deal with the offence. It
          is that court which has then to
          consider whether, having regard to
          the material placed before it, the
          accused person is entitled to bail."
32.
In
K.L.Verma Vs. State and another
reported in (1998) 9 S.C.C.348 the Apex Court was

issuing a direction which was somewhat contrary to

the procedure and practice prevailing as regards

the provision of
Section 438
Cr. P.C. In that case

an accused who had been granted anticipatory bail

for a limited period approached the Apex Court and

while not disturbing the earlier direction or not

holding that it could not have been issued, the

Supreme Court directed the appellant before their

Lordships to approach the original courts for bail

after submission of the charge sheet at the end of

the duration for which the order under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. was available to him and directed that High

Court may extend it with a direction to the accused

to move the original court for grant of regular bail.
However, the above observation of the Apex Court

appears not approved by its subsequent decision in
30
Nirmal Jeet Kaur Vs. State of M.P. and anr
,

reported in 2004(7) S.C.C. 558 by referring to the

provisions of
Sections 437
and
439
Cr. P.C. which

require an accused to move for bail under those

provisions only when he was in custody of the

courts.
Reference in the above behalf was made to

the decision in
Niranjan Singh and another Vs.

Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others
reported in

A.I.R. 1980 S.C. 785 in which the Apex Court

adumbrated upon the word „custody‟ and it was

held that direction issued in
K.L.Verma
(Supra)

was per incuriam.
33.
In
Bharat Chaudhary and another Vs.

State of Bihar
and anr. reported           in (2003)8

S.C.C.77 the issue was not as is before us, that‟s to

say,   as to whether an accused who         had been

earlier admitted to an order under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. for a particular duration, could file a similar

prayer after expiry of that duration or, say, after

submission    of    charge   sheet   or   passing   of

cognizance order. For that the accused
in that case
had filed a petition under
Section 438
Cr.PC. for the
31
first time after cognizance order had been passed.
It appears that the resistance to the maintainability

of the anticipatory bail petition after submission of

the charge sheet and passing of the cognizance

order was on the ground that as soon as the order

of cognizance was passed the petition was not

maintainable and for resisting the prayer reliance

was placed on Salauddin Abdul Samad Shaikh V.

State of Maharashtra ( supra). The Apex Court

made the following observations in paragraph 11 of

Bharat Chaudhary‟s case( supra):
"We respectfully agree with the
          observations of this Court in the said
          case that the duration of anticipatory
          bail should be normally limited till
          the trial court has the necessary
          material before it to pass such orders
          and it thinks fit on the material
          available before it. That is only a
          restriction in regard to blanket
          anticipatory bail for an unspecified
          period. This judgment in our opinion
          does not support the extreme
          argument addressed on behalf of the
          learned counsel for the respondent
          State that the courts specified in
Section 438
of Cr PC are denuded of
          their power under the said section
          where either the cognizance is taken
          by the court concerned or a charge-
          sheet is filed before the appropriate
          court. As stated above, this would
          only amount to defeat the very object
32
for   which
Section 438
was
          introduced in Cr PC in the year
          1973."
Thus, what appears from the above

observations is that the Supreme Court was never

laying down the proposition in Bharat Chaudhary

that in a case in which an accused had obtained a

protective order under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. till

submission of the charge sheet, he could again file

a similar petition after cognizance order had been

passed. In fact, the whole decision in Bharat

Chaudhary does not appear considering the above

issue and the observations contained in paragraph

11 extracted above were simply negating the

submission of the respondent State that the courts

were not empowered to act under Section 438 Cr.

P.C.
34.        However, the proposition which appears

laid down in Bharat Chaudhary in paragraph 11

was laid down by this Court long back in 1989

P.L.J.R. 767 Bajranglal Agrawal and Ors. Vs. The

State of Bihar. In that case also the accused had

applied for anticipatory bail after submission of the
33
charge sheet and passing of cognizance order.

Before that he had not prayed for bail under any of

the provisions of the Cr. P.C. The State was

resisting the prayer on the same premise as was

done    by    the        respondent   State   in   Bharat

Chaudhary.     Hon‟ble late L.M.Sharma, J.( as his

Lordship then was) was pointing out in Bajranglal

Agrawal( supra) that the petition was very much

maintainable even after submission of the charge

sheet or taking of cognizance because the

language employed to frame the provision of

Section 438 Cr. P.C. did not permit a narrow

construction of it.
35.           From the discussions of the relevant

law set down by the Supreme Court, it is

abundantly clear that an order of anticipatory bail

may also be only for a limited period of time or till a

particular stage of investigation of the case, like, till

submission of the charge sheet or passing of order

of cognizance in a case and it may not be bad if the

accused was directed to surrender and pray for

regular bail thereafter before the original courts of
34
competent jurisdiction. The above view appears

taken by three of the decisions of this Court cited

by the learned Single Judge in his order of

reference    which    are   reported    in   2004(3)

P.L.J.R.491 Mahendra Prasad Singh Vs. State of

Bihar, 2007(4) B.B.C.J. V-66 Sheochandra Singh

and Ors. Vs.State and 2010(2) P.L.J.R. 684

Jagnarayan Yadav alias
Babajee Yadav & Ors. Vs.

The State of Bihar
. However, what I find is that

except the proposition that such accused persons

could not file another anticipatory bail petition and

the same could not be maintainable, no further and

definite reason has been assigned by any of the

decisions including those of the Apex Court in

support of the above as regards explaining the

scope, ambit and application ofthe provision of
Section 438
Cr. P.C. I, in fact, find that there could

be some very good reason flowing from the

provision and scheme of the Cr. P.C. itself in the

above behalf which gets clear support from the

prevailing practice on the provisions regarding bail.

In my       considered view, the reason for not
35
maintaining the anticipatory bail petition again by

such accused persons could be deduced from

some of the provisions in the same Chapter XXXIII

of the
Cr.P.C
36.       As may appear from the provision of
Section 438
Cr. P.C., the accused may be directed

to be released on bail if his case is found fit for

granting him the relief prayed for under that

provision. After the accused is granted bail, he is

required to furnish his bond before the competent

court and the contents of the bond which is

required to be executed by an accused in the case

including one under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. is

indicated by the provision of
Section 441
Cr. P.C.

which reads as under:
" 441. Bond of accused and
          sureties.- (1) Before any person is
          released on bail or released on his
          own bond, a bond for such sum of
          money as the police Officer or Court,
          as the case may be, thinks sufficient
          shall be executed by such person,
          and, when he is released on bail, by
          one or more sufficient sureties
          conditioned that such person shall
          attend at the time and place
          mentioned in the bond, and shall
          continue so to attend until otherwise
          directed by the police Officer or
36
Court, as the case may be.
(2) Where any condition is imposed
          for the release of any person on bail,
          the bond shall also contain that
          condition.
(3) If the case so requires, the bond
          shall also bind the person released
          on bail to appear when called upon
          at the High Court, Court of Session
          or other Court to answer the charge
                              .
(4) For the purpose of determining
          whether the sureties are fit or
          sufficient, the Court may accept
          affidavits in proof of the facts
          contained therein relating to the
          sufficiency or fitness of the sureties,
          or, if it considers necessary, may
          either hold an inquiry itself or cause
          an inquiry to be made by a
          Magistrate subordinate to the Court,
          as to such sufficiency or fitness."
Thus, the bond has to be executed by the

accused after appearing and undertaking before

the court that he shall attend the court at the time

and place mentioned in the bond and shall continue

to so attend until otherwise directed by the Police

Officer or court, as the case may be. It hardly

requires to be noted that the accused could

execute the bond only when he had appeared

before the court and had submitted himself to its
37
custody. The word „custody‟ does not appear either

in the provision of
Section 438
Cr. P.C. or under
Section 441
Cr. P.C. extracted above. However,

the same appears in
Sections 437
and
439
Cr. P.C.

The very
Section 441
presupposes that no bond

could be executed       by an accused unless he

appears before the court to execute the bond which

has to be accepted by it. Not only that, the very

provision also indicates that the accused shall have

to put down the conditions which might have been

imposed upon him for his release on bail in the

very bond to be executed by him. The provision of
Section 441
Cr. P.C. itself indicates that before the

accused is released on bail on his bond, the bond

has to be executed before the court. Therefore, I

have noted            that such an accused who has

been ordered to be released on bail even under
Section 438
Cr. P.C., shall have to appear before a

court for executing the bond. In other words, what

is meant by the above is that the accused has to

submit himself to the custody of the court for

executing the bond.
38
37.     The word „custody‟ has not been defined in

the
Cr.P.C
., though this has some vital importance

as regards the chapter of bail. The Supreme Court

in
Niranjan Singh and another V. Prabhakar

Rajaram Kharote and others
reported in A.I.R. 1980

S.C. 785 was considering and indicating its import.

In that case the accused had been summoned for

committing offences under
Section 302
, etc., of the
Indian Penal Code
and his prayer for bail had been

refused by the Magistrate. The refusal was without

surrender of the accused and the Magistrate also

stayed the warrant of arrest which had been issued

by him for appearance of the accused. The

Sessions Judge was approached by the accused

before whom later he surrendered too, and the

Sessions Judge without satisfying that the accused

was in custody of the Magistrate who refused his

prayer, admitted the accused to bail which order

was challenged before the High Court and the High

Court also upheld the order of the Sessions Judge

by putting certain conditions in its order of bail.

Niranjan Singh, the complainant, challenged the
39
order before the Apex Court. This is how the Apex

Court was considering the issue as to when a

person            could be said to be in „custody‟ in

the light of
Section 439
Cr. P.C. It was held as

follows:
" When he is in duress either because he is
   held by the investigating agency or other
   police or allied authority or is under the
   control of the court having been remanded
   by judicial order, or having offered himself
   to the court‟s jurisdiction and submitted to
   its orders by physical presence. No lexical
   dexterity nor precedential         profusion is
   needed to come to the realistic conclusion
   that he who is under the control of the court
   or is in the physical hold of an officer with
   coercive power is in custody for the purpose
   of
S. 439
. This word is of elastic semantics
   but its core meaning is that the law has
   taken control of the person. The
   equivocatory quibblings and hide-and-seek
   niceties sometimes heard in court that the
   police have taken a man into informal
   custody but not arrested him, have detained
   him for interrogation but not taken him into
   formal custody and other like terminological
   dubiotics      are unfair evasions of the
   straightforwardness of the law. We need not
   dilate on this shady facet here because we
   are satisfied that the accused did physically
   submit before the Sessions Judge and the
   jurisdiction to grant bail thus arose.
Custody, in the context of
S.
   439
,( we are not, be it noted, dealing with
   anticipatory bail under
S.438
) is physical
   control or at least physical presence of the
   accused in court coupled with submission to
   the jurisdiction and orders of the court.
He can be in custody not merely
40
when the police arrests him, produces him
   before a Magistrate and gets a remand to
   judicial or other custody. He can be stated
   to be in judicial custody when he surrenders
   before the court and submits to its
   directions."
Thus, if an accused puts himself in the control of

the court even after surrendering himself or even,

in my opinion, appearing before it for the purposes

of fulfilling formalities of executing a bail bond

directed to be executed by him by an order under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. then he could be said to have

offered himself to the courts‟ jurisdiction and have

further submitted himself to its orders by his

physical presence in court. Is not it even in case of

an order    under
Section 438
Cr. P.C. that the

accused has to execute a bond and as I have just

noticed, only when he had executed a bond he is

legally and truly released on bail? Further, from

where he is said to be released on bail as per the

provision of
Section 441
Cr. P.C.? He has

definitely to be from the custody of the court. When

we consider the provision of
Section 441
and Form

no. 45 which is the form created by the legislature
41
for executing a bond by the accused in pursuant to

an order of bail in his favour then it may be more

clear that as soon as he appears before a court, he

submits himself to its jurisdiction and custody and,

thus, undertakes to it to remain present before it as

and when the court requires him to. Thus, what

appears from the above discussion is that as soon

as an accused appears and goes into the custody

of the court so as to observing the legal obligation

cast upon him by
Section 441
Cr. PC., he is in

custody of the court and that custody in spite of his

release, is subject to the terms of the bond and

those terms are further creating perennial and

permanent    constructive custody of the court in

which the accused puts himself and could be said

to be lying in spite of having got an order of bail.

Thus, as soon as an accused appears before a

court and executes a bond in terms of Section 441

Cr. P.C. and Form No. 45 appended           to its II

Schedule, he could       remain very well in the

constructive custody of the court and, as such,

there could not be any question of any statutory
42
right being vested in him for filing yet another

application for bail under Section 438 Cr. P.C.
38.            The learned Judge who passed the

judgment in Anirudh Prasad Yadav alias
Sadhu

Yadav Vs. State of Bihar
reported in 2006(2)

P.L.J.R. 676 was simply extracting a single line

from the decision of the Supreme Court in Bharat

Chaudhary reported in (2003) 8 S.C.C.77 which is

as under:
"This judgment in our opinion does not
      support the extreme argument addressed
      on behalf of the learned counsel for the
      respondent State that the courts specified in
Section 438
of Cr. P.C. are denuded of their
      power under the said section where either
      the cognizance is taken by the court
      concerned or a charge-sheet is filed before
      the appropriate court."
I have already referred to the case of
Bharat

Chaudhary
(supra) and I have already held that it

never fell for consideration by the Apex Court
in

that case
as to whether an accused who had been

admitted to anticipatory bail till submission of the

charge sheet could prefer yet another anticipatory

bail petition after submission of the charge sheet
43
and passing of cognizance order.
In my considered

view, the judgment in Anirudh Prasad Yadav alias
Sadhu Yadav
( Supra) rendered by the learned

Single Judge was not laying down the correct

proposition of law and appears a thoroughly bad

law which is hereby over ruled.
39.         My esteemed Sister has issued certain

directions in such cases of granting anticipatory bail

up to a particular stage as may appear from

paragraph 19 of the order of her Lordship for

guidance of the courts which could be approached

by such accused after expiry of the period of

anticipatory bail. I simply want to add that in all

such cases, in which charge sheet is submitted and

the period of bail comes to an end, the only course

left to the accused has to pray for regular bail

before the original courts of jurisdiction which shall

have the advantage of perusing and considering

the materials which had been collected by the

investigating agency during the investigation and

could, thus, come to a conclusion as to whether his

liberty should be protected further or it be cut down
44
on account of          commission of some serious

offence. In all such cases, the original courts must

consider some important factors, like, that the

accused    was     granted   anticipatory    bail    after

considering some material by the competent court

and that he had enjoyed that liberty. If the material

as against him remains the same or almost the

same, and there is no complain of tampering, etc.,

then his liberty must not be put to jeopardy. The

court, in such case, may have to undertake hearing

which may spill over a few days. In all such cases,

the court should not send the accused into custody,

rather allow him to remain on bail till the court finds,

for definite reasons, it no more permissible in the

facts of the case as presented before it. One has

hardly to be worried about circumstances under

which anticipatory bail may be granted as the same

appears    very   much     restricted   to   the    newly

incorporated provision of
Section 438
Cr. P.C.

which has made it compulsory for considering

many factors as may appear from the newly

amended provision. The court which has to
45
consider the prayer for anticipatory bail, has to

consider the nature and gravity of the accusation,

antecedents of the accused including the instance

of his previous conviction and imprisonment by a

court in respect of any       cognizable offence, the

possibility of the accused          running away from

justice and, lastly, whether the accusation had been

made with the object of injuring or humiliating       the

applicant by having him arrested. One aspect of the

matter which is often confronted by us in Court is

that in spite of having been granted anticipatory

bail, sometimes the accused may be remanded to

custody as he had not furnished the bail bond. It is

expected that the courts below shall consider

proceeding under
Section 438 (3)
Cr. P.C. and act

in that light in all such cases.
40.         With these reasons, I completely agree

with the order passed by my esteemed Sister.
( Dharnidhar Jha, J.)

A.Kumar/Kanth/AFR
46
