Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 730;
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/196618756/

[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Naveen Yadav vs State on 21 February, 2024
Author:
Jyoti Singh
Bench:
Jyoti Singh
$~13
                              *    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI'
                              %                                    Date of Decision: 21st February, 2024
                              +      BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023
                                     NAVEEN YADAV                            ..... Petitioner
                                                 Through: Mr. Pradeep Kumar Arya, Mr. Aditya
                                                 Kumar Yadav, Mr. Gaurav Chaudhary, Mr. Arpit
                                                 Bamal and Mr. Vaibhav Chauhdary, Advocates.

                                                         versus

                                     STATE                                            ..... Respondent
                                                         Through: Ms. Shubhi Gupta, APP for the State
                                                         with Insp. Arun Chauhan, SHO, PS: Jahangir Puri.

                                     CORAM:
                                     HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE JYOTI SINGH
                                                              JUDGEMENT
JYOTI SINGH, J. (ORAL)
1.     This is an application filed under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. on behalf of the
                              Applicant Naveen Yadav S/o Sh. Arjun Singh for grant of anticipatory bail
                              in case FIR No. 427/2023 dated 15.05.2023 registered under
Sections
                              498A
/
304B
/
34
IPC at PS: Jahangir Puri.
2.     Status report has been filed on behalf of the State.
3.     It is stated in the status report and not disputed on behalf of the
                              Applicant that vide order dated 03.11.2023, Applicant herein has been
                              declared as an absconder by the Trial Court. The order is unassailed till date.
                              First and foremost objection raised on behalf of the State is that this
                              application cannot be entertained in view of the judgments of the Supreme
                              Court in
Lavesh v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2012) 8 SCC 730;
State of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                         Page 1 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
Madhya Pradesh v. Pradeep Sharma
, (
2014) 2 SCC 171 and State of
                              Haryana v. Dharamraj
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1085. It is argued by learned
                              APP that no doubt, the Supreme Court has also observed that in exceptional
                              and rare cases, the Supreme Court and High Courts can consider a plea
                              seeking anticipatory bail, despite being a proclaimed offender, given that the
                              Supreme Court and High Courts are Constitutional Courts, however, no
                              exceptional situation arises in the present case. It is also submitted that
                              Charge Sheet has been filed and there is enough evidence at this stage
                              against the Applicant to proceed inasmuch as Complainant Satish Yadav and
                              his wife Kusum Yadav, parents of the deceased, have stated that the
                              Applicant, who was the maternal brother-in-law of the deceased, was
                              influencing/interfering in day-to-day personal life of the deceased. On
                              12.05.2023, he and his wife pressurized the deceased to give a confession
                              forcefully that she was pregnant due to her illicit relationships with her
                              boyfriend and even made a video recording the confession. He also
                              instigated deceased's husband to give divorce if she did not fulfill the dowry
                              demand. The death has taken place within one month of the marriage and
                              the Applicant has played a major role in the unnatural death of the deceased.
                              Parents of the deceased have also stated that on receiving information from
                              their daughter that she was being harassed, they visited her matrimonial
                              home on 12.05.2023 to pacify the situation, however, her in-laws including
                              the Applicant insulted them. Relevant paragraphs from the Charge Sheet
                              have been relied on in support of this submission.
4.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Applicant, per contra,
                              submits that the status of the Applicant of being an absconder cannot be an
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                     Page 2 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
absolute bar for considering the present application for anticipatory bail. In
                              any case, the Supreme Court in the judgments relied upon by the State has
                              observed that being a Constitutional Court, the High Court can entertain the
                              application for anticipatory bail in exceptional and rare cases and the present
                              case falls in the category of 'exceptional case'. This, it is urged, is on
                              account of the fact that: (a) investigation is over; (b) wife of the Applicant
                              has been granted anticipatory bail by the Supreme Court in SLP (CRL.) No.
                              13865/2023 by order dated 04.01.2024; (c) mother-in-law of the deceased
                              has been placed in Column No. 12; and (d) Applicant along with his wife
                              and two minor children was living separately and not residing in the
                              matrimonial house of the deceased. Moreover, Applicant is not a proclaimed
                              offender since
Section 82(4)
Cr.P.C. does not include the offences alleged to
                              be committed in the Charge Sheet and in law, there is a difference between
                              proclaimed offender and proclaimed person.
5.     I have heard learned counsel for the Applicant and learned APP for
                              the State.
6.     It is an admitted position that by an order dated 03.11.2023, Applicant
                              has been declared as absconder and the order is unassailed till date. The
                              question that thus arises is whether the present application seeking
                              anticipatory bail ought to be entertained in view of this undisputed fact. The
                              answer to this question need not detain this Court, as the law is no longer res
                              integra. This very question came up before the Supreme Court in
Prem
                              Shankar Prasad v. State of Bihar and Another
, (2022) 14 SCC 516, where
                              the Complainant challenged the order of the High Court granting
                              anticipatory bail to the accused. The accused in the said case was
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                      Page 3 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
absconding and concealing himself to avoid service of warrants of arrest and
                              the Chief Judicial Magistrate issued a proclamation under
Section 82
Cr.P.C., whereafter the accused filed anticipatory bail application before the
                              Trial Court and by a detailed order, the learned Trial Court dismissed
                              application and rejected the bail on merits as well as on the ground that the
                              accused was absconding and proceedings had been initiated under
Sections
                              82
and
83
Cr.P.C., and thus, he was not entitled to anticipatory bail. The
                              accused approached the High Court, which allowed the bail application and
                              released the accused, subject to conditions mentioned in the order.
                              Examining the issue before it, the Supreme Court observed that after
                              investigation, Charge Sheet had been filed against the accused and thus, a
                              prima facie case was made out. Arrest warrant was issued by the learned
                              Magistrate followed by proceedings under
Sections 82
and
83
Cr.P.C. and
                              only thereafter the accused filed the anticipatory bail application. The
                              Supreme Court further observed that despite the fact having been brought to
                              the notice of the High Court that accused was absconding and proclamation
                              proceedings had been initiated, High Court ignored this relevant aspect and
                              granted anticipatory bail, which fact ought not to have been ignored.
The
                              Supreme Court also referred to its earlier judgments in
Pradeep Sharma
(supra) and
Lavesh
(supra) and held that the High Court committed an error
                              in granting anticipatory bail to the accused ignoring the proceedings under
Sections 82
and
83
Cr.P.C. Relevant paragraphs are as follows:-
"10.2. Despite the above observations on merits and despite the fact that
                                     it was brought to the notice of the High Court that Respondent 2-accused
                                     is absconding and even the proceedings under
Sections 82
/83CrPC have
                                     been initiated as far back as on 10-1-2019, the High Court has just
                                     ignored the aforesaid relevant aspects and has granted anticipatory bail to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                             Page 4 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
Respondent 2-accused by observing that the nature of accusation is
                                     arising out of a business transaction. The specific allegations of cheating,
                                     etc. which came to be considered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge
                                     has not at all been considered by the High Court. Even the High Court has
                                     just ignored the factum of initiation of proceedings under
Sections
                                     82
/83CrPC by simply observing that "be that as it may". The aforesaid
                                     relevant aspect on grant of anticipatory bail ought not to have been
                                     ignored by the High Court and ought to have been considered by the High
                                     Court very seriously and not casually.
xxx                           xxx                            xxx
11. Thus the High Court has committed an error in granting anticipatory
                                     bail to Respondent 2-accused ignoring the proceedings under
Sections
                                     82
/83CrPC."
7.
In
Abhishek v. State of Maharashtra and Others
, (2022) 8 SCC 282,
                              the Supreme Court held as follows:-
"68. As regards the implication of proclamation having been issued
                                     against the appellant, we have no hesitation in making it clear that any
                                     person, who is declared as an "absconder" and remains out of reach of
                                     the investigating agency and thereby stands directly at conflict with law,
                                     ordinarily, deserves no concession or indulgence. By way of reference, we
                                     may observe that in relation to the indulgence of pre-arrest bail in terms of
                                     Section 438CrPC, this Court has repeatedly said that when an accused is
                                     absconding and is declared as proclaimed offender, there is no question of
                                     giving him the benefit of
Section 438
CrPC. [ For example,
Prem Shankar
                                     Prasad v. State of Bihar
, (2022) 14 SCC 529 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 955]
                                     What has been observed and said in relation to Section 438CrPC applies
                                     with more vigour to the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India. The submissions on behalf of the
                                     appellant for consideration of his case because of application of stringent
                                     provisions impinging his fundamental rights does not take away the impact
                                     of the blameworthy conduct of the appellant. Any claim towards
                                     fundamental rights also cannot be justifiably made without the person
                                     concerned himself adhering to and submitting to the process of law."
8.
In an earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in
Lavesh
(supra), the
                              Supreme Court observed that as the Appellant had been declared as an
                              absconder, there was no question of granting anticipatory bail, as his
                              conduct did not entitle him to the relief prescribed in
Section 438
Cr.P.C.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                               Page 5 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
Reference may also be made in this regard to a recent judgment of the
                              Supreme Court in
Dharamraj
(supra), which is instructive on the issue
                              under consideration. In this case, the State had filed an appeal seeking
                              cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the Respondent therein, accused
                              of serious offences. Respondent had been declared a Proclaimed Offender
                              and the contention of the State was that grant of indulgence under
Section
                              438
Cr.P.C. by the High Court to a Proclaimed Offender was erroneous.
Referring to its earlier decisions in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of
                              Punjab
, (1980) 2 SCC 565;
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of
                              Maharashtra
, (
2011) 1 SCC 694 and Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of
                              Delhi
), (2020) 5 SCC 1, with respect to the contours of anticipatory bail, the
                              Supreme Court first observed that the Court was cognizant that liberty was
                              not to be interfered with easily more so, when an order of pre-arrest bail
                              stands granted by the High Court. The Supreme Court thereafter observed
                              that much like bail, grant of anticipatory bail is to be exercised with judicial
                              discretion. Noting the reasons which weighed with the High Court to grant
                              bail, two of them being that Respondent's declaration as a Proclaimed
                              Offender was not on account of him deliberately avoiding the Court and that
                              he was a first time offender and deserved a chance to 'reform and course
                              correct', the Supreme Court held that the logic of the High Court did not
                              commend itself to the Supreme Court as what the High Court had lost sight
                              of was that the accused was a declared Proclaimed Offender. Relevant
                              passages from the judgment are as follows:
"11. The contours of anticipatory bail have been elaborately dealt with
                                     by 5-Judge Benches in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab
, (
1980) 2
                                     SCC 565 and Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2020) 5 SCC 1.
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra
, (2011) 1 SCC
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                           Page 6 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
694 is worthy of mention in this context, despite its partial overruling in
Sushila Aggarwal
(supra). We are cognizant that liberty is not to be
                                     interfered with easily. More so, when an order of pre-arrest bail already
                                     stands granted by the High Court.
12.     Yet, much like bail, the grant of anticipatory bail is to be exercised
                                     with judicial discretion. The factors illustrated by this Court through its
                                     pronouncements are illustrative, and not exhaustive. Undoubtedly, the fate
                                     of each case turns on its own facts and merits.
In
Vipan Kumar Dhir v.
                                     State of Punjab
, (2021) 15 SCC 518, taking note of Dolat Ram (supra) and
X v. State of Telangana
(supra), the Court cancelled the anticipatory bail
                                     granted to the accused therein. Keeping all the aforesaid in mind, we turn
                                     our attention to the facts in praesenti.
13.    Having considered the matter, this Court finds that, in the facts
                                     and circumstances of the present case, it was not proper for the High
                                     Court to have granted anticipatory bail to the respondent.
14.    As would be manifest from the Impugned Order, the reasoning
                                     thereof is contained in Paragraphs 7-12. Closer perusal reveals what
                                     weighed with the High Court:
(a) That the maximum sentence for the offences in the First
                                         Information Report did not exceed 7 years.
(b) That the possibility of the respondent influencing the investigation,
                                         tampering with evidence et al, could be taken care of by imposing
                                         stringent conditions.
(c) That the respondent's declaration as a proclaimed offender was
                                         not on account of him deliberately avoiding court.
(d) That the respondent was a first-time offender and deserved a
                                         chance to 'reform and course correct'.
15.     The logic of the High Court does not commend itself to us. The
                                     High Court placed reliance on
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar
, (2014) 8
                                     SCC 273 to the effect that where the offence is punishable with
                                     imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may
                                     extend to seven years, whether with or without fine, there is to be no
                                     automatic arrest.
Having gone through
the said judgment
as also its most
                                     recent reiteration in
Md. Asfak Alam v. State of Jharkhand
, 2023 INSC
                                     6605, we are in full agreement with the propositions enunciated therein.
                                     However,
Section 364
, IPC carries a term of imprisonment for life or
                                     rigorous imprisonment of ten years and fine.
We are a bit perplexed as to
                                     how, despite addition of
Section 364
, IPC, the High Court took the view
                                     that
Arnesh Kumar
(supra) would aid the respondent in his quest for pre-
                                     arrest bail.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                                Page 7 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
16.    What the High Court (also) lost sight of was that the respondent
                                     was a declared proclaimed offender. The High Court notes, at Paragraph
                                     28, that it was not dealing with the prayer seeking quashing of the
                                     proclamation proceedings as the same were not made part of the petition
                                     before it. As things were, the respondent was declared a proclaimed
                                     offender on 05.02.2021, and sought anticipatory bail from the High Court
                                     only in October, 2021. As such, it was not correct for the High Court to
                                     brush aside such factum, on the basis of averments alone, purporting to
                                     explain the backdrop of such declaration by mere advertence to a similar-
                                     sounding name, in the petition before it, as recorded at Paragraphs 9 and
                                     10 of the Impugned Order. The declaration of the respondent as a
                                     proclaimed offender, and such declaration subsisting on the date of the
                                     Impugned Order, we are unable to agree with the High Court that the
                                     respondent was entitled to 'reform and course correct'.
17.     The respondent, without first successfully assailing the order
                                     declaring him as a proclaimed offender, could not have proceeded to seek
                                     anticipatory bail. Looking to the factual prism, we are clear that the
                                     respondent's application under
Section 438
, CrPC should not have been
                                     entertained, as he was a proclaimed offender. We may note that in
Lavesh
                                     v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2012) 8 SCC 730, this Court was categoric
                                     against grant of anticipatory bail to a proclaimed offender.
In the same
                                     vein, following
Lavesh
(supra) is the decision in
State of Madhya Pradesh
                                     v. Pradeep Sharma
, (2014) 2 SCC 171, where this Court emphasised that
                                     a proclaimed offender would not be entitled to anticipatory bail. Of
                                     course, in an exceptional and rare case, this Court or the High Courts can
                                     consider a plea seeking anticipatory bail, despite the applicant being a
                                     proclaimed offender, given that the Supreme Court and High Courts are
                                     Constitutional Courts. However, no exceptional situation arises in the
                                     case at hand.
Following Pradeep Sharma
(supra), in
Prem Shankar
                                     Prasad v. State of Bihar
, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 955, this Court was
                                     unequivocal that the High Court therein erred in granting anticipatory
                                     bail ignoring proceedings under
Sections 82
and
83
, CrPC.
In
Abhishek v.
                                     State of Maharashtra
, (2022) 8 SCC 282, this Court concluded:
'68. As regards the implication of proclamation having been issued
                                         against the appellant, we have no hesitation in making it clear that
                                         any person, who is declared as an "absconder" and remains out of
                                         reach of the investigating agency and thereby stands directly at
                                         conflict with law, ordinarily, deserves no concession or indulgence.
                                         By way of reference, we may observe that in relation to the indulgence
                                         of pre-arrest bail in terms of
Section 438
CrPC, this Court has
                                         repeatedly said that when an accused is absconding and is declared
                                         as proclaimed offender, there is no question of giving him the benefit
                                         of
Section 438
CrPC. [For example,
Prem Shankar Prasad v. State of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                             Page 8 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
Bihar
, (2022) 14 SCC 529, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 955] ...'"
9.
In view of the law
laid down by
the Supreme Court, Applicant is not
                              deserving of grant of anticipatory bail, as he has been declared as an
                              absconder post initiation of proclamation proceedings. Coming to the
                              contention of the counsel for the Applicant that the present case falls under
                              'exceptional and rare cases', entitling the Applicant to anticipatory bail, in
                              my view, Applicant has been unable to establish an exceptional case. On the
                              contrary, the allegations against the Applicant are serious. Charge Sheet has
                              been filed and therefore, there is prima facie material against the Applicant
                              to proceed. Learned APP has drawn the attention of the Court to the
                              allegations made by the parents of the deceased that the Applicant was
                              actively involved in interfering in the day-to-day life of the deceased and
                              had forcibly extracted a confession from her that her pregnancy was a result
                              of an illicit relationship along with a threat to make this fact public if the
                              dowry demand was not met.
On the issue of parity claimed with the wife of
                              the Applicant and the mother-in-law of the deceased, suffice would it be to
                              note that neither of the two were declared absconders, which is a glaring fact
                              in case of the Applicant and cannot be ignored by this Court in view of the
                              observations of the Supreme Court in
Prem Shankar Prasad
(supra).
It
                              was held by the Supreme Court in
Abhishek
(supra) that any person, who is
                              declared as an absconder and remains out of reach of the investigating
                              agencies and thereby stands directly in conflict with law, ordinarily,
                              deserves no concession or indulgence.
10.    Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances and the seriousness
                              and gravity of the alleged offences including the factum of the Applicant
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                       Page 9 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
having been declared as an absconder, this Court is not inclined to grant
                              anticipatory bail to the Applicant.
11.    Application is dismissed. It is, however, made clear that the
                              observations herein are only for the purpose of deciding this application and
                              shall not be construed as expression on the merits of the case.
12.    Application stands disposed of.
JYOTI SINGH, J
                              FEBRUARY 21, 2024/shivam
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:KAUSHAL   BAIL APPLN. 4258/2023                                      Page 10 of 10
KUMAR SACHDEVA
Signing Date:22.02.2024
21:42:00
