Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 1750
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/198417772/

[Cites
35
, Cited by
21
]
Delhi High Court
Aarka Sports Management Pvt. Ltd. vs Kalsi Buildcon Pvt. Ltd on 6 July, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 DEL 1750
Author:
J.R. Midha
Bench:
J.R. Midha
$~
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                        Date of Decision: 6th July, 2020

+      ARB.P. 662/2019
       AARKA SPORTS MANAGEMENT PVT. LTD.             ..... Petitioner
                       Through: Mr.Kumar    Mihir,       AOR        with
                                Mr.Shamik Narain, Advocate
                       versus
       KALSI BUILDCON PVT. LTD                     ..... Respondent
                       Through: Mr.Sharan Thakur, Mr.Siddharth
                                Thakur,   Mr.Gurmehar            Sistani,
                                Mr.Ketan Paul and Mr.Vijay Kumar,
                                Advocates
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.R. MIDHA
                          JUDGMENT
1.     The petitioner is seeking appointment of an arbitrator under
Section
11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
2.     The arbitration agreement between the parties is contained in clause
15 of the operation, maintenance and management agreement dated 16 th
March, 2018, which is reproduced hereunder:
―15. Governing Law, Jurisdiction & Dispute Resolution
         15.1 This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
              accordance with the laws of India and subject to clauses 15.2
              and 15.3, the jurisdiction of this Agreement shall be
              exclusively in the courts of New Delhi, India.
         15.2 Negotiation: The Parties shall negotiate in good faith and use
              reasonable efforts to settle any dispute, difference or claim
              raised, arising out of or in connection with this Agreement
              including the construction, validity, execution, performance,
              termination or breach hereof (hereinafter referred to as
              ‗Dispute'). In the event that the Parties are unable to reach a
              resolution within 30 (thirty) days of the start of Dispute the
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                Page 1 of 16
same shall be settled by binding arbitration.
         15.3 Arbitration: Any Dispute which is not settled by Mediation,
              shall be determined by Arbitration under the
Arbitration and
              Conciliation Act, 1996
, as amended by the
Arbitration and
              Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
. The Arbitration shall
              be conducted before a sole arbitrator appointed with the
              mutual consent of both Parties. If the Parties are unable to
              reach an agreement on the choice of an arbitrator within 30
              days of the Notice of Arbitration by either Party, the Parties
              shall approach the court of proper jurisdiction for
              appointment of arbitrator.‖
                                                         (Emphasis Supplied)
3.     The petitioner invoked the arbitration vide notice dated 26th February,
2019 which was replied by the respondent on 20th March, 2019.
4.     The arbitration agreement as well as notice of invocation are not
disputed. Learned counsel for the respondent however disputes the
jurisdiction of this Court to entertain this petition. According to the
respondent, Delhi is neither the seat of arbitration nor any cause of action
arose at Delhi. The agreement was drawn at Ranchi; the agreement was
signed at Lucknow and the place of performance/execution of the agreement
was Patna, Bihar.
5.     Learned counsel for the petitioner urged at the time of the hearing that
this Court has exclusive jurisdiction to entertain this petition under clause
15.1 which specifically provides that the jurisdiction of the agreement shall
be exclusively with the Courts at New Delhi. Reliance was placed on Indus
Mobile Distribution Private Limited v. Datawind Innovations Private
Limited, (2017) 7 SCC 678; Brahmani River Pellets Limited v. Kamachi
Industries Limited, (2019) SCC OnLine SC 929; State of West Bengal v.
Associated Contractors, (2015) 1 SCC 32;
NJ Construction v. Ayursundra
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                  Page 2 of 16
Health Care Pvt. Ltd.
, 2018 (168) DRJ 274;
Raman Deep Singh Taneja v.
Crown Realtech Private Limited
, 2017 SCC OnLine Del 11966;
Rohit
Bhasin v. Nandini Hotels
, 2013 SCC OnLine Del 2300;
Spentex Industries
Ltd. v. Louis Dreyfus Commodities India Pvt. Ltd.
, (2019) 258 DLT 138;
and
Virgo Softech Ltd. v. National Institute of Electronics and
Information Technology
, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 12722.
6.     Learned counsel for the respondent urged at the time of the hearing
that clause 15.1 of the agreement is invalid as Delhi is not the seat of
agreement; no cause of action arose at Delhi and the respondent does not
work at Delhi. It was submitted that agreement was drawn at Ranchi; the
agreement was signed at Lucknow and place of performance/execution was
Patna. It was further submitted that the parties cannot confer jurisdiction on
a Court which otherwise has no jurisdiction.        Reliance was placed on
Interglobe Aviation Limited v. N. Satchidanand
, (2011) 7 SCC 463. It was
further submitted that Clause 15.1 is not absolute and is subject to Clause
15.3 which records that the parties shall approach the "Court of proper
jurisdiction‖. It was further submitted that the "Court of proper jurisdiction"
is the "Court" as per
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
It was submitted that this Court is not a competent Court within the meaning
of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act as neither the
cause of action arose at Delhi nor the parties work at Delhi and the
agreement does not provide any seat of arbitration. Reliance was placed on
GE Countrywide Consumer Financial Services Ltd. v. Surjit Singh Bhatia
,
2006 (89) DRJ 73;
Apparel Export Promotion Council v. Prabhati Patni,
ILR
(2005) II Delhi 1066; and
Gulati Construction Co., Jhansi v. Betwa
River Board
, AIR 1984 Del 299.
With respect to
Indus Mobile Distribution
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                  Page 3 of 16
Private Limited
(supra) relied upon by the petitioner, it was submitted that
the arbitration clause
in that case
provided seat of arbitration to be Mumbai
whereas the arbitration clause in the present case does not provide for the
seat of arbitration.
Legal Position
7.     Section 2(1)(e) of the Arbitron and Conciliation Act defines "Court"
which is reproduced hereunder:-
―
Section 2
. Definitions.-(1) In this Part, unless the context
           otherwise requires-
xxx            xxx           xxx
(e) ―Court‖ means the Principal Civil Court of Original
           Jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in
           exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having,
           jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter
           of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a
           suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to
           such Principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes;
xxx            xxx           xxx
               (2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in
           India.‖
8.
Section 20
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act defines "Place of
Arbitration" which is reproduced hereunder:-
―
Section 20
. Place of arbitration.- (1) The parties are free
           to agree on the place of arbitration.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the
           place of arbitration shall be determined by the Arbitral
           Tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case,
           including the convenience of the parties.
(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the
           Arbitral Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties,
           meet at any place it considers appropriate for consultation
           among its members, for hearing witness, experts or the parties,
           or for inspection of documents, goods or other property‖.
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                   Page 4 of 16
9.
Section 31(4)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act provides that the
arbitral award shall state its date and place of arbitration as determined in
accordance with
Section 20
.
Section 31(4)
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act is reproduced hereunder:-
―
Section 31
. Form and contents of arbitral award. -
(1)...........................................................................
           (2)...........................................................................
           (3)...........................................................................
           (4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of
           arbitration as determined in accordance with
Section 20
and
           the award shall be deemed to have been made at that place.‖

Judgments cited by the Petitioner
10.
In
Indus Mobile Distribution Private Limited v. Datawind
Innovations Private Limited
, (2017) 7 SCC 678, the arbitration agreement
provided that the seat of the arbitration shall be at Mumbai. The agreement
also provided for exclusive jurisdiction of Mumbai Courts. An application
for appointment of an arbitrator was filed before Delhi High Court on the
ground that part of the cause of action arose at Delhi and, therefore, the
clause providing for seat of arbitration at Mumbai was not valid. This Court
held that exclusive jurisdiction clause would not apply as no part of the
cause of action arose at Mumbai. This
Court further held
that the Courts of
only three territories had jurisdiction, namely, Delhi and Chennai (from and
to where goods were supplied), and Amritsar (which is the registered office
of the appellant company). This Court appointed an arbitrator which was
challenged before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court held that
Section 20
recognizes autonomy of the
parties to choose a neutral seat of arbitration where no part of the cause of
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                 Page 5 of 16
action arose. The Supreme
Court further held
that the once the seat is
determined, the Court of that place would have exclusive jurisdiction to
regulate the arbitration proceedings arising out of the agreement between the
parties. The Supreme
Court further held
that the neutral seat chosen by the
parties may not have jurisdiction under any of the provisions of
Section 16
to
21
of Code of Civil Procedure. The Supreme Court held that Mumbai
Courts alone had exclusive jurisdiction, as Mumbai was the seat of
arbitration. The relevant portion of
the said judgment
is reproduced
hereunder:-
―9. The concept of juridical seat has been evolved by the courts
           in England and has now been firmly embedded in our
           jurisprudence.       Thus,      the     Constitution      Bench
           in BALCO v. Kaiser       Aluminium        Technical     Services
           Inc. [BALCO v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc.,
           (2012) 9 SCC 552 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 810] has adverted to
           ―seat‖ in some detail. Para 96 is instructive and states as
           under:
―We are of the opinion, the term ―subject-matter of the
                   arbitration‖ cannot be confused with ―subject-matter
                   of the suit‖. The term ―subject-matter‖ in
Section
                   2(1)(e)
is confined to Part I. It has a reference and
                   connection with the process of dispute resolution. Its
                   purpose is to identify the courts having supervisory
                   control over the arbitration proceedings. Hence, it
                   refers to a court which would essentially be a court of
                   the seat of the arbitration process. In our opinion, the
                   provision in
Section 2(1)(e)
has to be construed keeping
                   in view the provisions in
Section 20
which give
                   recognition to party autonomy. Accepting the narrow
                   construction as projected by the learned counsel for the
                   appellants would, in fact, render
Section 20
nugatory.
                   In our view, the legislature has intentionally given
                   jurisdiction to two courts i.e. the court which would
                   have jurisdiction where the cause of action is located
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                  Page 6 of 16
and the courts where the arbitration takes place. This
                   was necessary as on many occasions the agreement
                   may provide for a seat of arbitration at a place which
                   would be neutral to both the parties. Therefore, the
                   courts where the arbitration takes place would be
                   required to exercise supervisory control over the
                   arbitral process. For example, if the arbitration is held
                   in Delhi, where neither of the parties are from Delhi,
                   (Delhi having been chosen as a neutral place as
                   between a party from Mumbai and the other from
                   Kolkata) and the tribunal sitting in Delhi passes an
                   interim order under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act,
                   1996, the appeal against such an interim order under
Section 37
must lie to the courts of Delhi being the
                   courts having supervisory jurisdiction over the
                   arbitration proceedings and the tribunal. This would be
                   irrespective of the fact that the obligations to be
                   performed under the contract were to be performed
                   either at Mumbai or at Kolkata, and only arbitration is
                   to take place in Delhi. In such circumstances, both the
                   courts would have jurisdiction i.e. the court within
                   whose jurisdiction the subject-matter of the suit is
                   situated and the courts within the jurisdiction of which
                   the dispute resolution i.e. arbitration is located.‖
                                                       (emphasis in original)
10. Paras 98 to 100 have laid down the law as to ―seat‖ thus:
xxx                  xxx                  xxx
                   A plain reading of
Section 20
leaves no room for doubt
                   that where the place of arbitration is in India, the
                   parties are free to agree to any ―place‖ or ―seat‖
                   within India, be it Delhi, Mumbai, etc. In the absence of
                   the parties' agreement thereto,
Section 20(2)
authorises
                   the tribunal to determine the place/seat of such
                   arbitration. Section 20(3) enables the tribunal to meet
                   at any place for conducting hearings at a place of
                   convenience in matters such as consultations among its
                   members for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties.‖
                          xxx                   xxx                 xxx
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                   Page 7 of 16
13. This Court reiterated that once the seat of arbitration has
           been fixed, it would be in the nature of an exclusive jurisdiction
           clause as to the courts which exercise supervisory powers over
           the arbitration. (See para 138.)‖
                         xxx                   xxx                  xxx
19. A conspectus of all the aforesaid provisions shows that the
           moment the seat is designated, it is akin to an exclusive
           jurisdiction clause. On the facts of the present case, it is clear
           that the seat of arbitration is Mumbai and Clause 19 further
           makes it clear that jurisdiction exclusively vests in the Mumbai
           courts. Under the Law of Arbitration, unlike
the Code of Civil
           Procedure
which applies to suits filed in courts, a reference to
           ―seat‖ is a concept by which a neutral venue can be chosen by
           the parties to an arbitration clause. The neutral venue may not
           in the classical sense have jurisdiction -- that is, no part of the
           cause of action may have arisen at the neutral venue and
           neither would any of the provisions of
Sections 16
to
21
of CPC
           be attracted. In arbitration law however, as has been held
           above, the moment ―seat‖ is determined, the fact that the seat is
           at Mumbai would vest Mumbai courts with exclusive
           jurisdiction for purposes of regulating arbitral proceedings
           arising out of the agreement between the parties.
20. It is well settled that where more than one court has
           jurisdiction, it is open for the parties to exclude all other courts.
For an exhaustive analysis of the case law, see
Swastik Gases
           (P) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. [Swastik Gases (P)
           Ltd.
v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., (2013) 9 SCC 32 : (2013) 4 SCC
           (Civ) 157] This was followed in a recent judgment in B.E.
           Simoese Von Staraburg Niedenthal v. Chhattisgarh Investment
           Ltd. [B.E. Simoese Von Staraburg Niedenthal v. Chhattisgarh
           Investment Ltd., (2015) 12 SCC 225 : (2016) 1 SCC (Civ) 427]
           Having regard to the above, it is clear that Mumbai courts
           alone have jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other courts in the
           country, as the juridical seat of arbitration is at Mumbai.‖
                                                          (Emphasis Supplied)
11.
In
Brahmani River Pellets Limited v. Kamachi Industries Limited
,
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                      Page 8 of 16
(2019) SCC OnLine SC 929, the arbitration agreement provided that the
venue of the arbitration shall be at Bhubaneswar. An application for
appointment of an arbitrator was filed before the Madras High Court. The
respondent raised an objection to the jurisdiction on the ground that the
parties agreed the seat of arbitration to be Bhubaneswar and, therefore, the
Orissa High Court alone had exclusive jurisdiction. The Madras High Court
held that in absence of any express clause excluding jurisdiction of other
Courts, both the Madras High Court and the Orissa High Court had
jurisdiction. The decision of Madras High Court was challenged before the
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court held that the parties agreed to have the
venue of arbitration proceedings at Bhubaneswar and, therefore, Orissa High
Court had exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the matter. The relevant portion
of
the said judgment
is reproduced hereunder:-
―18. Where the contract specifies the jurisdiction of the court at
           a particular place, only such court will have the jurisdiction to
           deal with the matter and parties intended to exclude all other
           courts. In the present case, the parties have agreed that the
           ―venue‖ of arbitration shall be at Bhubaneswar. Considering
           the agreement of the parties having Bhubaneswar as the venue
           of arbitration, the intention of the parties is to exclude all other
           courts. As held in Swastik, non-use of words like ―exclusive
           jurisdiction‖, ―only‖, ―exclusive‖, ―alone‖ is not decisive and
           does not make any material difference.
19. When the parties have agreed to have the ―venue‖ of
           arbitration at Bhubaneswar, the Madras High Court erred in
           assuming the jurisdiction under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. Since
           only Orissa High Court will have the jurisdiction to entertain
           the petition filed under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, the impugned
           order is liable to be set aside.‖
                                                       (Emphasis Supplied)
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                     Page 9 of 16
12.
In
State of West Bengal v. Associated Contractors
, (2015) 1 SCC 32,
the objections under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act were
filed before the Principal Civil Court of the District Jalpaiguri, West Bengal
on the ground that earlier an interim order under
Section 9
was passed by the
Calcutta High Court in different proceedings. A writ petition was filed
before Calcutta High Court to challenge the jurisdiction in principal civil
Court. The Calcutta High Court held that the parties had submitted to the
jurisdiction of the High Court in its ordinary original civil jurisdiction in
connection with different earlier proceedings arising out of the said contract
and the jurisdiction of the Court of the District Judge to entertain the said
application for setting aside of the award was excluded under
Section 42
of
the Act. The decision of High Court was challenged in the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court rejected the objection to the jurisdiction and laid down
the principles relating to
Section 2(1)(e)
and
Section 42
of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, which are not relevant for the present case.
13.
In
NJ Construction v. Ayursundra Health Care Pvt. Ltd.
, 2018 (168)
DRJ 274, the agreement provided the seat of the arbitration at New Delhi
and jurisdiction of Guwahati Courts. An application for appointment of
arbitrator was filed before the Delhi High Court in which the objection of
jurisdiction was raised.
Following Indus Mobile Distribution Private
Limited
(supra), this Court held that the Delhi Courts had exclusive
jurisdiction as Delhi was the seat of arbitration.
14.
In
Raman Deep Singh Taneja v. Crown Realtech Private Limited
,
2017 SCC OnLine Del 11966, the agreement provided the venue of
arbitration proceedings to be Faridabad and exclusive jurisdiction of Delhi
Courts. An application for appointment of an arbitrator was filed before
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                     Page 10 of 16
Delhi High Court. The agreement stipulated that where the disputes have to
be adjudicated without reference to the arbitration, Courts at Delhi would
have exclusive jurisdiction, but if the disputes have to be resolved through
arbitration, venue being at Faridabad, Haryana, the Courts at Faridabad,
Haryana, would have exclusive jurisdiction. This Court held that the
Faridabad Courts had exclusive jurisdiction, since the arbitration clause had
been invoked and the venue of the arbitration proceedings was Faridabad.
15.
In
Rohit Bhasin v. Nandini Hotels
, 2013 (5) AD (Del.) 710, the
agreement provided the venue of the arbitration to be Delhi in case the
disputes were to be resolved by arbitration and the jurisdiction for civil
Court at Noida and Allahabad High Court for civil disputes. An application
for appointment of an arbitrator was filed before Delhi High Court. This
Court held that the Delhi Courts had exclusive jurisdiction since the venue
of arbitration was New Delhi and part of cause of action also arose at Delhi.
16.
In
Spentex Industries Ltd. v. Louis Dreyfus Commodities India Pvt.
Ltd.
, (2019) 258 DLT 138, the objections under
Section 34
of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act were filed before the Delhi High Court on the ground
that the agreement provided for exclusive jurisdiction of Delhi Courts to deal
with any matter arising out of the arbitration proceedings or the award. The
respondent raised an objection to the maintainability on the ground that the
arbitration was conducted under the rules and bye-laws of Cotton
Association of India (CAI) and proceedings were held in Cotton Association
of India's office in Mumbai. Rule 32 of the Rules and Bye-laws of CAI
provided that place or venue of arbitration shall be India. Considering that
Mumbai was not the seat/venue of the arbitration and the arbitration was
held in CAI's premises for convenience, this Court held that Delhi High
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                 Page 11 of 16
Court had exclusive jurisdiction to consider the objections.
17.
In
Virgo Softech Ltd. v. National Institute of Electronics and
Information Technology
, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 12722, the arbitration
agreement provided that the arbitration proceedings shall be held at New
Delhi and the Courts at Chandigarh shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
entertain any dispute arising therefrom. An application for appointment for
an arbitrator was filed before the Delhi High Court. This Court held that the
Court at Chandigarh alone had the territorial jurisdiction as New Delhi was
not the "seat" but only a "venue" of the arbitration.
Judgements cited by the Respondent
18.
In
Interglobe Aviation Limited v. N. Satchidanand
, (2011) 7 SCC
463, the Supreme Court held that any clause which ousts the jurisdiction of
all Courts having jurisdiction and confers jurisdiction on a Court not
otherwise having jurisdiction, would be invalid. The parties cannot by
agreement confer jurisdiction. The ouster of jurisdiction of some Courts is
permissible so long as the Court on which exclusive jurisdiction is
conferred, had jurisdiction. However, there was no arbitration agreement
in
that case
.
19.
In
AAA Landmark Ltd. v. Akme Projects Ltd
, 2018 SCC OnLine Del
7586, the agreement provided for exclusive jurisdiction of Delhi Courts.
The application for appointment of an arbitrator was filed before Delhi High
Court in which an objection of jurisdiction was raised on the ground that the
previously, a petition under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act
was filed before the Gurgaon Court. This Court allowed the objection
holding that all subsequent applications arising out of the agreement have to
be filed before Gurgaon Court as the petition under
Section 9
was previously
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                 Page 12 of 16
filed before the Gurgaon Court.
20.
In
GE Countrywide Consumer Financial Services Ltd. v. Surjit
Singh Bhatia
, 2006 (89) DRJ 73, an application for appointment of an
Arbitrator was filed before Delhi High Court on the ground that the
agreement stipulated the place of arbitration to be Delhi. This Court rejected
the application on the ground that the loan was applied and disbursed at
Ahmedabad and no part of cause of action arose at Delhi.
This judgment is
prior to
Indus Mobile Distribution Private Limited
(supra) in which the
Supreme Court held that the Court at seat of arbitration shall have exclusive
jurisdiction.
21.
In
Apparel Export Promotion Council v. Prabhati Patni, ILR
(2005)
II Delhi 1066, the objections under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act were filed before the Delhi High Court in which the
objection of territorial jurisdiction was raised on the ground that the
agreement provided for exclusive jurisdiction of Jaipur Courts. This Court
dismissed the objections holding that the situs of arbitration or the fact that
the award was made at a particular place, would not be relevant for
conferring jurisdiction.
This judgment is also prior to
Indus Mobile
Distribution Private Limited
(supra) in which the Supreme Court held that
the Court at seat of the arbitration shall have exclusive jurisdiction.
22.
In
Gulati Construction Co., Jhansi v. Betwa River Board
, AIR 1984
Del 299, the arbitrator filed an award under the
Arbitration Act, 1940
before
Delhi High Court on the ground that the arbitration proceedings were
conducted at Delhi. The Delhi High Court returned the award holding that
the arbitration proceedings having been conducted and the award having
been made in New Delhi, does not give this Court jurisdiction to entertain
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                    Page 13 of 16
the award as neither cause of action arose at Delhi nor the parties reside or
work for gain at Delhi. This judgment was in the context of
Section 14
of the
Arbitration Act, 1940 and is not relevant for the present case.
Summary of Principles
23.
Section 20 (1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act empowers the
parties to determine the seat of arbitration. The parties are at liberty to
choose a neutral seat of arbitration where neither the cause of action arose
nor the parties reside or work and
Sections 16
to
20
of the Code of Civil
Procedure would not be attracted.
24.    Once the seat is determined, the Court of that place shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to deal with all matters relating to arbitration
agreement between the parties.
25.    If the parties have not determined the seat of arbitration, the seat of
arbitration shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 20(2)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
26.    If the parties have not agreed on the seat of the arbitration, the Court
competent to entertain an application under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act would be the "Court‖ as defined in
Section 2(1) (e)
of the
Act read with
Sections 16
to
20
of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Findings
27.    The arbitration agreement dated 16th March, 2018 does not stipulate
any seat of arbitration as the parties had not agreed on the seat of the
arbitration under
Section 20(1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. In
that view of the matter, the seat of the arbitration shall be determined by the
Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 20(2)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act.
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                  Page 14 of 16
28.    Since the parties have not agreed on the seat of the arbitration, the
Court within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(e)
of Arbitration and Conciliation
Act read with
Sections 16
to
20
of Code of Civil Procedure would be
competent to entertain an application under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act.
29.    This Court lacks territorial jurisdiction as Delhi is not the seat of
arbitration; no cause of action arose at Delhi and the respondent does not
work at Delhi. The agreement was drawn at Ranchi, signed at Lucknow and
was to be performed at Patna.
30.    The petitioner could have succeeded if the agreement had provided
the seat of arbitration to be Delhi. In that case, this Court would have
exclusive jurisdiction to entertain this application.
31.    Clause 15.1 which provides for exclusive jurisdiction of Delhi Courts,
is not valid as the parties cannot confer jurisdiction on a Court which
otherwise has no jurisdiction. That apart, clause 15.1 is subject to clauses
15.2 and 15.3.
32.    The judgments cited by the petitioner do not support the case of the
petitioner. The petitioner has relied upon cases in which the agreements
provided the seat of arbitration, which eventually determined the jurisdiction
of the Court whereas the agreement dated 16th March, 2018, in the present
case, does not determine the seat. In that view of the matter, the jurisdiction,
in the present case, has to be determined according to
Section 2(1)(e)
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act read with
Sections 16
to
20
of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
Conclusion
33.    This Court holds that it has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain this
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                    Page 15 of 16
petition.
34.    The petition is dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to approach the
Court of competent jurisdiction.
J.R. MIDHA, J.
JULY 06, 2020
rsk/dk/ds/ak
Arb. P. 662/2019                                                  Page 16 of 16
