Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 603 [Commissioner of Income Tax and others vs.
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/28515556/

[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Mackeil Ispat And Forging Limited vs State Bank Of India on 20 November, 2019
Author:
Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya
Bench:
Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya
In the High Court at Calcutta

                             Civil Revisional Jurisdiction

                                    Appellate Side




The Hon'ble Justice Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya



                                 C.O. No.3224 of 2019

                         Mackeil Ispat and Forging Limited
                                        Vs.
                               State Bank of India




For the petitioner       :       Mr. S.N. Mookherjee,

                                 Mr. Pradip Kr. Tarafder,

                                 Mr. Sambuddha Dutta



For the respondent/SBI   :       Mr. S.K. Kapur,
Ms. Suhani Dwivedi,

                                 Mr. Dipan Sarkar,

                                 Mr. Deepanjan Dutta



Hearing concluded on     :       15.11.2019



Judgment on              :       20.11.2019
2
Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J.:‐
1. The present application under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India has been

      preferred against an order passed by the National Company Law Tribunal,

      Kolkata Bench, refusing leave to the corporate debtor/petitioner the leave to file a

      supplementary affidavit.
2. Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner argues that although, by the

      same order, the financial creditor was permitted to file a rejoinder much beyond

      the time which was stipulated by the tribunal itself for filing of the same, bias

      was exhibited in the impugned order by refusing the petitioner to file its

      supplementary affidavit in the same breath.
3. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner argues that, by an order dated June 19,

      2019, a photocopy of which has been handed over on behalf of the opposite party

      itself, the matter was fixed for further consideration on August 14, 2019 but only

      seven days was granted to the financial creditor to file rejoinder. However, the

      rejoinder was filed much thereafter. The corporate debtor, by the same order

      dated June 19, 2019, was granted time to file a reply within seven days as well.
4. In the impugned order, no reason was assigned as to why the belated rejoinder

      of the financial creditor was allowed to be filed as late as on August 14, 2019 but,
3
in the same breath, the leave sought by the corporate debtor to file its

   supplementary affidavit was refused on the ground that no valid reasons were

   submitted.
5. This, according to the petitioner, exhibited a lack of impartial attitude on the part

   of the tribunal. It is argued that the cardinal rule of fair play was absent in such

   refusal on the part of the tribunal.
6. Learned senior counsel for the opposite party/financial creditor argues at the

   outset that an appeal lay under Section 61(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

   Code, 2016 (hereafter referred to as "the IBC"). As such, as settled by various

   High Courts and the Supreme Court, this court ought not to have entertained or

   to dispose of the present application under
Article 227
, since an equally

   efficacious alternative remedy is available under the IBC. By placing reliance on

   the preamble of the IBC, learned senior counsel for the opposite party argues that

   primacy was given to insolvency resolution in a time‐bound manner for

   maximization of value of assets, to promote entrepreneurship, availability of

   credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders. As such, it is argued, in

   the event this court entertains the present application under
Article 227
of the

   Constitution of India despite the availability of an appeal, the entire scheme of

   the IBC and allied Acts would be frustrated, thereby thwarting the legislative
4
scheme of early resolution of such matters and opening up a flood‐gate of similar

   matters, which would overburden this court despite the availability of an

   appellate tribunal.
7.
In this context, learned senior counsel for the opposite party places reliance on a

   judgment reported at (
2014) 1 SCC 603 [Commissioner of Income Tax and others vs.

   Chhabil Dass Agarwal
], for the proposition that the High Courts would not readily

   interfere in such matters under
Article 226
or
Article 227
of the Constitution of

   India in view of availability of an alternative remedy.
8. Learned senior counsel next argues that the filing of a further supplementary

   affidavit by the petitioner was, in any event, barred by Rule 55 of the National

   Company Law Tribunal Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as "the NCLT

   Rules").
9. Rule 55 provides that no pleadings, subsequent to the reply, shall be presented

   except by the leave of the tribunal upon such terms as a tribunal may think fit.
10. It is next argued that the delay in filing the reply by the opposite party remained

   unchallenged and cannot be a justification for the delay in filing the

   supplementary affidavit.
5
11. It is next submitted on behalf of the opposite party, on the question of

   maintainability of the present revisional application, that the expression "the

   order" in Section 61(1) of the IBC refers to any order passed under Part II of the

   IBC and includes the impugned order. It is submitted that a perusal of Section

   60(5) shows that the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) shall have

   jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of, inter alia, any question of priorities or any

   question of law or facts, arising out of or in relation to the insolvency resolution

   or liquidation proceedings of the corporate debtor or corporate person under this

   court. The present impugned order, it is argued, is a question of fact arising out

   of and in relation to an insolvency resolution and, as such, is covered by Section

   60(5)(c) of the IBC, thus, bringing the said order within the fold of the appellable

   orders contemplated in Section 61(1) of the IBC.
12. In reply, learned senior counsel for the petitioner argues that Rule 55 of the

   NCLT Rules are not applicable to insolvency resolution proceedings under the

   IBC. By placing reliance on Rule 10 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

   (Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as

   "the IBC Rules"), learned senior counsel argues that the specific rules of the

   NCLT Rules, 2016, which are applicable to IBC Proceedings, have been referred

   to there. Neither in Rule 10 nor in any other Rule of the IBC Rules, does Rule 55

   of the NCLT Rules find mention. As such, Rule 55 is not applicable at all to the
6
present IBC proceeding, merely because the NCLT was designated as the

   Adjudicating Authority under the IBC.
13. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner, in answer to the issue of

   maintainability raised by the opposite party, argues that Section 61(1) specifically

   refers to "the order of the Adjudicating Authority" under Part II of the IBC as

   being appellable. It is argued that the definite article "the" refers to orders which

   can be passed by the Adjudicating Authority under Part II of the IBC itself. By

   way of examples, learned senior counsel refers to Sections 7(5), 9(5), 10(4), 12A,

   13, 14, 16, 31, 33, 34, 42, 44 ‐ 49, 51 and 54 of the IBC. All such provisions

   contemplate the orders which the Adjudicating Authority can pass under Part II

   of the IBC, which have been referred to as "the order" which can be passed

   under Part II. The refusal to grant leave for filing a supplementary affidavit not

   being any of such orders, it would be treated to be a mere interlocutory order

   which is not appellable at all under Section 61(1) of the IBC. As such, there would

   be no remedy other than
Article 227
of the Constitution of India for the petitioner

   to avail against such an order.
14. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner cites a judgment reported at 2019
SCC

   Online SC 1292 [Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma Paribalana Sabai and others

   vs. Tuticorin Educational Society and others
], wherein it was discussed as to there
7
being a distinction between cases where the alternative remedy is available

   before civil courts in terms of the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
and

   in cases where such alternative remedy is available under special enactments

   and/or statutory rules and the fora provided therein, which happened to be

   quasi‐judicial authorities and tribunals. It was held that in cases falling under the

   first category, which may involve suits and other proceedings before the civil

   court, the availability of an appellate remedy in terms of the provisions
of the

   Code of Civil Procedure
may have to be construed as a near total bar. However,

   the second category of cases of alternative remedy was treated to be on a lighter

   footing. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner argues on the basis of such

   proposition that, in any event, there would not be any absolute bar for this court

   to proceed under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India in considering the

   legality and jurisdictional error of the impugned order even if there was a bar in

   the IBC, which does not provide an alternative remedy available before civil

   courts in terms of the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
.
15. Upon hearing both sides, an examination of the scope of
Section 61(1)
of the IBC,

   as regards appellability of orders passed by the Adjudicating Authority, is to be

   undertaken first.
8
16. It is seen from
Section 61(1)
that the language used is, notwithstanding anything

   to the contrary contained under the
Companies Act, 2013
, any person aggrieved

   by the order of the Adjudicating Authority under that Part (Part II) may prefer

   an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal.
17. However, in contrast, the very next Section, that is,
Section 62
of the IBC

   provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court against "an order" of the NCLT to

   the Supreme Court, thereby creating an explicit distinction between the language

   of the two successive sections between the appeal preferable against the order of

   an Adjudicating Authority and that of the NCLT.
18. Seen in such context, it cannot be presumed that the legislature carved out such a

   distinction without any meaning or reason. Going through the provisions of Part

   II of the IBC, as rightly argued on behalf of the petitioner, specific provisions

   have been
laid down in
the said Part, which confer power on the Adjudicating

   Authority (the NCLT) to pass an order. There are no other provisions than those

   referred to by the petitioner for passing any order by the Adjudicating Authority

   under Part II.
19. The submission of learned senior counsel for the opposite party as regards the

   applicability of
Section 60(5)(c)
of the IBC to the present case is unacceptable,

   since the said clause merely provides for the jurisdiction and power of the NCLT.
9
Sub‐section (5) of
Section 60
lays down that notwithstanding anything to the

   contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, the NCLT shall

   have jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of the matters provided therein,

   including those mentioned in clause (c), that is, any question of priorities or any

   question of law or facts, arising out of or in relation to the insolvency resolution

   or liquidation proceedings of the corporate debtor or corporate person under the

   IBC.
20. The said provision does not empower the Adjudicating Authority to pass any

   order, as contemplated in
Section 61(1)
of the IBC, but merely confer jurisdiction

   on the NCLT (the Adjudicating Authority) to incidentally decide questions of

   facts as well, arising out of or in relation to the insolvency resolution. The said

   provision confers power and jurisdiction on the Adjudicating Authority to deal

   with such questions while deciding matters under the IBC, which would

   culminate in orders under Part II, but do not provide for any occasion for the

   Adjudicating Authority to pass an order.
Section 60(5)
of the IBC is merely

   enabling, charting out the territory of the powers of the Adjudicating Authority,

   and does not contemplate any order being passed by the said authority.
21. Moreover, the language of
Section 62
of the IBC, which ex facie shows that "an

   order" that is, any order of the NCLT is appellable whereas, by explicit contrast,
10
Section 61(1)
provides for an appeal only against "the order of the Adjudicating

   Authority" under Part II. Since
Section 61(1)
cannot be read in isolation of the

   other provisions of Part II, the expression "the" has to be relatable to the

   previous provisions conferring authority on the Adjudicating Authority to pass

   orders.
22. The present impugned order not being such an order, no appeal lies under
Section 61(1)
of the IBC.
23. The use of the indefinite article "an" to qualify appellable orders in
Section 62
and the definite article "the" in
Section 61 (1)
of the IBC reflects the intention of

   the Legislature and cannot be construed to be redundant. Such intention of the

   Legislature has to be attributed a meaning and cannot be ignored while

   construing the statute.
24. The judgment cited on behalf of the petitioner is besides the point, inasmuch as
the said judgment
lays down a distinction between alternative remedies of civil

   nature and other alternative remedies, which does not take away from the

   sanctity of the alternative remedy in any manner.
25. Even the judgment cited on behalf of the opposite party does not lay down the

   proposition that an alternative remedy is an absolute bar for a High Court to

   exercise its jurisdiction under
Article 226
or
Article 227
of the Constitution of
11
India. It is well‐settled since long that, although there is no absolute bar if

   alternative remedies are available, if such remedies are equally efficacious, the

   High Court exercises a self‐imposed restriction in not frustrating the scheme of

   the concerned statute by interfering, but generally chooses to leave the matter for

   being challenged before the appropriate forum, of course, unless there is any

   inherent jurisdictional error hitting the root of the authority passing the order.
26. Be that as it may, the aforesaid propositions are entirely irrelevant for the present

   purpose, since the present application under
Article 227
of the Constitution of

   India was entertained and is being disposed of not despite the availability of an

   alternative remedy but on the ground that there is no alternative remedy at all

   for challenging the impugned order. Since
Section 61(1)
, providing for an appeal

   against "the order" of the Adjudicating Authority is the only provision for

   challenge in Part II of the IBC, and the present impugned order is not covered by

   the said provision, there would be no other remedy before the petitioner against

   the impugned order but to approach this court, either under
Article 226
or under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
27. Hence, the issue of maintainability raised by the opposite party is turned down

   and it is hereby held that the present application under
Article 227
of the

   Constitution is very much maintainable.
12
28. As regards the applicability of Rule 55 of the NCLT Rules, the contention of the

   petitioner is more acceptable, in so far as the said Rules govern the functioning of

   the NCLT, that is, the National Company Law Tribunal and does not

   automatically apply to the IBC, unless specifically provided for. Since the IBC

   has its own Rules, being the IBC Rules, 2016, and such Rules, despite specifying

   certain rules of the NCLT Rules to be applicable to IBC matters, does not mention

   Rule 55 of the same, it is evident that Rule 55 of the NCLT Rules cannot be

   automatically invoked in IBC matters.
29. Even if it was taken for the sake of argument that Rule 55 was applicable to the

   present case, the said Rule specifically provides for leave being given by the

   tribunal to present pleadings subsequent to the reply. It is conspicuous that no

   written application for leave is contemplated in the said section.
30. The tribunal, in the present case, merely attributed a single sentence in holding

   that no valid reasons were submitted by the corporate debtor/petitioner to file

   the supplementary affidavit, in spite of having accepted the rejoinder filed by the

   financial creditor in specific violation of the time‐frame stipulated earlier, about

   one‐and‐a‐half months after such time expired, without even assigning any

   reason. The said modus operandi reeks of bias and a partisan approach and ought

   to be deprecated.
13
31. It may be mentioned here that the argument advanced by the opposite party as

   to the entertainment of the present application under
Article 227
of the

   Constitution opening a flood gate for the litigants to come up against every order

   passed by the Adjudicating Authority under the IBC, is misplaced in view of the

   discussions made above. There are several orders which can be passed by the

   Adjudicating Authority under Part II of the IBC, which are appellable under
Section 61(1)
, as referred to in the present judgment. However, in the event the

   order impugned does not fall within the category of such appellable orders, the

   principle of ubi jus ibi remedium would be squarely hit, if this court shuts its eyes

   to a patent perversity or jurisdictional error committed by the tribunal.
32. In the present case, the perversity occasioned by meting out a step‐motherly

   treatment to the parties respectively is, by itself, a sufficient ground to interfere

   with the impugned order. Moreover, the supplementary affidavit sought to be

   filed being apparently relevant for a proper and complete adjudication of the

   proceeding, ought to have been permitted to be filed by the petitioner.
33. Accordingly, C.O. No. 3224 of 2019 is allowed on contest, thereby setting aside

   the impugned order in so far as the refusal to grant the petitioner leave to file its

   supplementary affidavit is concerned. The corporate debtor/petitioner is hereby

   granted leave to file such supplementary affidavit before the NCLT on the next
14
available date, if not already filed. The NCLT shall thereafter proceed with the

   hearing of the main matter, upon considering all the pleadings and other

   materials, including the supplementary affidavit so filed by the corporate debtor.
34. There will be no order as to costs.
35. Urgent certified website copies of this order, if applied for, be made available to

   the parties upon compliance with the requisite formalities.
( Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J. )
