Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 3 of 2003
Citation: SCC 190. In the
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/30347812/

[Cites
67
, Cited by
1
]
Delhi High Court
Union Of India vs Videocon Industries Ltd. on 5 March, 2012
Author:
Reva Khetrapal
Bench:
Reva Khetrapal
*    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+                     CS(OS) 3314/2011

UNION OF INDIA                                     ..... Plaintiff
                            Through:   Mr. A.S. Chandiok, ASG with
                                       Mr. R. Sasiprabhu, Mr. Ritesh
                                       Kumar, Ms. Bindu K. Nair,
                                       Mr. Somiran Sharma,
                                       Mr. Sumit and Ms. Shweta,
                                       Advocates

                   versus

VIDEOCON INDUSTRIES LTD                            ..... Defendant
                 Through:              Mr. Amit Sibal, Mr. Prashant
                                       Kalra, Mr. Rohan Dheman and
                                       Mr. Harsh Kaushik, Advocates

%                           Date of Decision : March 05, 2012

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

                            JUDGMENT
: REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
IA No.21069/2011 (under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 read with
Section 151
CPC)
1.    By way of present application, an anti-suit injunction is sought

by the Plaintiff restraining the Defendant from pursuing Claim

No.2009, Folio 1382 filed in the High Court of Justice, Queen‟s
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 1 of 130
Bench Division, Commercial Court, London. The aforesaid

application is filed in a suit for declaration and perpetual injunction

instituted by the Plaintiff to restrain the above named Defendant from

pursuing the aforesaid claim in London in relation to the issue and

matter already finally determined by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of

India by its judgment and order dated 11.05.2011 between the parties.
2.    The chronological factual matrix leading to the institution of

the suit in which the present application is instituted is delineated as

follows.
3.    The Union of India, the Plaintiff herein, as the owner of natural

resources including petroleum in the territorial waters of India,

through the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, entered into a

Production Sharing Contract (hereinafter referred to as "PSC") on

October 28, 1994 at New Delhi. The said PSC was executed between

the Union of India on the one hand and a consortium of four

companies consisting of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited

(ONGC), Videocon Petroleum Limited, Command Petroleum (India)

Private Limited and Ravva Oil (Singapore) Private Limited in terms
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 2 of 130
of which the consortium was granted an exploration licence and

mining lease to explore and produce hydro-carbon resources owned

by the plaintiff underlying a Contract Area called „Ravva Oil and Gas

Field‟ in the Offshore of Andhra Coast owned by the Plaintiff. These

companies, including ONGC, are collectively referred to as "the

Contractor" in the PSC. Subsequently, Cairn Energy U.K. was

substituted in place of Command Petroleum (India) Private Limited

and the name of Videocon Petroleum Limited was changed to

Petrocon India Limited, which merged with the Defendant herein, i.e.,

Videocon Industries Limited.
4.    The aforesaid PSC was entered into for and on behalf of the

President of India with the desire that the petroleum resources in the

Contract Area be exploited with the utmost expedition in the overall

interest of India. As per
Article 35.2
of the PSC, it was stipulated that

the contract shall not be amended, modified, varied or supplemented

in any respect except by an instrument in writing signed by all the

parties, which shall state the date upon which the amendment or

modification shall become effective.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 3 of 130
5.    The PSC dated 28.10.1994 also contained a stipulation in
Article 33.1
that the contract shall be governed and interpreted in

accordance with the Laws of India subject to
Article 34.12
, which,

inter alia, provided that the seat of arbitration shall be Kuala Lumpur

and the Arbitration Agreement as contained in
Article 34
shall be

governed by the Laws of England.
6.    In the year 2000, disputes arose between the Plaintiff and the

Defendant pertaining to the correctness of certain cost recoveries and

profit, which along with a few other disputes was referred to an

Arbitral Tribunal as contemplated in
Article 34
of the PSC. The

arbitration case relevant for the present purposes was registered on

19.08.2003 as Case No.3 of 2003 before the Tribunal at Kuala

Lumpur, Malaysia and was fixed for hearing. However, before the

hearing could take place, Malaysia was hit by the outbreak of the

epidemic „SARS‟. Accordingly, after consultation and keeping in

mind the convenience of all concerned and to ensure that proceedings

were not delayed, the Tribunal held sittings at Amsterdam in the first

instance and on 15.11.2003 the parties agreed to shift the seat of
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 4 of 130
arbitration to London. This was done, according to the plaintiff,

without affecting the contractual and jurisdictional venue of Kuala

Lumpur and without amendment of the arbitration agreement as

contemplated in the PSC. Therefore, the jurisdictional seat of the

arbitration remained and continues to remain in Kuala Lumpur.
7.    The Arbitral Tribunal passed a partial award dated 31.03.2005

in the above Arbitration Case No.3/2003. The Plaintiff on 10.05.2005

challenged this partial award before the Malaysian High Court at

Kuala Lumpur by filing a petition for setting aside the award. In

those proceedings, the Defendant herein on 20.05.2006 questioned the

jurisdiction of the Malaysian High Court on the ground that seat had

shifted to London.
8.    Since further proceedings in the matter were to take place for

the passing of the final award and the epidemic in Kuala Lumpur was

over, the Plaintiff requested the Arbitral Tribunal to hold its further

sittings at Kuala Lumpur, the jurisdictional seat of arbitration. This

was opposed by the Defendant/Videocon. The Arbitral Tribunal by
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 5 of 130
an order dated 20th April, 2006 decided that further sittings be held at

London from 30th June, 2006 to 2nd July, 2006.
9.    Aggrieved by the order dated 20.04.2006 of the Hon‟ble

Tribunal, the Plaintiff on 30.05.2006 filed OMP No.255 of 2006

under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, in this

Court seeking a declaration that the seat of arbitration is Kuala

Lumpur. The Defendant raised objection to the maintainability of the

petition on the ground of jurisdiction. The aforesaid objection was

decided by a learned Single Judge of this Court by order dated

30.04.2008 in favour of the Plaintiff, rejecting the objection of the

Defendant and proceeding to fix dates for hearing on the merits of

OMP No.255 of 2006.
10.   On 08.07.2008, the Defendant filed a Special Leave Petition,

being SLP(C) No.16371/2008 before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of

India impugning the judgment dated 30.04.2008, which was

subsequently converted to a Civil Appeal No.4269 of 2011.
11.   On 05.08.2009, while the Special Leave Petition before the

Supreme Court of India was pending, the High Court of Malaysia
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 6 of 130
dismissed the Plaintiff‟s challenge to the Partial Award on the ground

that the seat of arbitration had been shifted to London. The Plaintiff

filed a Notice of Appeal in Malaysia on 12.08.2009 and subsequently

a Memorandum of Appeal was filed on 14.12.2010.
12.   On 09.10.2009, the Defendant brought the decision of the

Malaysian Court on the record of the Special Leave Petition pending

before the Supreme Court. On 13.10.2009, while the matter was

pending before the Supreme Court, the Defendant filed a Claim

Petition No.2009, Folio 1382 before the High Court of Justice,

Queen‟s Bench Division, Commercial Court, London. However, the

Defendant did not disclose the above filing to the Supreme Court or

to the Plaintiff, and, according to the Plaintiff, deliberately suppressed

the same despite an order passed by the London Court on 20.10.2009

to serve the Plaintiff herein as soon as possible. On 11.11.2009, the

judgment in Civil Appeal No.4269 of 2011 was reserved by the

Supreme Court.
13.   On 21st April, 2010, the Plaintiff was served with notice in the

Claim Petition No.2009, Folio 1382 pending in the London Court.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 7 of 130
Thereafter, on 10th August, 2010, the Plaintiff moved the Supreme

Court by filing IA No.4/2010 in Civil Appeal No.4269/2011 pleading,

inter alia, that the Supreme Court was seized of the matter including

the question as to whether the seat of arbitration continued to be

at Kuala lumpur or the same had shifted to London.

Simultaneously, on 12th August, 2010, an application was filed by the

Plaintiff before the London Court stating that the juridical seat was

not London and in any case the issue of juridical seat was being

contested in proceedings elsewhere, i.e., in the Supreme Court of

India. In the light of these facts, it was prayed that the London Court

did not have the jurisdiction to hear the claim of juridical seat. On the

same day, i.e., on 12.08.2010, the Plaintiff‟s solicitors also wrote to

the Defendant‟s solicitors clearly stating:-
"For the avoidance of doubt, this letter and
             our client‟s application are not a submission
             to the jurisdiction of the Courts of England
             and Wales."
14.   On 06.09.2010, the Plaintiff‟s application IA No.4/2010 came

up for hearing before the Supreme Court and after considering the

matter, the Supreme Court by a consent order of the same date, i.e.,
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 8 of 130
06.09.2010 disposed of the said application by recording that "subject

to completion of pleadings in the proceedings pending in the Courts

in England as well as in Malaysia, neither the petitioner nor the

respondent will proceed/take any pro-active steps for hearing in the

proceedings/applications pending in the Court in England as well as

in the Court in Malaysia, till the disposal of the present SLP".
15.   On 11.05.2011, the Supreme Court delivered its judgment in

Civil Appeal No.4269/2011, wherein it was held that "mere change

in the physical venue of hearing from Kuala Lumpur to

Amsterdam and London did not amount to change in the

juridical seat of arbitration" and negated the contention of the

defendant that the seat of arbitration had shifted to London. It was

further held by the Supreme Court that in view of the specific

exclusion of
Part I of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
, the

Delhi High Court did not have the jurisdiction to entertain OMP

No.255/2006 and the said petition was liable to be dismissed.

Consequently, on 30.05.2011, OMP No.255/2006 was formally
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 9 of 130
dismissed by the High Court in view of the judgment of the Supreme

Court rendered on 11.05.2011.
16.   Subsequent to the decision of the Supreme Court, the Plaintiff

on 02.06.2011 requested the Defendant to withdraw the proceedings

bearing Claim No.2009, Folio 1382 dated 13.10.2009 before the

Queen‟s Bench Division, Commercial Court, London. By way of a

reply the plaintiff through its solicitors at London received a letter

dated 08.06.2011 from the Defendant‟s solicitors addressed to the

Commercial Court Listing Office, the Royal Courts of Justice,

London, seeking to recommence the proceedings before the London

Commercial Court. The Plaintiff through its solicitors replied to the

said letter on 14.06.2011 stating that the Supreme Court of India had

considered and finally decided that the juridical seat of arbitration (as

opposed to the physical shift of sittings to London) remained at Kuala

Lumpur. However, on 22.06.2011, the Defendant‟s solicitors wrote

to the solicitors of the Plaintiff at London reiterating their position

that the decision of the Supreme Court of India had not rendered the

proceedings before the London Court unnecessary stating: "Any legal
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 10 of 130
issue arising from the judgment of the Indian Supreme Court are

matters    for     the   English   Court    to   determine      at   the

hearing............"
17.   The Plaintiff‟s solicitors responded to the above letter of the

defendant by letter dated 29.06.2011 stating that the Hon‟ble Supreme

Court of India had finally and conclusively decided the relevant issue

to the effect that the juridical seat of the arbitration was not changed

to London but remained in Kuala Lumpur and the defendant was

estopped from relitigating the point of juridical seat of arbitration

before the English Courts. The plaintiff, however, consented to the

hearing without prejudice to the issue of res judicata.              The

solicitors of the Defendant replied to the aforesaid letter on

01.07.2011, stating that they disagreed with the Plaintiff‟s position

that the decision of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India had "finally

and conclusively" decided the relevant issue pending before the

English Court.
18.   Thereafter, on 29.08.2011, the witness statement of Ms. Pallavi

Shroff was filed on behalf of the Defendant and on 14.10.2011,
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 11 of 130
witness statements of Ms. Promila Jaspal and Ms. Simran Dhir were

filed on behalf of the Plaintiff.    The Plaintiff under the rules of

practice in London also participated in the Case Management

Conference held on 04.11.2011 without prejudice to its rights and

contentions and without admitting, in any manner, that the London

Court had jurisdiction to adjudicate on the question in issue. On

14.11.2011, pursuant to the Case Management Conference, the

London Court issued orders fixing the dates for hearing and prior

thereto dates for evidence by way of witness statements and expert

evidence to be filed by both the parties on the status and effect in

Indian law of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India dated 11 th

May, 2011 and in particular whether the decision of the Supreme

Court of India as to the seat of the first and third arbitrations are res

judicata or are otherwise binding on the parties.
19.   Aggrieved therefrom, on 22.12.2011 the present suit has been

preferred by the Plaintiff seeking declaration and perpetual injunction

to restrain the Defendant from pursuing the aforesaid claim in London

predicated on its stand that the matter had already been finally
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 12 of 130
adjudicated upon by the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered on

11.05.2011.
20.   In the aforesaid factual backdrop, the learned Additional

Solicitor General Mr. A.S. Chandiok made detailed submissions in

support of his prayer for the grant of an injunction order, which, for

the sake of convenience, are summarized below.

PLAINTIFF‟S CONTENTIONS
21.   The learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the

attempt on the part of the defendant to re-litigate the issue of

juridical seat of arbitration before the English Court after having

it settled/decided by the Supreme Court of India is in breach of

the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) dated October 28, 1994 in

particular,
Article 33.2
of the PSC and barred by res judicata/issue

estoppel. At the outset, he referred to the relevant clauses of the PSC,

which, for the sake of facility of reference, are extracted below:-
"33.1 Indian Law to Govern
              Subject to the provisions of
Article 34.12
, this
              Contract shall be governed and interpreted in
              accordance with the laws of India.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 13 of 130
33.2 Laws of India Not to be Contravened
             Subject to
Article 17.1
nothing in this Contract
             shall entitle the Contractor to exercise the
             rights, privileges and powers conferred upon it
             by this Contract in a manner which will
             contravene the laws of India.
34.3 Unresolved Disputes
             Subject to the provisions of this contract, the
             Parties agree that any matter, unresolved
             dispute, difference or claim which cannot be
             agreed or settled amicably within twenty one
             (21) days may be submitted to a sole expert
             (where
Article 34.2
applies) or otherwise to an
             arbitral tribunal for final decision as
             hereinafter provided.
34.12 Venue and Law of Arbitration
             Agreement
             The venue of sole expert, conciliation or
             arbitration proceedings pursuant to this Article,
             unless the Parties otherwise agree, shall be
             Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and shall be
             conducted in the English language. Insofar as
             practicable, the Parties shall continue to
             implement the terms of this Contract
             notwithstanding the initiation of arbitral
             proceedings and any pending claim or dispute.
             Notwithstanding the provisions of
Article 33.1
,
             the arbitration agreement contained in this
Article 34
shall be governed by the laws of
             England.
35.2 Amendment
             This Contract shall not be amended, modified,
             varied or supplemented in any respect except
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 14 of 130
by an instrument in writing signed by all the
             Parties, which shall state the date upon which
             the amendment or modification shall become
             effective."
22.   Learned Additional Solicitor General contended that as per
Article 34.12
of the PSC, the seat of arbitration is Kuala Lumpur, and

a bare glance at the relevant Articles of the PSC extracted

hereinabove would suffice to show that
Article 34.12
is an overriding

provision qua
Article 33.1
whereunder Indian Law is stated to be the

governing law; however,
Article 34.12
does not override
Article 33.2
of the PSC, which provides that the Contractor shall not exercise the

rights, privileges and powers conferred upon it by the contract in a

manner which will contravene the laws of India.           He further

contended that the admitted position is that nothing which is

inconsistent to Indian Laws can be claimed by any of the parties

and this is evident from the written statement filed by the defendant,

and in particular from Clause (xiii) of paragraph 16 of the written

statement, wherein it is stated:-
"..............The Defendant in filing the English
             Court Proceedings is not in any manner
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 15 of 130
claiming anything inconsistent in Indian Law as
             alleged...."
23.   He submitted that re-litigating the same issue, i.e., issue of

juridical seat of arbitration by the Defendant is against Indian Laws

and consequently the Defendant is in breach of
Article 33.2
of the

PSC as alleged in the plaint. The Defendant cannot be permitted to

indulge in forum shopping and to re-agitate the same issue before

the English Court when the Supreme Court of India has already

decided on the issue. This is opposed to the public policy of India

embodied in the doctrine of res judicata and principles analogous

thereto, intended to eliminate multiplicity of proceedings and

potentially conflicting decisions and to preserve the integrity of the

proceedings before the Supreme Court of India, which in the instant

case culminated in the final judgment and order dated 11.05.2011 in

the appeal filed by the defendant being Civil Appeal No.4269/2011.
24.   Reference was also made by him in this regard to the decision

of the Supreme Court in the case of
Venture Global Engineering vs.

Satyam Computer Services Ltd. and Anr.
, (2008) 4 SCC 190. In the

said case, the appellant, a company incorporated in USA entered into
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 16 of 130
a Joint Venture Agreement with the Respondent, a company

registered in India, to constitute a company named Satyam Venture

Engineering Services, registered in India. A Shareholders Agreement

(SHA) was also entered into between the parties. The SHA, which

was governed by Michigan Law, provided for arbitration of disputes

at the London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA). The SHA in
Section 11
.05 clause (c) further provided that:-
"Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
             this agreement, the shareholders shall at all
             times act in accordance with the
Companies
             Act
and other applicable Acts/Rules being in
             force, in India at any time."
The Supreme Court after considering the aforesaid provisions

in the SHA opined:- (SCC, at page 211, paragraph 44)

             ".....................Notwithstanding              that    the
             proper law or the governing law of the contract
             is the law of the State of Michigan, their
             shareholders shall at all times act in
             accordance with the
Companies Act
and other
             applicable Acts/Rules being in force in India at
             any time. Necessarily, enforcement has to be in
             India, as declared by this very section which
             overrides every other section in the
             Shareholders Agreement. Respondent No.1,
             therefore, totally violated the agreement
             between the parties by seeking enforcement of
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 17 of 130
the transfer of the shares in the Indian
             company by approaching the District Courts
             in the United States."
25.   The learned Additional Solicitor General further contended that
Order XXXIX Rule 2 of the CPC
specifically empowers the Court to

grant injunction restraining the defendant from committing a breach

of contract or other injury of any kind. Thus, in the case of
Pioneer

Publicity Corporation vs. Delhi Transport Corporation & Anr.
, 103

(2003) DLT 442, a learned Single Judge of this Court with reference

to the scope and ambit of
Order XXXIX Rule 2 CPC
opined: (DLT,

at page 449, para 8)

             "Keeping in view the provisions of Order
             XXXIX Rule 2 it is no longer possible to
             contend that the Court does not possess power
             to prohibit or prevent the breach of contract. If
             this is possible in the realm of private
             contracts, it is an obligation in the realm of
             pubic enterprises............"
26.   The learned Additional Solicitor General next contended that

the proceedings re-initiated by the defendant before the English

Court is barred by res judicata/issue estoppel. The plaintiff had

on 30.05.2006 moved a petition under
Section 9
of the Arbitration
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 18 of 130
and
Conciliation Act, 1996
being OMP No.225 of 2006 before a

learned Single Judge of this Court, inter alia, making the following

prayers:-
"(a) direct the parties and the Arbitral Tribunal
                  consisting of Hon'ble Mr. Justice B.N.
                  Kirpal, Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.T. Nanavati
                  and Hon'ble Mr. Justice J.K Mehra to
                  continue hearing at Kuala Lumpur, the
                  contractual and jurisdictional venue of
                  arbitration as contemplated in
Article 34
of the PSC;
(b) declare that the contractual venue, i.e.,
                  Kuala Lumpur was and is contractual and
                  jurisdictional seat of arbitration;
(c) stay of the further proceedings of the
                  arbitration as informed vide letter dated
                  20th April, 2006 by the Tribunal."
27.   A preliminary objection was raised to the maintainability of the

said petition by the respondent (defendant herein) to the effect that the

jurisdictional seat of arbitration had shifted to London and the

petitioner was estopped from contending that the seat of arbitration

continued to be at Kuala Lumpur. By his order dated 30 th April,

2008, the learned Single Judge held that it had the jurisdiction to

decide upon the petition.       Aggrieved therefrom, the defendant

approached the Supreme Court by way of SLP (C) No.16371/2008
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 19 of 130
(which was later converted to Civil Appeal No.4269 of 2011). In the

said SLP, the defendant herein again raised the issue of juridical seat

and even filed detailed written submissions before the Supreme Court

on the issue of „juridical seat of arbitration‟. The judgment was

delivered by the Supreme Court on May 11, 2011, wherein it was

held that change in „the venue of hearing‟ to Amsterdam or London

did not amount to change in the „juridical seat of arbitration‟; and the

contention of the defendant that the juridical seat had been shifted to

London was negated. As a matter of fact, the Supreme Court gave a

categorical finding that Kuala Lumpur would remain the seat of

arbitration (paras 12, 13 and 14 of the judgment of the Supreme

Court).
28.   The learned Additional Solicitor General contended that in

view of the above the issue of juridical seat is no longer res integra

after the judgment of the Supreme Court. The defendant cannot

under the garb of the claim made by it in the London Court seek to set

aside a binding judgment and finding of fact on the aforesaid issue

decided by the Apex Court. The law
laid down by
the Supreme Court
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 20 of 130
besides being binding between the parties, being a judgment in

personam is in fact the law of the land, unless set aside in review.

Admittedly, no review petition has been filed by the defendant and

the judgment, therefore, acts as an estoppel against the defendant.
29.   Reference was made by the learned Additional Solicitor

General to a large number of precedents in support of his aforesaid

contention, including the following:-
(
i)   Satish Nambiar vs. Union of India & Anr.
, 150 (2008) DLT

312 (DB), wherein a Division Bench of this Court held as under:-
(DLT, at page 318, para 13)

             "......................The principles of res judicata
             applicable to writ proceedings prevent parties
             to a judicial determination from agitating the
             same question over again. That is true even
             when the earlier determination may be
             erroneous. A party aggrieved of any such
             decision can no doubt challenge the same in
             appeal, but cannot institute fresh proceedings
             on the same cause of action nor can a party
             agitate any such issue as it constituted an
             essential element of the decision earlier
             rendered..................."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 21 of 130
(
ii)   Ishwar Dutt vs. Land Acquisition Collector and Anr.
, (2005) 7

SCC 190, in which it was held as follows:- (SCC, at page 198, paras

18-19)

             "18. .................. The principle of res judicata
             is specie of the principle of estoppel. When a
             proceeding based on a particular cause of
             action has attained finality, the principle of res
             judicata shall fully apply.
19. Reference in this regard may be made to
             Wade and Forsyth on Administrative Law, 9th
             Edn., p. 243, wherein it is stated:
"One special variety of estoppel is res
                   judicata. This results from the rule,
                   which prevents the parties to a judicial
                   determination from litigating the same
                   question over again, even though the
                   determination is demonstrably wrong.
                   Except in proceedings by way of appeal,
                   the parties bound by the judgment are
                   estopped from questioning it. As
                   between one another, they may neither
                   pursue the same cause of action again,
                   nor may they again litigate any issue
                   which was an essential element in the
                   decision. These two aspects are
                   sometimes distinguished as „cause of
                   action estoppel‟ and „issue estoppel‟."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 22 of 130
(
iii)   Swamy      Atmananda    and    Ors.   vs.   Sri   Ramakrishna

Tapovanam and Ors.
, (2005) 10 SCC 51, wherein it was observed as

follows:- (SCC, at page 61, para 26)


             "26. The object and purport of principle of res
             judicata as contended in
Section 11
of the Code
             of Civil Procedure is to uphold the rule of
             conclusiveness of judgment, as to the points
             decided earlier of fact, or of law, or of fact and
             law, in every subsequent suit between the same
             parties. Once the matter which was the subject-
             matter of lis stood determined by a competent
             court, no party thereafter can be permitted to
             reopen it in a subsequent litigation. Such a rule
             was brought into the statute book with a view to
             bring the litigation to an end so that the other
             side may not be put to harassment."
(
iv)    M. Nagabhushana vs. State of Karnataka and Others
, (2011)

3 SCC 408, wherein the principles of res judicata were delineated as

under:- (SCC, at pages 415-416, paras 12 and 13)


             "12. The principles of res judicata are of
             universal application as they are based on two
             age-old principles, namely, interest reipublicae
             ut sit finis litium which means that it is in the
             interest of the State that there should be an end
             to litigation and the other principle is nemo
             debet bis vexari, si constat curiae quod sit pro
             una et eademn causa meaning thereby that no
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 23 of 130
one ought to be vexed twice in a litigation if it
             appears to the Court that it is for one and the
             same cause. This doctrine of res judicata is
             common to all civilized system of jurisprudence
             to the extent that a judgment after a proper trial
             by a Court of competent jurisdiction should be
             regarded as final and conclusive determination
             of the questions litigated and should for ever set
             the controversy at rest.
13. That principle of finality of litigation is
             based on high principle of public policy. In the
             absence of such a principle great oppression
             might result under the colour and pretence of
             law in as much as there will be no end of
             litigation and a rich and malicious litigant will
             succeed in infinitely vexing his opponent by
             repetitive suits and actions. This may compel
             the weaker party to relinquish his right. The
             doctrine of res judicata has been evolved to
             prevent such an anarchy. That is why it is
             perceived that the plea of res judicata is not a
             technical doctrine but a fundamental principle
             which sustains the rule of law in ensuring
             finality in litigation. This principle seeks to
             promote honesty and a fair administration of
             justice and to prevent abuse in the matter of
             accessing Court for agitating on issues which
             have become final between the parties."
(
v)   Hope Plantations Ltd. vs. Taluk Land Board, Peermade and

Anr.
, (1999) 5 SCC 590, wherein the following apposite observations

are set out:- (SCC, at page 607, para 26)
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 24 of 130
"26. It is settled law that principles of
             estoppel and res judicata are based on public
             policy and justice. Doctrine of res judicata is
             often treated as a branch of the law of estoppel
             though these two doctrines differ in some
             essential particulars. Rule of res judicata
             prevents the parties to a judicial determination
             from litigating the same question over again
             even though the determination may even be
             demonstratedly wrong. When the proceedings
             have attained finality, parties are bound by the
             judgment and are estopped from questioning
             it. They cannot litigate again on the same
             cause of action nor can they litigate any issue
             which was necessary for decision in the earlier
             litigation. These two aspects are "cause of
             action estoppel" and "issue estoppel". These
             two terms are of common law origin. Again,
             once an issue has been finally determined,
             parties cannot subsequently in the same suit
             advance arguments or adduce further evidence
             directed to showing that the issue was wrongly
             determined. Their only remedy is to approach
             the higher forum if available.................."
(vi)   D.S.V. Silo-Und Verwaltungs - Gesellschaft M.B.H. vs.

Owners of the Sennar and 13 Other Ships, (1985) 1 W.L.R. 490

(House of Lords), wherein the buyers of Sudanese groundnut

expellers brought an action for damages in a Dutch Court, which was

dismissed by the Dutch Court holding that it had no jurisdiction to

entertain the claim by virtue of the exclusive jurisdiction clause. The
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 25 of 130
buyers then brought an action in the Admiralty Court in England,

which held that the buyers‟ claim did not fall within the exclusive

jurisdiction clause in the Bill of Lading and that the plaintiffs were

not estopped by the decision of the Dutch Court of Appeal from so

asserting. The Court of Appeal allowed an appeal by the defendants

holding that the plaintiffs were so estopped.      On appeal by the

plaintiffs the House of Lords dismissed the appeal. The law, in the

words of Lord Brandon of Oakbrook, was as follows:-
"....a decision on the merits is a decision which
             establishes certain facts as proved or not in
             dispute; states what are the relevant principles
             of law applicable to such facts; and expresses a
             conclusion with regard to the effect of applying
             those principles to the factual situation
             concerned. If the expression "on the merits" is
             interpreted in this way, as I am clearly of
             opinion that it should be, there can be no doubt
             whatever that the decision of the Dutch Court
             of Appeal in the present case was a decision on
             the merits for the purposes of the application of
             the doctrine of issue estoppel."
(
vii) Makhija Construction & Engg. (P) Ltd. vs. Indore

Development Authority and ors
, (2005) 6 SCC 304, wherein a fine
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 26 of 130
distinction between the principle of precedent and the principle of res

judicata is drawn in the following words:-
"They refer to the principle of precedent which
             is distinct from the principle of res judicata. A
             precedent operates to bind in similar situations
             in a distinct case. Res judicata operates to bind
             parties to proceedings for no other reason, but
             that there should be an end to litigation."
(
viii) S. Nagaraj (dead) by LRs and Ors. vs. B.R. Vasudeva Murthy

& Ors.
, (2010) 3 SCC 353, wherein the Supreme Court again

reiterated the distinction between the doctrine of res judicata and the

doctrine of precedent and held that the principle of per incurium and

other principles related to the doctrine of precedent have no relevance

to the doctrine of res judicata whereunder whether a decision is

correct or erroneous has no bearing upon the question whether it

operates or does not operate as res judicata. The following apposite

observations were made in the said case:-
"The High Court has failed to appreciate that
             the principle of per incurium has relevance to
             the doctrine of precedents but has no
             application to the doctrine of res judicata. To
             quote Rankin, C.J. of the Calcutta High Court
             in
Tarini Charan Bhattacharjee v. Kedar Nath
             Haldar
AIR 1928 Cal 777: (AIR p.781)
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 27 of 130
"(1) The question whether decision is
                   correct or erroneous has no bearing
                   upon the question whether it operates or
                   does not operate as res judicata. The
                   doctrine is that in certain circumstances
                   the Court shall not try a suit or issue but
                   shall deal with the matter on the footing
                   that it is a matter no longer open to
                   contest by reason of a previous decision.
In these circumstances it must
                   necessarily be wrong for a court to try
                   the suit or issue, come to its own
                   conclusion thereon, consider whether the
                   previous decision is right and give effect
                   to it or not according as it conceives the
                   previous decision to be right or wrong.
To say, as a result of such disorderly
                   procedure, that the previous decision
                   was wrong and that it was wrong on a
                   point of law, or on a pure point of law,
                   and that therefore it may be disregarded,
                   is an indefensible form of reasoning. For
                   this purpose, it is not true that a point of
                   law is always open to a party."
(
ix)   K.K. Modi vs. K.N. Modi and Ors.
, (1998) 3 SCC 573, wherein

the Court has termed re-litigation as one of the examples of an abuse

of the process of the Court as follows:- (SCC, at page 592, para 44)

             "44. One of the examples cited as an abuse of
             the process of the court is relitigation.
It is an
             abuse of the process of the court and contrary
             to justice and public policy for a party to re-
litigate the same issue which has already been
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 28 of 130
tried and decided earlier against him. The re-
             agitation may or may not be barred as res
             judicata. But if the same issue is sought to be
             reagitated, it also amounts to an abuse of the
             process of the court. A proceeding being filed
             for a collateral purpose, or a spurious claim
             being made in litigation may also in a given set
             of facts amount to an abuse of the process of
             the court. Frivolous or vexatious proceedings
             may also amount to an abuse of the process of
             court especially where the proceedings are
             absolutely groundless. The court then has the
             power to stop such proceedings summarily and
             prevent the time of the public and the court
             from being wasted....................."
30.   On the basis of the aforesaid decisions, the learned Additional

Solicitor General contended that the principles of
Section 11
of the

Code of Civil Procedure would squarely apply in the present case.

Therefore, a second round of litigation is barred by the principles of

res judicata and the public policy of India, and by seeking to re-

initiate the proceedings before the London Court, the defendant is

not only trying to breach the PSC between the parties, but is

following a course of conduct which is vexatious and oppressive,

besides being in breach of
Article 33
of the PSC whereunder the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 29 of 130
parties had agreed that the laws of India were not to be

contravened.
31.    Relying upon the decision of the Court of Appeal (Civil

Division) rendered in Munib Masri vs. Consolidated Contractors

International Company SAL, Consolidated Contractors (Oil & Gas)

Company SAL [2008] EWCA Civ 625, the learned Additional

Solicitor General, further contended that re-litigation in a foreign

jurisdiction of matters which are already res judicata between the

parties by reason of a prior judgment can be a sufficient ground for

grant of anti-suit injunction. The following apposite observations are

set out:
"82. I do not accept the judgment debtors'
             argument that there is a principle (whether it is
             expressed as a condition for the exercise of the
             jurisdiction, or as an aspect of comity, or as an
             element in exercise of the discretion) that the
             English court will not restrain re-litigation
             abroad of a claim which has already been the
             subject matter of an English judgment adverse
             to the person seeking to re-litigate abroad. It
             has been established since at least 1837 that
             the fact that the respondent is seeking to re-
             litigate in foreign jurisdiction matters which
             are already re judicata between himself and
             the applicant by the reason of an English
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 30 of 130
judgment can be a sufficient ground for the
             grant of an anti-suit injunction."
32.   Next, adverting to the binding nature of the findings rendered

by the Supreme Court, the learned Additional Solicitor General

contended that a five-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case

of
Rupa Ashok Hurra vs. Ashok Hurra and Anr.
, (2002) 4 SCC 388

has placed matters beyond the pale of controversy by laying down in

no uncertain terms that a judgment rendered by the highest court

of the land is sacrosanct and is a precedent for itself and for all

Courts/Tribunals and authorities in India. The relevant part of the

judgment reads as under:- (SCC, at pages 406-407, 412 and 417)


             "24. There is no gainsaying that the Supreme
             Court is the Court of last resort - the final
             Court on questions both of fact and of law
             including constitutional law. The law declared
             by this Court is the law of the land; it is
             precedent for itself and for all the
             courts/tribunals and authorities in India. In a
             judgment there will be declaration of law and
             its application to the facts of the case to render
             a decision on the dispute between the parties to
             the lis. It is necessary to bear in mind that the
             principles in regard to the highest Court
             departing from its binding precedent are
             different from the grounds on which a final
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 31 of 130
judgment between the parties,           can     be
             reconsidered........................"
"25. In Hoystead vs. Commissioner of
             Taxation, Lord Shaw observed: (All ER p.62 B-
C)

                   "Parties are not permitted to begin fresh
                   litigation because of new views they may
                   entertain of the law of the case, or new
                   versions which they present as to what
                   should be a proper apprehension by the
                   Court of the legal result...... If this were
                   permitted litigation would have no end,
                   except when legal ingenuity is
                   exhausted."
"40. ...................In a State like India,
             governed by rule of law, certainty of law
             declared and the final decision rendered on
             merits in a lis between the parties by the
             highest court in the country is of paramount
             importance. The principle of finality is insisted
             upon not on the ground that a judgment given
             by the apex Court is impeccable but on the
             maxim interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium."
"57. ....................There cannot possibly be
             any manner of doubt that the matter once dealt
             with by this Court attains a state of finality
             and no further grievance can be had in regard
             thereto.      The founding fathers of the
             Constitution decidedly provided that the
             decision of this Court was final, conclusive and
             binding - final and conclusive inter partes and
             binding on all. But the makers have also
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 32 of 130
conferred a power of review of the judgment of
             this Court and the perusal of the provisions of
Articles 137
and
145
makes it abundantly
             clear."
33.   The learned Additional Solicitor General further contended

relying upon the decision of a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme

Court in
Kunhayammed and Ors. vs. State of Kerala and Anr.
,

(2000) 6 SCC 359, that the nature and scope of the power of the

Supreme Court under
Articles 136
and
141
is such that even when a

petition for leave to appeal is dismissed by a speaking or reasoned

order,
Article 141
of the Constitution would be attracted and if there

is a law declared by the Supreme Court, the said law would be

binding on all Courts and Tribunals in India and certainly the parties

thereto.   The relevant extract of the judgment is reproduced

hereunder:- (SCC, at pages 377-378, para 27)

             "27. ................................If the order of
             dismissal be supported by reasons then also the
             doctrine of merger would not be attracted
             because the jurisdiction exercised was not an
             appellate    jurisdiction    but    merely     a
             discretionary jurisdiction refusing to grant
             leave to appeal. We have already dealt with this
             aspect earlier. Still the reasons stated by the
             Court would attract applicability of
Article 141
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 33 of 130
of the Constitution if there is a law declared by
             the Supreme Court which obviously would be
             binding on all the courts and tribunals in India
             and certainly the parties thereto. The
             statement contained in the order other than on
             points of law would be binding on the parties
             and the court or tribunal, whose order was
             under challenge on the principle of judicial
             discipline, this Court being the apex court of
             the country. No court or tribunal or parties
             would have the liberty of taking or canvassing
             any view contrary to the one expressed by this
             Court........................."
34.   The learned Additional Solicitor General highlighted that the

present case stands on a higher footing, in that leave to appeal has

been granted in the instant case, and the appeal disposed of by a

detailed order passed by the Supreme Court dealing with every aspect

of the matter. Therefore, the judgment of the Supreme Court in the

instant case is final, binding and conclusive between the parties and

the only remedy available to the defendant is to file a review petition

under
Article 137
of the Constitution. The judgment of the Supreme

Court even if it is contended to be erroneous or alleged to be passed

without jurisdiction, the same can be corrected by the Supreme Court

itself and cannot be dealt with collaterally by any other Court.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 34 of 130
35.   Elaborating on the aforesaid, he referred to the Constitution

Bench decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
A.R. Antulay vs.

R.S. Nayak and Anr.
, (1988) 2 SCC 602, wherein the Court with

great lucidity and with utmost precision laid down:- (SCC, at page

651, para 40)

             "40. The question of validity, however, is
             important in that the want of jurisdiction can
             be established solely by a superior court and
             that, in practice, no decision can be
             impeached collaterally by any inferior court.
             But the superior court can always correct its
             own error..........."
36.   Referring to a recent decision delineating the wide powers of

the Supreme Court of India under
Article 136
of Constitution of India

rendered in the matter of
A. Subash Babu vs. State of Andhra

Pradesh and Anr.
, (2011) 7 SCC 616, learned ASG contended that

by virtue of the special jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court by
Article 136
, the argument of the defendant that the Supreme Court did

not have the jurisdiction to rule on the juridical seat of arbitration

loses all tenability. The following extract from the judgment deserves

to be noted:- (SCC, at page 638, para 65)
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 35 of 130
"65.
As held in Ramakant Rai v. Madan Rai
             following      Arunachalam            v.  P.S.R.
             Sadhanantham and P.S.R. Sadhanantham v.
Arunachalam, the appellate power vested in
             the Supreme Court under
Article 136
is not to
             be confused with the ordinary appellate power
             exercised by appellate Courts and appellate
             tribunals under specific statutes. It is plenary
             power exercisable outside the purview of
             ordinary law to meet the demand of justice.
Article 136
is a special jurisdiction. It is
             residuary power. It is extraordinary in its
             amplitude. The limits of Supreme Court when
             it chases injustice, is the sky itself."
37.
In the context of the wide amplitude of the powers of the

Supreme Court as a superior Court of record constituted by the

Constitution, he also
placed reliance upon
the judgment of the

Supreme Court rendered in the case of Delhi Judicial Service

Association, Tis Hazari Court,
Delhi vs. State of Gujarat and Ors.
,

(1991) 4 SCC 406, wherein it was observed by the Supreme Court as

under:- (SCC, at page 453, para 38)

             "...............It is true that courts constituted
             under a law enacted by the Parliament or the
             State Legislature have limited jurisdiction and
             they cannot assume jurisdiction in a matter, not
             expressly assigned to them, but that is not so in
             the case of a superior court of record
             constituted by the Constitution. Such a court
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 36 of 130
does not have a limited jurisdiction instead it
             has power to determine its own jurisdiction.
No matter is beyond the jurisdiction of a
             superior court of record unless it is expressly
             shown to be so, under the provisions of the
             Constitution. In the absence of any express
             provision in the Constitution the Apex court
             being a court of record has jurisdiction in
             every matter and if there be any doubt, the
             Court has power to determine its jurisdiction.
             If such determination is made by High Court,
             the same would be subject to appeal to this
             Court, but if the jurisdiction is determined by
             this Court it would be final."
38.   He also relied upon the case of
Ravi S. Naik vs. Union of India

and Ors.
, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 641 to urge that even in the case of a

High Court which is a superior Court of record, it is for the Court to

consider whether any matter falls within its jurisdiction or not. The

relevant portion of the judgment is extracted hereinbelow:- (Supp

SCC, at page 662, para 40)

             "It is settled law that an order, even though
             interim in nature, is binding till it is set aside by
             a competent could and it cannot be ignored on
             the ground that the Court which passed the
             order had no jurisdiction to pass the same.
Moreover the stay order was passed by the
             High Court which is a Superior Court of
             Record and "in the case of a superior Court of
             Record, it is for the court to consider whether
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 37 of 130
any matter falls within its jurisdiction or not.
              Unlike a court of limited jurisdiction, the
              superior Court is entitled to determine for
              itself questions about its own jurisdiction."
39.   The learned Additional Solicitor General on the basis of the

aforesaid decisions contended that firstly, no matter or issue is beyond

the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court which is the highest Court of

the land and secondly, even if there is any doubt as to the jurisdiction

of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court alone can decide upon the

same. Therefore, the judgment of the Supreme Court is binding on

the parties unless and until the Supreme Court itself holds that it did

not have jurisdiction.
40.   Without prejudice to his aforesaid contentions, learned ASG

submitted that as per the amended provisions of Explanation VIII of
Section 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure, an issue decided by even a

Court of limited or special jurisdiction is binding between the parties

[See
Sulochana Amma vs. Narayanan Nair
, (1994) 2 SCC 14]. For

the facility of reference, the aforesaid provision is reproduced

hereunder:-
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 38 of 130
"Explanation VIII.- An issue heard and finally
             decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction,
             competent to decide such issue, shall operate as
             res judicata in a subsequent suit,
             notwithstanding that such Court of limited
             jurisdiction was not competent to try such
             subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue
             has been subsequently raised."
41.   Learned Additional Solicitor General next contended that in

any case, it is fundamental law that parties cannot vest a Court with

jurisdiction it does not otherwise have. Thus, the London Court

which does not have jurisdiction to go into the issue of „juridical seat‟

cannot assume jurisdiction.     In contrast, the plaintiff at all times

possessed the right at common law to institute a suit before this Court

and the said right cannot be extinguished on some mistaken notion

that only London Courts can decide the issue raised in the present

suit. The case of
Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs. Western

Company of North America
, (1987) 1 SCC 496 is a case in point. In

the said case, the appellant ONGC entered into a drilling contract

with the respondent Western Company of USA. The contract

provided for reference to arbitration in case of any dispute arising out

of the contract. The arbitration proceedings were to be governed by
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 39 of 130
the
Indian Arbitration Act, 1940
read with the relevant rules.         A

dispute having arisen between the parties, the matter was referred to

arbitration. The agreed venue under the contract was in London. An

award rendered by the umpire in London was sought to be enforced

by the American company in New York. The appellant ONGC filed

arbitration petition before the Bombay High Court under
Sections 30
and
33
for setting aside the award, seeking ex parte interim order

restraining the American company from enforcing the award in New

York. The Supreme Court after considering the rival contentions of

the parties opined that to oblige the Indian company to contest

proceedings before the American Court would be oppressive to the

Indian company given the situation which had been created by the

American company of seeking enforcement of the award in New

York while a petition to set aside the award was instituted and

pending in the Indian Court at the time of the institution of the action

in the US Court. This was enough to entitle the Indian company to a

restraint order. It held:- (SCC, at page 510, para 15)

             "15. We are of the opinion that the appellant,
             ONGC, should not be obliged to face such a
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 40 of 130
situation as would arise in the light of the
             aforesaid discussion in the facts and
             circumstances of the present case. To drive the
             appellant in a tight corner and oblige it to be
             placed in such an inextricable situation as
             would arise if the Western Company is
             permitted to go ahead with the proceedings in
             the American Court would be oppressive to the
             ONGC. It would be neither just nor fair on the
             part of the Indian Court to deny relief to the
             ONGC when it is likely to be placed in such an
             awkward situation if the relief is refused. It
             would be difficult to conceive of a more
             appropriate case for granting such relief. The
             reasons which have been just now articulated
             are good and sufficient for granting the relief
             and accordingly it appears unnecessary to
             examine the meaning and content of the
             relevant articles of the New York Convention
             for the purposes of the present appeal."
42.   Significantly, in the aforesaid case, the High Court which at the

first instance granted interim restraint order to the ONGC

subsequently vacated the interim order granted by it earlier inter alia

on the ground that it was open to the ONGC to contend before the US

Court that the petition for setting aside the award which was sought to

be enforced in the US Court was already pending in the Indian Court.

Disagreeing with the aforesaid view of the High Court, the Supreme

Court observed:- (SCC, at pages503-504, para 7)
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 41 of 130
"7. The High Court has examined the
             question as to whether the action instituted by
             the Western Company against ONGC was
             maintainable in the context of the New York
             Convention in the light of the relevant Articles
             of the Convention and has come to the
             conclusion that an action to enforce the award
             in question as a foreign award in the US Court
             was quite in order. The view is expressed that
             the mere fact that a petition to set aside the
             award had already been instituted in the Indian
             Court and was pending in the Indian Court at
             the time of the institution of the action in the US
             Court was a matter of no consequence, for the
             purposes of consideration of the question as to
             whether or not Western Company should be
             restrained from proceeding further with the
             action in the US Court. Now, there cannot be
             any doubt that the Western Company can
             institute an action in the US Court for the
             enforcement of the award in question
             notwithstanding the fact that the application for
             setting aside the award had already been
             instituted and was already pending before the
             Indian Court. So also there would not be any
             doubt or dispute about the proposition that the
             ONGC can approach the US Court for seeking
             a stay of the proceedings initiated by the
             Western Company for procuring a judgment in
             terms of the award in question. But merely on
             this ground the relief claimed by ONGC
             cannot be refused. To say that the Court in
             America has the jurisdiction to entertain the
             action and to say that the American Court can
             be approached for staying the action is
             tantamount to virtually cold-shouldering the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 42 of 130
substantial questions raised by ONGC and
             seeking an escapist over-simplification of the
             matter. The points urged by the ONGC are of
             considerable importance and deserve to be
             accorded serious consideration."
43.   Learned ASG argued that the jurisdiction exercised by the

Indian Supreme Court was well within its competence in view of the

fact that the parties are Indian, domiciled in India, properties and

assets under the contract which has been executed in Delhi are within

the territory of India and the performance of the contract is also in

Indian territory and the same is governed by the laws of India with an

overriding stipulation that: "nothing in this Contract shall entitle the

Contractor to exercise the rights, privileges and powers conferred

upon it by this Contract in a manner which will contravene the laws

of India." The Indian Supreme Court is thus the natural forum i.e the

forum with which the parties and the contract has the most real and

substantial connection. Thus, Indian Courts have not only personal

jurisdiction but also subject matter and territorial jurisdiction. When

the award is to be enforced either against the assets or the person of

the award debtor, only the Indian Court can enforce the same.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 43 of 130
Therefore, its determination on the seat issue, which was squarely

raised and which was required to be determined for the purpose of

deciding the applicability of or otherwise of
Part I of the Act
, was

within the competence of the Apex Court of India. It has been held

by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of
Man Roland

Druckimachinen Ag vs. Multicolur Offset Ltd and Anr.
, (2004) 7

SCC 447 as under:-
"Undoubtedly, when the parties have agreed on
             a particular forum, the courts will enforce such
             agreement. This is not because of a lack or
             ouster of its own jurisdiction by reason of
             consensual conferment of jurisdiction on
             another court, but because the court will not be
             party to a breach of an agreement...."
44.   The Supreme Court was required to enter a finding as to where

is the juridical seat of arbitration and what is the curial law governing

the arbitration to rule upon the applicability or otherwise of Part I of

the 1996 Act. Sub-section (2) of
Section 2
of the 1996 Act requires

the Court to decide where is the juridical seat of arbitration. That is

what the Supreme Court has done and the relief was granted to the

defendant on that basis alone. The defendant cannot and should not
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 44 of 130
be permitted to pick and choose from a judgment it has won. On this

basis alone, it was argued, there was no merit in the contention of the

defendant that the Indian Supreme Court did not possess the

competence to decide the seat issue.
45.   Learned ASG next contended that without prejudice to his

contentions with regard to the width and amplitude of the powers of

the Supreme Court and that it was not open to the defendant to

contend that the High Court of Justice, Queen‟s Bench Division,

Commercial Court, London is the Court which can render a finding

on the juridical seat of arbitration, it was open to the parties to

invoke the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to render a finding

on the juridical seat of arbitration. It was so
laid down in
the case

of A.P. State Financial Corporation vs. M/s. Gar Re-Rolling Mills

and Anr., (1994) 2 SCC 647, wherein while dealing with the right

vested in the Corporation under
Section 29
of the State Financial

Corporations Act, 1951, the Supreme Court opined that the right

vested in the Corporation under the aforesaid Section is besides the

right already possessed at common law to institute a suit or the right
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 45 of 130
available to it under
Section 31
of the Act. The following pertinent

observations were made by it:- (SCC, at page 660, para 15)

             "15. The Doctrine of Election clearly suggests
             that when two remedies are available for the
             same relief, the party to whom the said
             remedies are available has the option to elect
             either of them but that doctrine would not apply
             to cases where the ambit and scope of the two
             remedies is essentially different. To hold
             otherwise may lead to injustice and inconsistent
             results."
46.   Learned Additional Solicitor General pointedly drew the

attention of this Court to the conduct of the defendant throughout,

highlighting that the defendant at every given point of time has

suppressed material facts from the Court including the Supreme Court

and its malicious conduct was evident from the following:-
(i)    The defendant did not disclose before the Hon‟ble

             Supreme Court that it had filed proceedings before the

             London Court on the same subject matter.
(ii)   Despite a clear order dated 20.10.2009 from the London

             Court for service of the plaintiff, the defendant did not

             get the service effected on the plaintiff till April, 2010,
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 46 of 130
i.e., after the Supreme Court had reserved judgment in

              the case.
(iii)   In the written statement filed on behalf of the defendant

              on 09.01.2012 before the Malaysian High Court, the

              defendant did not disclose:-
a.    The Supreme Court proceedings.

              b.    The London proceedings.

              c.    The proceedings relating to the present suit.
47.   To sum up, the learned Additional Solicitor General contended

that the mere initiation of a proceeding in breach of the principle of

res judicata is abuse of the process which makes the foreign

proceedings vexatious and oppressive. It is this re-commencement of

proceedings by the defendant in the English Court which is sought to

be injuncted by filing the present suit.      If the contention of the

defendant is accepted that only the foreign court before whom the

proceedings are pending can decide the said issue, then
in that case
the entire concept and purpose of anti-suit injunction would be lost

and defeated. In the present case, there is a judgment in favour of the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 47 of 130
plaintiff from the highest court, i.e., the Supreme Court of India, and,

therefore, the proceedings initiated before the London Court are

highly oppressive and vexatious. The contention of the defendant

based on comity of courts is also misplaced for the reason that the

Hon‟ble Supreme Court by its order dated 06.09.2010 had earlier

directed the parties not to proceed with the London proceedings. At

that time, no such contention of comity of courts was raised and,

therefore, this argument is only an after-thought and without any

basis. Even otherwise, the reliance placed by the defendant on the

principle of comity of courts loses sight of the fact that the grant of an

injunction is not towards any foreign court but only against the parties

who are amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court.
48.   In view of the aforesaid, the learned Additional Solicitor

General submitted that the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case in

its favour justifying the grant of an injunction against the defendant.
The balance of convenience is also tilted in favour of the plaintiff and

irreparable injury is likely to be caused to the plaintiff if the plaintiff

is forced to join the London proceedings, in which event the entire
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                            Page 48 of 130
suit will be rendered infructuous whereas, on the other hand,

proceedings can be re-commenced before the London Court if

ultimately the present suit is dismissed by this Court.

DEFENDANT‟S CONTENTIONS
49.   Responding to the arguments advanced by the learned

Additional Solicitor General, Mr. Amit Sibal, the learned counsel for

the defendant contended that the issue before this Court is not

whether the observations in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Supreme

Court judgment operate as res judicata so as to bar the English claim.

The issue before this Court is whether:-
(a)    The English Court deciding whether the defendant‟s

             English claim is barred by res judicata pursuant to

             the plaintiff‟s application is so abusive, oppressive

             and vexatious as to defeat the ends of justice and to

             perpetuate injustice; and/or
(b)    The principle of Comity of Nations does not come in

             the way of barring this Court from exercising its

             jurisdiction to decide whether the English claim is
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 49 of 130
barred by res judicata pursuant to the plaintiff‟s

             application.
It is submitted that only if the answer to both the above is in the

affirmative, can an anti-suit injunction be granted.       It is further

submitted that the plaintiff has failed to make out a prima facie

case on either of the abovementioned conditions and hence no

relief ought to be granted to the plaintiff.
50.   For substantiating the aforesaid contention, the learned counsel

for the defendant referred to the tests
laid down by
the Supreme Court

in the case of
Modi Entertainment Network and Anr. vs. W.S.G.

Cricket Pvt. Ltd.
(2003) 4 SCC 341 in the following terms:- (SCC, at

page 360, paragraph 24)

          "24. From the above discussion the following
          principles emerge:
(1) In exercising discretion to grant an anti-
suit injunction the court must be satisfied
                    of the following aspects:-
(a) the defendant, against whom
                          injunction is sought, is amenable to
                          the personal jurisdiction of the
                          court;
(b) if the injunction is declined, the
                          ends of justice will be defeated and
                          injustice will be perpetuated; and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 50 of 130
(c)   the principle of comity - respect
                             for the court in which the
                             commencement or continuance of
                             action/ proceeding is sought to be
                             restrained - must be borne in
                             mind."
(2) In a case where more forums than one
                       are available, the Court in exercise of its
                       discretion to grant anti-suit injunction
                       will examine as to which is the
                       appropriate forum (Forum conveniens)
                       having regard to the convenience of the
                       parties and may grant anti-suit
                       injunction in regard to proceedings
                       which are oppressive or vexations or in
                       a forum non-conveniens;
(3) Where jurisdiction of a court is invoked
                       on the basis of jurisdiction clause in a
                       contract, the recitals therein in regard to
                       exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction of
                       the court of choice of the parties are not
                       determinative but are relevant factors
                       and when a question arises as to the
                       nature of jurisdiction agreed to between
                       the parties the court has to decide the
                       same on a true interpretation of the
                       contract on the facts and in the
                       circumstances of each case;
(4) A court of natural jurisdiction will not
                       normally grant anti-suit injunction
                       against a defendant before it where
                       parties have agreed to submit to the
                       exclusive jurisdiction of a court
                       including a foreign court, a forum of
                       their choice in regard to the
                       commencement or continuance of
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 51 of 130
proceedings in the court of choice, save
                       in an exceptional case for good and
                       sufficient reasons, with a view to prevent
                       injustice in circumstances such as which
                       permit a contracting party to be relieved
                       of the burden of the contract; or since
                       the date of the contract the
                       circumstances or subsequent events have
                       made it impossible for the party seeking
                       injunction to prosecute the case in the
                       court of choice because the essence of
                       the jurisdiction of the court does not
                       exist or because of a vis major or force
                       majeure and the like;
(5) Where parties have agreed, under a non-
exclusive     jurisdiction    clause,   to
                       approach a neutral foreign forum and be
                       governed by the law applicable to it for
                       the resolution of their disputes arising
                       under the contract, ordinarily no anti-
                       suit injunction will be granted in regard
                       to proceedings in such a forum
                       conveniens and favoured forum as it
                       shall be presumed that the parties have
                       thought over their convenience and all
                       other relevant factors before submitting
                       to non-exclusive jurisdiction of the court
                       of their choice which cannot be treated
                       just an alternative forum;
(6) A party to the contract containing
                       jurisdiction clause cannot normally be
                       prevented from approaching the court of
                       choice of the parties as it would amount
                       to aiding breach of the contract; yet
                       when one of the parties to the
                       jurisdiction clause approaches the court
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 52 of 130
of choice in which exclusive or non-
exclusive jurisdiction is created, the
                       proceedings in that court cannot per se
                       be treated as vexatious or oppressive nor
                       can the court be said to be forum non-
conveniens; and
                   (7) The burden of establishing that the
                       forum of the choice is a forum non-
conveniens or the proceedings therein
                       are oppressive or vexatious would be on
                       the party so contending to aver and
                       prove the same.
51.   Reliance was also placed by the learned counsel for the

defendant on a decision rendered by the High Court of Justice,

Queen‟s Bench Division, Admiralty Court in Seismic Shipping Inc.,

Westerngeco Ltd. vs. Total E&P UK Plc, The Western Regent

(2005) EWHC 460 (Admlty) [as upheld by the Court of Appeal], and

in particular on the following dictum laid down in the said case:-
"...............the function of an anti suit
             injunction is to prevent unconscionable conduct
             and not, in effect, to ensure recognition of an
             English judgment in a friendly foreign
             jurisdiction."
52.   In support of his contention that the tests for the grant of an

anti-suit injunction as laid down in the aforesaid two decisions

have not been met in the instant case, the learned counsel for the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                            Page 53 of 130
defendant vehemently contended that the proceedings before the

English Court cannot be termed as abusive, oppressive and/or

vexatious. He emphasized that the purpose of anti-suit injunctions is

to prevent abusive proceedings and not to ensure enforcement of

judgments in a "foreign friendly jurisdiction".
53.   The next plank of the contentions of the learned counsel for the

defendant is that even otherwise, the English Court is the

appropriate Court to decide whether or not the defendant‟s claim

in England is barred by res judicata. He contended that the bar of

res judicata is a procedural bar that can only be raised as a defence to

a claim in the forum where the claim is filed. Thus, the issue of

whether or not a subsequent proceeding is barred by res judicata

needs to be determined by the Court where the subsequent proceeding

has been filed, in this case the English Court. To buttress his said

contention, he referred to the four conditions required under Indian

Law for the application of principle of res judicata as summarized by

the Supreme Court in the case of
Syed Mohd. Salie Labbai (Dead) by

LRs and Ors. vs. Mohd. Hanifa (Dead) by LRs and Ors.
(1976) 4
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 54 of 130
SCC 780, which, he stated, were similar to the conditions applicable

under the English Law. The said conditions are as set out below:-
(SCC, at page 790, para 7)

             "(1) that the litigating parties must be the
                  same;
(2) that the subject-matter of the suit also must
                  be identical;
(3) that the matter must be finally decided
                  between the parties; and
             (4) that the suit must be decided by a court of
                  competent jurisdiction."
54.   Relying upon the aforesaid principles
laid down in
Syed Mohd.

Salie Labbai
(supra), Mr. Sibal urged that
Section 11
of the Code of

Civil procedure, 1908 stipulates that no Court shall try any suit or

issue which has been decided in a former suit between the same

parties. Therefore, the bar operates in the forum where the issue

alleged to have been decided is being re-agitated and res judicata

does not arise in the abstract or prior to the subsequent suit. Thus,

there is no occasion for this Court to decide whether the claim before

the English Court is barred by res judicata.
55.   Alternatively, he contended on behalf of the defendant that the

Court of the country whose law governs the arbitration
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 55 of 130
agreement has the exclusive jurisdiction to decide all disputes

relating to the arbitration clause. Differently put, the contention is

that where
Part I of the Act
has been excluded, the only role to be

played by the Indian Courts is under
Part II of the Act
at the stage of

enforcement of the Foreign Award, if and only if the successful party

chooses to enforce the award in India under
Part II of the Act
. Any

and all other proceedings must be filed in the Courts of the country

whose laws apply to arbitration agreement. Since the issue of „seat of

arbitration‟ is contained in the arbitration clause, only the English

Courts have jurisdiction to decide the said issue. Referring to the

judgment of the Supreme Court in
National Thermal Power

Corporation vs. Singer Company and Ors.
(1992) 3 SCC 551, the

learned counsel for the defendant contended that the law in this

context was lucidly
laid down in
paragraph 26 of
the said judgment
as

follows:- (SCC, at page 564, para 26)

             "Whereas, as stated above, the proper law of
             arbitration (i.e., the substantive law governing
             arbitration) determines the validity, effect and
             interpretation of the arbitration agreement, the
             arbitration proceedings are conducted, in the
             absence of any agreement to the contrary, in
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 56 of 130
accordance with the law of the country in which
             the arbitration is held. On the other hand, if the
             parties have specifically chosen the law
             governing the conduct and procedure of
             arbitration, the arbitration proceedings will be
             conducted in accordance with that law so long
             as it is not contrary to the public policy or the
             mandatory requirements of the law of the
             country in which the arbitration is held. If no
             such choice has been made by the parties,
             expressly or by necessary implication, the
             procedural aspect of the conduct of arbitration
             (as distinguished from the substantive
             agreement to arbitrate) will be determined by
             the law of the place or seat of arbitration.
Where, however, the parties have, as in the
             instant case, stipulated that the arbitration
             between them will be conducted in accordance
             with the ICC Rules, those rules, being in many
             respects self-contained or self-regulating and
             constituting a contractual code of procedure,
             will govern the conduct of the arbitration,
             except insofar as they conflict with the
             mandatory requirements of the proper law of
             arbitration, or of the procedural law of the seat
             of arbitration. [See the observation of Kerr, LJ.
             in Bank Mellat v. Helliniki Techniki SA
             (1983) 3 All E.R. 428 (CA). See also Craig,
             Park and Paulsson, International Chamber of
             Commerce Arbitration, 2nd edn. (1990)]. To
             such an extent the appropriate courts of the
             seat of arbitration, which in the present case
             are the competent English courts, will have
             jurisdiction in respect of procedural matters
             concerning the conduct of arbitration. But the
             overriding principle is that the courts of the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 57 of 130
country whose substantive laws govern the
             arbitration agreement are the competent courts
             in respect of all matters arising under the
             arbitration agreement, and the jurisdiction
             exercised by the courts of the seat of arbitration
             is merely concurrent and not exclusive and
             strictly limited to matters of procedure. All
             other matters in respect of the arbitration
             agreement fall within the exclusive competence
             of the courts of the country whose laws govern
             the arbitration agreement. [See Mustil & Boyd,
             Commercial Arbitration, 2nd edn.; Allen
             Redfern and Martin Hunter, Law & Practice of
             International Commercial Arbitration, 1986;
             Russel on Arbitration, 20th edn. (1982);
Cheshire & North's Private International Law,
             11th edn. (1987)].
56.   A recent judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case

of
Yograj Infrastructure Ltd. vs. Ssang Yong Engineering and

Construction Co. Ltd.
, 2011 (9) SCALE 567 was also referred to by

Mr. Sibal to fortify his contention that once the parties had

specifically agreed that the arbitration proceedings would be

conducted in accordance with the English Law, it was no longer open

to the plaintiff to contend that Indian Courts have jurisdiction to

entertain the plaintiff‟s defence of res judicata.
In the case of
Yograj

Infrastructure
(supra), an appeal under
Section 37(2)(b)
of the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 58 of 130
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
for setting aside the interim

order passed by the learned arbitrator was filed before the District

Judge, Narsinghpur on behalf of the appellant. The learned District

Judge dismissed the appeal accepting the submissions advanced on

behalf of the respondent that the said appeal was not maintainable

since the seat of the arbitration proceedings was in Singapore and the

said proceedings were governed by the laws of Singapore. The Civil

Revision filed against the order of District Judge was also dismissed

by the High Court, against which a Special Leave Petition was filed.

The Supreme Court noting that there was no ambiguity that the curial

law with regard to the arbitration proceedings was the SIAC Rules

and the seat of arbitration was Singapore, held that the question which

arose was whether in such a case the provisions of
Section 2(2)
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, which indicate that
Part I of

the Act
would apply where the place of arbitration is in India, would

be a bar to the invocation of the provisions of
Sections 34
and
37
of

the Act, as far as the arbitral proceedings in the case before the

Supreme Court were concerned.
After considering the judgment in
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 59 of 130
Bhatia International vs. Bulk Trading S.A.
, (2002) 4 SCC 105 and

noting that the decision therein had been subsequently applied in the

case of
Venture Global Engg.
(supra) and
Citation Infowares Ltd.

vs. Equinox Corporation
, (2009) 7 SCC 220, the Court held that once

the parties had specifically agreed that the arbitration proceedings

would be conducted in Singapore in accordance with the SIAC Rules,

which includes Rule 32 whereunder the International Arbitration Act

is made applicable, the decision in
Bhatia International
(supra) and

the subsequent decisions on the same lines would no longer apply, the

parties having willfully agreed to be governed by the SIAC Rules.
57.   The third contention of the learned counsel for the defendant is

predicated on the principle of Comity of Nations as recognized by the

Indian Courts, including the Supreme Court of India. The principle

of Comity of Nations, Mr. Sibal urges, precludes the grant of anti-

suit injunctions barring the rarest of rare cases. Such injunctions,

in particular, cannot be granted where a party has already challenged

a foreign Court‟s jurisdiction until such party has failed in such

challenge. This principle, Mr. Sibal contends, has been recognized by
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 60 of 130
a Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Horlicks Ltd. and Anr.

vs. Heinz India (Pvt.) Ltd.
, 2010 (42) PTC 156 (Del.) (DB) where a

judgment of the Canadian Supreme Court was quoted with approval

as follows:- (PTC, at pages 192-193)

             "In this respect the anti-suit injunction is
             unique in that the applicant does not have to
             establish that the assumption of jurisdiction by
             the foreign court will amount to an actionable
             wrong. Moreover, although the application is
             heard summarily and based on affidavit
             evidence, the order results in a permanent
             injunction which ordinarily is granted only
             after trial. In order to resort to this special
             remedy consonant with the principles of comity,
             it is preferable that the decision of the foreign
             court not be pre-empted until a proceeding has
             been launched in that court and the applicant
             for an injunction in the domestic court has
             sought from the foreign court a stay or other
             termination of the foreign proceedings and
             failed."
58.   It was emphasized that the English Court is respecting the

principle of Comity, as the English Court has not proceeded with

hearing the defendant‟s claim on merits. Instead, the English Court is

only completing the pleadings so that the plaintiff‟s application

contesting the jurisdiction of the English Court can be heard on the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 61 of 130
dates fixed, i.e., on 5th and 6th March, 2012. In such circumstances, in

the event the English proceedings are injuncted by this Court prior to

the English Court even examining its own jurisdiction, it would

amount to an irreparable affront to the Comity of Nations, which has

been recorded as one of the guiding principles to be kept in mind by

Courts in deciding whether or not to grant anti-suit injunctions.
In

any event, keeping in mind the principles
laid down by
the Supreme

Court of India in
Modi Entertainment Network
(supra), this Court

would have to apply a much higher standard of proof in considering

whether the English proceedings in London are so abusive as to

defeat the ends of justice and to perpetuate injustice.
59.   The fourth contention of the learned counsel for the defendant

is two pronged. The first prong is that in the event anti-suit

injunction is not granted by this Court, there would be no loss of

legitimate juridical advantage to the plaintiff, who would be then

required to further pursue its application before the English Court.

The second prong is that if, on the other hand, an anti-suit
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 62 of 130
injunction is granted by this Court, the arbitration proceedings

would end in a stalemate.
60.   Dealing first with the first limb of his argument that there

would be no loss of legitimate juridical advantage to the plaintiff in

case anti-suit injunction is not granted by this Court, Mr. Sibal urged

the following points:-
(i)    The plaintiff has been actively pursuing its application

             before the English Court challenging the jurisdiction of

             the English Court since June, 2011 and the expenditure

             already incurred by the plaintiff in the pursuit of its

             application before the English Court would also be

             wasted if the English proceedings are injuncted. It is the

             plaintiff‟s own case that the pleas raised by the plaintiff

             before this Court and the English Court are identical.
There is no reason to pre-suppose that the plaintiff will

             not be given a full and complete hearing of its

             application before the English Court.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 63 of 130
(ii)   The principles of res judicata in India and England are

             substantially the same. In fact, the jurisprudence on the

             issue of res judicata as cited by the Supreme Court of

             India from time to time is largely quoted from an English

             authority, viz., Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict

             of Laws, 14th Edn., Vol.I, Page 579 at para 14-027. The

             relevant extract for the facility of reference is reproduced

             hereunder:-
"Clause (2) of the Rule. A foreign
                   judgment may be relied on in English
                   proceedings otherwise than for the
                   purpose of its enforcement. A claimant
                   who has brought proceedings abroad
                   and lost may seek to bring a similar
                   claim in England; or in proceedings on a
                   different claim an issue may be raised
                   which has been decided abroad. In such
                   cases a foreign judgment entitled to
                   recognition may give rise to res judicata,
                   i.e., to a cause of action estoppel, which
                   prevents a party to proceedings from
                   asserting or denying, as against the other
                   party, the existence of a cause of action,
                   the nonexistence or existence of which
                   has been determined by the foreign court,
                   or to an issue estoppel, which will
                   prevent a matter of fact or law
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 64 of 130
necessarily decided by a foreign court
                    from being re-litigated in England."
(iii)   Since the year 1953, there has been a reciprocity

              between India and England in enforcing judgments

              which continues till today. In India, foreign judgments

              are being enforced under
Section 44-A
of the Code of

              Civil Procedure, 1908 provided the judgment is made in

              a reciprocating territory. United Kingdom and Northern

              Ireland have been notified as reciprocating territories by

              the plaintiff/Union of India vide Notification No.SRO

              399 dated 01.03.1953. Likewise, the United Kingdom

              recognizes judgments from reciprocating territories as

              per the Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement)

              Act, 1933 (
Section 8
). Pursuant to this Act, India was

              notified as a reciprocating territory in 1953, which was

              amended in 1958 by way of Reciprocal Enforcement of

              Judgments (India) Order, 1958 (
Sections 3
and
4
).
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 65 of 130
(iv)   In view of the above, the proceedings pending before the

             English Courts are not oppressive or vexatious in any

             manner whatsoever. It is also not understood how the

             plaintiff contends that it will suffer irreparable injury

             when there has been no change in circumstances or

             trigger between May 11, 2011 when the judgment of the

             Supreme Court was rendered and the filing of the instant

             suit.
(v)    The plaintiff itself having invoked the jurisdiction of the

             English Court to decide the issue of res judicata, during

             the pendency of the plaintiff‟s application before the

             English Court there is no cause of action for filing the

             present suit. In this regard, the correspondence

             exchanged between the parties as also the record of the

             English Court amply demonstrates that the plaintiff has

             not only invoked the jurisdiction of the English Court but

             is actively pursuing its application before the English

             Court and cannot now be heard to say that it was
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 66 of 130
compelled to submit to the jurisdiction of the English

              Court to decide the issue of res judicata.
61.   On the second limb of his argument that if an anti-suit

injunction was to be granted, the arbitration would be left in

stalemate, Mr. Sibal submitted that:
(i)     The Malaysian Court by its judgment dated 05.08.2009

              has refused to exercise jurisdiction, inter alia, on the

              ground that the seat of the arbitration was permanently

              shifted to London.
(ii)    The Supreme Court has held that Indian Courts do not

              have the jurisdiction to decide whether the seat is

              London or Kuala Lumpur.
(iii)   The defendant has always maintained that only the

              English Courts have jurisdiction to decide the issue of

              the seat of arbitration. On this conspectus, if this Court

              were to hold that the English Courts cannot decide the

              issue of seat, the arbitration would remain in a stalemate

              indefinitely. For this reason alone, the interpretation of
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 67 of 130
the Supreme Court judgment as submitted by the

             plaintiff ought not to be accepted.
62.   The fifth contention put forth by the learned counsel for the

defendant is that the defendant is eventually likely to succeed in

showing that the observations made in paras 12 and 13 of the

Supreme Court judgment would not operate as res judicata and,

therefore, the defendant‟s plea that the English claim is not barred

is not unconscionable. A four-fold argument is raised in support of

this contention:-
(A)    Observations by the Supreme Court on the seat of

             arbitration were not necessary for the decision of the

             case before the Supreme Court which related to whether

             or not the Indian Courts had no jurisdiction, and were

             thus in the nature of obiter.
(B)    Observations of the Supreme Court in paras 12 and 13 of

             its judgment are in relation to the
Indian Arbitration Act,

             1996
, which stands excluded in the latter part of the

             judgment of the Supreme Court.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 68 of 130
(C)    Even as per Indian Law, the observations in paras 12 and

             13 of the Supreme Court would not operate as res

             judicata.
(D)    The fact that OMP No.255/2006 stood dismissed and the

             appeal was allowed indicates that the Supreme Court

             never considered the question of juridical seat of

             arbitration.
63.   Elaborating the aforesaid, the learned counsel for the defendant

contended that OMP No.255 of 2006 was filed by the plaintiff, inter

alia, seeking a declaration that the seat of arbitration remained at

Kuala Lumpur. The High Court by its order dated 30 th April, 2008

did not decide the issue of seat of arbitration nor entered into the

merits of the case of the plaintiff. The High Court only held that it

had jurisdiction to hear OMP No.255 of 2006. It was against this

order that an appeal was preferred by the defendant to the Supreme

Court. The thrust of the submissions before the Supreme Court was

that the Indian Courts have no jurisdiction, since
Part I of the Act
has

been excluded in view of the fact that the seat of arbitration is outside
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 69 of 130
India and the law governing the arbitration agreement was chosen by

the parties to be English law. Thus the issue regarding seat of

arbitration was not before the Supreme Court and the Supreme

Court was not called upon to decide which foreign court has

jurisdiction to decide the seat of arbitration. In fact, the Supreme

Court in para 2 of its judgment identified the question which arose for

consideration before the Supreme Court as follows:-
"2. Whether the Delhi High Court could
             entertain the petition filed by the Respondents
             under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and
             Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, "the Act")
             for grant of a declaration that Kuala Lumpur
             (Malaysia) is contractual and juridical seat of
             arbitration and for issue of a direction to the
             arbitral tribunal to continue the hearing at
             Kuala Lumpur in terms of clause 34 of
             Production Sharing Contract (PSC) is the
             question which arises for consideration in this
             appeal."
64.   Mr. Sibal urged that the Supreme Court judgment is the best

indicator of what was argued by the respective counsel and the

reliance placed by Mr. Chandiok, the learned ASG on the written

submissions of the defendant to contend that the defendant had

invoked the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to rule on whether the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 70 of 130
seat of arbitration is Kuala Lumpur or London is misconceived. The

then learned Solicitor General Mr. Gopal Subramaiam had made

arguments on the merits of which is the seat of arbitration (See para

10 of the Supreme Court judgment). It is for this reason alone that

the written submissions of the defendant clearly state that the

submissions on the issue of seat of arbitration are being made without

prejudice to the defendant‟s contention that the issue whether the seat

is London or Kuala Lumpur is not relevant for the determination of

the SLP and are only being made to respond to the submissions of the

plaintiff in this regard. Thus, it cannot be said that the defendant

invited a decision from the Supreme Court on the issue of the seat

of arbitration. The defendant in fact has consistently contended that

the English Courts are the Courts competent to decide the issue of

seat. Without prejudice to this contention, even if it is said that the

defendant invited a decision on the seat of arbitration, the Hon‟ble

Supreme Court subsequently held that Indian Courts would not have

jurisdiction to decide the issue.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 71 of 130
65.   According to Mr. Sibal a close reading of paras 15 to 19 of the

judgment of the Supreme Court which resulted in the dismissal of

OMP No.255 of 2006 in para 20, shows that the conclusion of the

Supreme Court was based on the fact that the seat of arbitration was

outside India and the law of the Arbitration Agreement was English

Law. This is also clear from the fact that the Supreme Court relied

upon para 21 of
Bhatia International
(supra) which refers to the seat

of arbitration being outside India as the relevant criteria to determine

exclusion of
Part I of the Act
.      Significantly also, he states, the

Supreme Court did not dispose of the OMP No.255 of 2006 but

dismissed the same in its entirety as not maintainable on the ground

of lack of jurisdiction. This conclusion arrived at by the Supreme

Court was based on the seat of arbitration being outside India and the

arbitration agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant being

governed by English law and no part of the reasoning depended on

whether the seat of arbitration was at London or Kuala Lumpur. Mr.

Sibal also pointed out that the plaintiff, in the review petition filed by

it before the Supreme Court, accepts that the issue as to whether the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 72 of 130
observations in paras 12 and 13 of the judgment are binding or not

was an arguable one. In fact, it is expressly stated by the plaintiff as

follows:-
"Because law as declared by this Hon'ble
             Court is binding under
Article 141
of the
             Constitution of India, however, in the present
             case the order dismissing the petition under
Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation
             Act could lead to arguments about the binding
             nature of law declared by this Hon'ble Court."
66.   Next, adverting to his contention that the observations in paras

12 and 13 of the Supreme Court judgment are in relation to the
Indian

Arbitration Act, 1996
which stands excluded, Mr. Sibal, the learned

counsel for the defendant, contended that what the Supreme Court in

fact observed was that while the English Arbitration Act, 1996

allowed parties to alter the seat of arbitration, the Indian Act did not,

as was evident from the following observations in paragraph 13:-
"A reading of the above reproduced provision
             shows that under the English law the seat of
             arbitration means juridical seat of arbitration,
             which can be designated by the parties to the
             arbitration agreement or by any arbitral or
             other institution or person empowered by the
             parties to do so or by the arbitral tribunal, if so
             authorised by the parties. In contrast, there is
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 73 of 130
no provision in the Act under which the arbitral
             tribunal could change the juridical seat of
             arbitration which, as per the agreement of the
             parties, was Kuala Lumpur."
67.   Without prejudice to the aforesaid, Mr. Sibal contended that

even if the Supreme Court had made observations with regard to

the seat of arbitration, the same would not operate as res judicata

in view of the fact that the Supreme Court ultimately held that

this Court had no jurisdiction to entertain OMP No.255 of 2006

filed by the plaintiff and pursuant to the Supreme Court judgment,

this Court was pleased to dismiss the said OMP.
In support of his

contention that the observations in paras 12 and 13 of the Supreme

Court judgment would not operate as res judicata even as per Indian

Law, reference was made by Mr. Sibal to the decision rendered by the

Supreme Court in
Pawan Kumar Gupta vs. Rochiram Nagdeo
,

(1999) 4 SCC 243, wherein it was observed as under:- (SCC, at page

250, para 19)

             "19. Thus the sound legal position is this: if dismissal
             of the prior suit was on a ground affecting the
             maintainability of the suit any finding in the judgment
             adverse to the defendant would not operate as res
             judicata in a subsequent suit."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 74 of 130
68.   On the basis of the aforesaid observations made in the case of
Pawan Kumar Gupta
(supra), it was argued that the observations

made by the Supreme Court in paras 12 and 13 of its judgment are of

no consequence in view of the decision contained in para 20 by which

the OMP pending before the High Court was dismissed as not

maintainable for want of jurisdiction.
69.   Referring to the reliance placed by the plaintiff on Explanation
(viii) of
Section 11
CPC and the judgment of the Supreme Court

reported in
Sulochana Amma
(supra), Mr. Sibal, the learned counsel

for the defendant, submitted that the defendant has no quarrel with the

submission of the plaintiff that even if there be a proceeding in a

forum of limited jurisdiction or special jurisdiction, the final decision

on the merits of an issue in that proceeding will be res judicata in a

subsequent proceeding between the same parties, even if the said

forum does not have jurisdiction to entertain the subsequent

proceeding. This proposition, however, has no bearing on the present
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 75 of 130
case since indubitably the Supreme Court is not a Court of limited or

special jurisdiction.
70.   Referring to the consent order dated 06.09.2010 passed in IA

No.4/2010, Mr. Sibal argued that it was open to the Supreme Court to

decide that Indian Courts had jurisdiction to decide the seat and

remand the matter back to the High Court for a decision on which is

the seat of arbitration. It was for this reason that the defendant gave

its consent and for no other. The contention of the learned ASG that

the order on 06.09.2010 pursuant to IA No.4/2010 constitutes an

agreement by the parties that the Supreme Court will decide the issue

of „seat of arbitration‟ is, therefore, wholly fallacious.
71.   It was also contended that even otherwise any decision of a

Court passed without jurisdiction is a nullity and such a decision

would not give rise to             the bar of        res judicata. [
Sri

Athmanathaswami Devasthanam vs. K. Gopalaswami Ayyangar
,

(1964) 3 SCR 763 at para 14;
Hasham Abbas Sayyad vs. Usman

Abbas Sayyad and Others
, (2007) 2 SCC 355 at para                       22;
Muthavalli of Sha Madhari Diwan Wakf, S.J. Syed Zakrudeen and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 76 of 130
Anr. vs. Syed Zindasha and Ors.
, (2009) 12 SCC 280 at para 19;
Syed Mohd. Salie Labbai (Dead) by L.R.s and Ors. vs. Mohd.

Hanifa (Dead) by L.R.s and Ors.
, (1976) 4 SCC 780 at para 7.]
72.   It was also contended that since an appeal is a continuation of

the original proceeding, the Supreme Court could not have and in

fact did not decide an issue which this Court did not have the

jurisdiction to decide.       Emphasis was laid on the following

observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of
Rachakonda

Narayana vs. Ponthala Parvathamma & Anr.
, (2001) 8 SCC 173:
(SCC, at page 178, para 10)

             "........................An appeal is a continuation
             of the suit. When an appellate Court hears an
             appeal, the whole matter is at large. The
             appellate Court can go into any question
             relating to rights of the parties which a trial
             Court was entitled to dispose of provided the
             plaintiff possesses that right on the date of
             filing of the suit."
73.   Rebutting the contentions of the learned Additional Solicitor

General, Mr. Sibal urged that in the instant case it was not open to

the plaintiff to rely either upon „issue estoppel‟ or upon „cause of

action estoppel‟.    The defendant had succeeded on the issue
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                       Page 77 of 130
submitted to the Supreme Court that this Court did not have

jurisdiction to entertain OMP No.255 of 2006. Therefore, it was not

open to the plaintiff to plead issue estoppel against the defendant and

in fact issue estoppel was wholly inapplicable to the present case,

more so, in view of the fact that the Supreme Court did not apply the

observations made by it in paras 12 and 13 to arrive at its conclusion

at paras 19 and 20. Insofar as cause of action estoppel is concerned,

he contended that the same was rightly not even pleaded by the

plaintiff.
74.    Mr. Sibal urged that it is trite that parties by consent, waiver

or acquiescence cannot confer jurisdiction upon a Court which it

does not possess. A decision made by such a Court is non est. It

was so held in
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi vs. DLF Universal Ltd.

and Anr.
, (2005) 7 SCC 791, wherein the Supreme Court while

classifying the jurisdiction of a Court into three categories, viz., (i)

territorial or local jurisdiction; (ii) pecuniary jurisdiction; and (iii)

jurisdiction over the subject-matter, opined that jurisdiction as to
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 78 of 130
subject-matter is totally distinct and stands on a different footing,

observing: (SCC, at pages 803-804, paras 30 and 32)

             "30. ...............Where a court has no
             jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the suit
             by reason of any limitation imposed by statute,
             charter or commission, it cannot take up the
             cause or matter. An order passed by a court
             having no jurisdiction is a nullity.
31. ...........................................
32. In Bahrein Petroleum Co., this Court
             also held that neither consent nor waiver nor
             acquiescence can confer jurisdiction upon a
             court, otherwise incompetent to try the suit. It is
             well-settled and needs no authority that "where
             a court takes upon itself to exercise a
             jurisdiction it does not possess, its decision
             amounts to nothing." A decree passed by a
             court having no jurisdiction is non est and its
             invalidity can be set up whenever it is sought to
             be enforced as a foundation for a right, even at
             the stage of execution or in collateral
             proceedings. A decree passed by a court
             without jurisdiction is a coram non judice."
75.   The sixth contention of the learned counsel for the defendant is

that the present suit is oppressive, abusive, vexatious and malafide

as it is the worst imaginable case of forum shopping by the

plaintiff. In this context, it is submitted that the plaintiff at its own

instance is blatantly forum shopping before three separate
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 79 of 130
jurisdictions, viz., before the English Court, before the Court at

Malaysia and before this Court. And as a matter of fact, the plaintiff

has all along been forum shopping since the passing of the Partial

Award on 31.03.2005 by challenging the Partial Award in different

fora and has also been forum shopping on the seat of arbitration. It

has been categorically admitted by the plaintiff that the pleas raised

by the plaintiff before this Court and before the English Court are

identical. This form of blatant forum shopping, Mr. Sibal contends,

has invited the disapproval of this Court in the judgment rendered by

a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Essel Sports Pvt. Ltd.

vs. BCCI and Ors., 178 (2011) DLT 465 (DB) in the following

words: (DLT, at page 488, para 27)

             "27. Having concurred with the learned Single
             Judge that the UK action is a two or multiple
             forum lis, we shall venture forward to assess
             whether the UK action is oppressive or
             vexatious. Mr. Salve's contention in this regard
             has already been noted by us above. We agree
             that in a commercial dispute, the compulsion to
             defend an action in a foreign jurisdiction may
             not invariably lead to the conclusion that the
             foreign proceedings are oppressive; however,
             having to defend the same allegations by the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 80 of 130
same party in two different jurisdiction is
             unquestionably oppressive."
76.   Mr. Sibal next contended that the plaintiff is not entitled to

seek any relief by invoking the equitable jurisdiction of this Court

in view of the blatant concealment and mis-statements made by the

plaintiff before this Court including suppression of documents having

significance to the lis between the parties, such as application for

clarification filed by the plaintiff; plaintiff‟s Notice of Motion and

Memorandum of Appeal filed before the Court of Appeal, Malaysia;

Written Submissions filed by the defendant before the Supreme

Court; plaintiff‟s application dated 12th August, 2010 filed in the

English Court along with affidavit of Mr. David Richard Brynmor

Thomas; affidavits of Ms. Pomila Jaspal, Mr. Partha Sarathi Das and

Ms. Simran Dhir; Case Management Information Sheet of the

plaintiff before the English Court; correspondence between the

plaintiff‟s English counsel and the defendant‟s English counsel

including letters dated 3rd November, 2011, 7th November, 2011, 12th

December, 2011 and 15th December, 2011; order dated 14th

November, 2011 which was a consent order passed by the English
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 81 of 130
Court fixing the time schedule for the exchange of expert evidence

and the order dated 15th December, 2011 which was also a consent

order passed by the English Court extending the time line to 6 th

January, 2012 for the plaintiff to file its expert evidence.
77.   Besides the aforesaid suppression of material documents by the

plaintiff, Mr. Sibal contended that it is malafide and abusive for the

plaintiff to contend that the Supreme Court has conclusively

decided the issue of seat of arbitration despite the fact that the

Special Leave petition was allowed in favour of the defendant and

OMP No.255 of 2006 was dismissed.               He contended that the

malafide conduct of the plaintiff was clearly evidenced by the fact

that the plaintiff during the pendency of the present suit filed an

amendment to its Memorandum of Appeal filed in Malaysia

contending that the issue of seat of arbitration is res judicata in view

of the Supreme Court judgment, while there is not a whisper in the

affidavit of the Indian Counsel filed in Malaysia about the actions of

the plaintiff either before the English Court or about the present suit

that has been initiated by the plaintiff against the defendant. Then
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                               Page 82 of 130
again, the malafide conduct of the plaintiff is clearly visible from the

fact that the plaintiff, on one hand, on 12.12.2011 sought an extension

of time from the English Court for filing its expert evidence on the

specific ground of inability to identify such an expert; whereas, on the

other hand, on 13.12.2011 the present suit and application were

verified and affirmed by the plaintiff‟s authorised representative. The

defendant‟s English counsel acting under a bonafide belief and

completely unaware of the filing of the instant suit wrote to the

plaintiff‟s English counsel on 14.12.2011 agreeing to the plaintiff‟s

request for extension of time and the same was recorded in the

consent order dated 15.12.2011. Before this Court, at the hearing on

03.01.2012, the counsel for the plaintiff sought time to file a rejoinder

to the reply filed by the defendant on the ground that although the

rejoinder had been prepared, the same was awaiting comments from

the Union of India. When the said rejoinder was served upon the

counsel for the defendant on 04.01.2012, the defendant‟s counsel

found to his utter shock and surprise that the said rejoinder had been

verified and affirmed by the deponent therein on 02.01.2012.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 83 of 130
78.   On the aspect of irreparable injury and balance of convenience,

it was contended on behalf of the defendant that the plaintiff cannot

be heard to say that it would suffer irreparable injury or that the

balance of convenience is in its favour to justify an injunction to

prevent hearing of its own application. In contrast, unless and until

the plaintiff‟s application is heard and disposed of by the English

Court, the defendant‟s claim will not be adjudicated. Dates before the

English Court have been fixed with the plaintiff‟s consent and with

great difficulty. There is no reason for the plaintiff to contend that it

would suffer irreparable injury if the hearing takes place on the dates

fixed. In contrast, the defendant would suffer irreparable injury in the

event the dates granted by the English Court were to be lost as the

proceedings would be further delayed indefinitely. Moreover, till

date, all steps in the English proceedings have been taken with the

consent of the plaintiff. Even today, until the order of 23.12.2011,

there has not been a single letter by the plaintiff to the English Court

protesting against the jurisdiction of the English Court to determine

its own jurisdiction, including the issue of res judicata.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 84 of 130
79.     Mr. Sibal, the learned counsel for the defendant, also contended

that the judgments cited on behalf of the plaintiff have no application

to the facts of the present case as is clear from the following:-
(i)     The decision in
Venture Global Engineering
(supra) is

        distinguishable on the ground that the law of the arbitration

        agreement had not been specified in the said case whereas in

        the present Arbitration Agreement, English Law has been

        specified as the governing law.
(ii)    The decision in
Pioneer Publicity Corporation
(supra) dealt

        with the validity of termination of a contract by DTC without

        any justification.     The facts of this case are entirely

        disconnected and irrelevant to the issue in the present case.
(iii)   The judgments relating to res judicata, viz.,
Satish Nambiar
(supra),
Ishwar Dutt
(supra),
Swamy Atmananda
(supra),
M.

        Nagabhushana
(supra),
Hope Plantation Ltd.
(supra),
Makhija Construction and Engineering Private Limited
(supra) and
S. Nagaraj
(supra) have no application because

        the appropriate Court to decide whether the claim filed in the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                            Page 85 of 130
English Court is barred by res judicata is the English Court.
The judgment in
Swamy Atmananda
(supra), which lays down

       that "if a Court lacks inherent jurisdiction, its judgment would

       be a nullity and thus principles of res judicata which is in the

       domain of procedure will have no application", supports the

       defendant‟s case that the observations in paras 12 and 13 of the

       Supreme Court judgment do not bar the English claim on

       grounds of res judicata.
(iv)   The judgment in
K.K. Modi
(supra), which lays down that it is

       an abuse of the process of the Court and contrary to justice and

       public policy for a party to re-litigate the same issue which has

       already been tried and decided earlier against him, has no

       application.   In the present case, the issue of „seat of

       arbitration‟ has not been tried and decided against the

       defendant in the judgment of the Supreme Court.
(v)    In Munib Masri‟s case (supra), the Judgment Debtor having

       suffered a judgment on merits in England, intentionally filed

       parallel proceedings in other countries, including in Yemen in
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 86 of 130
an attempt to obtain a decision in conflict with the English

       judgment. The Decree Holder did not have the protection of

       reciprocal arrangements for enforcing the English judgment

       and thus the Judgment Debtor sought to take illegitimate

       advantage of this fact. The Court of Appeal in the Munib

       Masri‟s case (supra) in fact declined to grant anti-suit

       injunction in respect of countries which were parties to the

       Lugano Convention.
(vi)   The decision in
Rupa Ashok Hurra
(supra) is irrelevant as the

       said case relates to the powers of the Supreme Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India and no reliance has

       been placed on
Article 142
on behalf of the Union of India in

       the present suit.
(vii) The judgment in
Kunhayammed
(supra), on which the plaintiff

       relies, in paragraph 13 contains an exposition of the scope of
Article 136
which is not relevant to the present case, where the

       matter was heard as a Civil Appeal after granting leave to

       appeal under
Article 136.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 87 of 130
(viii) The judgment in
Oil and Natural Gas Commission
(supra)

       relating to stay of foreign proceedings supports the case of the

       defendant rather than the plaintiff. The arbitration clause in

       ONGC was governed by Indian Law specifically the
Arbitration Act, 1940
and, therefore, the Court held that the

       appropriate Courts to decide any dispute relating to the

       arbitration clause were Indian Courts, and the filing of an

       action for confirming the award in a US Court was contrary to

       the contract and hence abusive.         In the present case, the

       arbitration clause is governed by English Law and on the

       reasoning of ONGC, the present plaint which seeks to restrain

       approach to the English Court to resolve disputes relating to the

       arbitration clause is abusive.
(ix)   The decision in
A.P. State Financial Corporation
(supra)

       relating to the „Doctrine of Election‟ does not help the plaintiff

       in view of the fact that the plaintiff had earlier elected to pursue

       the remedy in the English Court and cannot be permitted to
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                            Page 88 of 130
pursue the same remedy in parallel proceedings before this

      Court in the present suit.
FINDINGS
80.   Before I venture to render my findings on the rival contentions

of the parties, a few glaring facts and the inferences to be drawn

therefrom deserve to be highlighted:-
(i)   In the present case, the defendant has admitted that the

      Supreme Court has decided the issue of „juridical seat of

      arbitration‟ but the contention of the defendant is that
the said

      decision
would not be binding because it is merely by way of

      obiter. This is clear from the following extract from paragraph

      15 of the written statement:-
"..................Therefore, in the respectful
             submission of the Defendant, as the
             observations on seat of arbitration were not
             necessary to arrive at a final decision of
             exclusion of
Part-I of the Arbitration and
             Conciliation Act, 1996
, the aforesaid judgment
             of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India on the
             aspect of seat of arbitration, is by way of
             obiter."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 89 of 130
(ii)    The defendant in paragraph 7 of its written statement filed in

        the present suit has stated:-
"................ as of today, the Plaintiff is also
              bound by
the said decision
of High Court of
              Malaya at Kuala Lumpur.             Accordingly,
              granting any interim reliefs as prayed for by the
              Plaintiff qua the English Court proceedings
              would not curtail the likelihood of conflicting
              judgment as suggested by the Plaintiff. For the
              reasons that the conflict if any is already in
              existence between the judgment dated 5th
              August, 2009 of the High Court of Malaya at
              Kuala Lumpur and the judgment dated
              11.05.2011 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
              which, in the contention of the Plaintiff
              operates as res judicata on the issue of seat of
              arbitration................."
(iii)   In the Special Leave Petition filed by the defendant before the

        Supreme Court, the defendant explicitly submitted that the

        learned Single Judge who decided OMP No.255/2006 had

        committed an error in law in that he had failed to appreciate

        that it was incumbent upon him to have first determined the

        seat of arbitration before determining the question as to

        whether this Court had jurisdiction (the seat of arbitration

        having shifted to London). The following extracts from the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 90 of 130
grounds taken in the Special Leave Petition filed by the

      defendant before the Supreme Court may be referred to in this

      context:-
GROUND E(iii)

             "That assuming that the Arbitration Agreement
             was silent on the choice of curial law, it is not
             the law governing the contract that will govern
             the arbitration proceedings, but it is the law of
             the seat of the arbitration that will govern the
             conduct of the arbitration proceedings."
GROUND N

             "..............Moreover, the learned Single Judge
             has been unable to appreciate that in
             determining jurisdiction, the first issue to be
             determined is where the seat of the arbitration
             lies. Upon such determination, it is mandatory
             for the courts of that country to exercise
             jurisdiction over the Arbitration Agreement and
             the proceedings.............."
GROUND X

             "FOR THAT the learned Single Judge has
             recorded submissions of the Petitioner but
             failed to deal with such submissions or has
             erroneously rejected the same. In this regard,
             it is submitted as follows:
i.    That    the   Respondents     willfully
                   suppressed the material fact that the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 91 of 130
Arbitral Tribunal had shifted the seat of
                   the arbitration with consent of both
                   parties vide order dated 15.11.2003. The
                   said order was neither pleaded nor
                   annexed with O.M.P. No.255 of 2006 and
                   accordingly, the Respondent No.1 had
                   willfully suppressed the said document
                   on which ground O.M.P. No.255 of 2006
                   was liable to be dismissed.         It is
                   submitted       that      though      the
                   aforementioned submission as well as the
                   response of the Respondent No.1 to the
                   same has been recorded, the learned
                   Single Judge has not made any finding
                   on whether there had been willful
                   suppression by the Respondent No.1.
                   The gravity of such an omission cannot
                   be over stated as the Petitioner had
                   submitted that such suppression rendered
                   O.M.P. No.255 of 2006 liable to be
                   dismissed on that ground alone.
ii.   That Respondent No.1 was estopped
                   from contending that the seat of the
                   arbitration continues to be at Kuala
                   Lumpur as the Respondent No.1 had
                   consented to the shift of the seat of
                   arbitration to London and had
                   participated    in   all    arbitration
                   proceedings at London till 31.03.2005.
                   No hearings were ever held at Kuala
                   Lumpur. These aspects were not dealt
                   with in the Order."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                       Page 92 of 130
GROUND AA

             "FOR THAT the learned Single Judge has
             erroneously recorded in paragraph 2.6 of the
             impugned Order that as Kuala Lumpur was
             reportedly struck by the epidemic SARS, the
             arbitral tribunal shifted the venue of
             arbitration from Kuala Lumpur to Amsterdam
             and later to London. It is respectfully
             submitted that the shift from Kuala Lumpur to
             Amsterdam was not on the same footing as the
             shift to London. The correct position as has
             been submitted is as follows:
i.     The first arbitration hearing was fixed to
                    be held at Kuala Lumpur but due to
                    outbreak of the SARS epidemic in South
                    East Asia, the venue was changed to
                    Amsterdam vide Order dated 24.04.2003.
                    The seat of the arbitration continued to
                    remain at Kuala Lumpur, however, for
                    convenience, the next hearing was to take
                    place at Amsterdam.
ii.    The next date of hearing at Amsterdam
                    was fixed as 30.06.2003 vide Order
                    dated 13.05.2003. This was the first
                    hearing of the arbitration and thus, no
                    hearing ever took place at Kuala Lumpur
                    and this remains the position even today.
iii.   Thereafter, vide Order dated 04.08.2003,
                    the next hearing was fixed for London.
iv.    Vide Order dated 15.11.2003, it was
                    recorded that by consent of parties, the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 93 of 130
seat of the arbitration was shifted to
                   London.
It is submitted that the errors stated above go
             to the root of the impugned Order as the
             manner in which the facts with regard to the
             shift of the seat of the arbitration to London
             have been recorded clearly reflects that the
             Learned Single Judge has been unable to
             appreciate the consequences of the Order
             dated 15.11.2003 of the Arbitral Tribunal. It
             is further submitted that if the sitting at London
             was merely for convenience, then the Order of
             04.08.2003 was sufficient. There was no need
             for a separate order recording consent of the
             parties to shift the arbitral seat to London
             which was in accordance with
Article 34.12
of
             the PSC and
Section 3
of the English Act.
These relevant facts have been completely
             ignored and omitted by the Learned Single
             Judge which is self evident from the manner in
             which facts have been recorded."
GROUND FF

             "...............The petitioner had challenged the
             maintainability of the petition on the following
             grounds:-
i.    That
Section 5
of the Act does not
                   contemplate judicial intervention of the
                   nature as prayed for.
ii.   The Respondent No.1 has suppressed
                   material facts from this Court.
iii. That reliefs prayed for were beyond the
                   scope of
Section 9
of the Act.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 94 of 130
iv.     The reliefs sought were permanent in
                     nature which was beyond the scope of
Section 9
of the Act.
             v.      That the Respondent No.1 is estopped
                     from contending that the seat of the
                     arbitration continues to be at Kuala
                     Lumpur.
It is submitted that the learned Single Judge has
             demonstrated complete non-application of mind
             by failing to consider the submissions of the
             Petitioner, which were not limited only to
             jurisdiction, as stated above. It is submitted
             that this non-application of mind goes to the
             root of the decision and renders the impugned
             Order liable to be set aside on this ground
             alone............"
(iv)   It was while the Special Leave Petition was pending in the

       Supreme Court that the defendant in October, 2009 moved the

       High Court of Justice, Queen‟s Bench Division, Commercial

       Court, London seeking a declaration that „The seat of the first

       and third arbitration is in London‟.          The order dated

       20.10.2009 of the London Court directed the defendant to serve

       Union of India as soon as possible and practicable. However,

       the service of notice in the said Claim Petition No.2009, Folio

       No.1382 was got effected by the defendant on the plaintiff

       about six months later in the month of April, 2010.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 95 of 130
(v)    The plaintiff thereupon on 10th August, 2010 moved the

       Supreme Court by way of IA No.4/2010 in the pending appeal

       and almost simultaneously, i.e., on 12th August, 2010 filed an

       application before the London Court stating that the issue of

       juridical seat is being contested in proceedings elsewhere, i.e.,

       in the Supreme Court of India.       It was specifically stated

       therein as under:-
"I understand that the Government of India
             will separately be taking up this issue with the
             Supreme Court in India."
(vi)   Simultaneously, the plaintiff‟s solicitors also wrote to the

       defendant‟s solicitors vide letter dated 12th August, 2010

       clearly stating:-
"For the avoidance of doubt, this letter and
             our client‟s application are not a submission
             to the jurisdiction of the Courts of England
             and Wales."
(vii) On 11.05.2011, the judgment of the Supreme Court was

       pronounced and soon thereafter, i.e., on 02.06.2011, a letter

       was written on behalf of the plaintiff requesting the defendant
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 96 of 130
to withdraw the proceedings initiated before the London Court

       in view of the Supreme Court judgment.
(viii) On 8th June, 2011, a draft letter addressed to the Commercial

       Court Listing Office, The Royal Courts of Justice was sent by

       the defendant with a copy to the plaintiff‟s solicitors seeking to

       re-commence the proceedings before the English Court, to

       which the plaintiff replied by letter dated 14.06.2011 asking the

       defendant‟s solicitors to indicate the basis on which the

       defendant proposed to continue their proceedings before

       the London Court after the final judgment of the Supreme

       Court that the juridical seat of the arbitration (as opposed

       to the physical change to London) remained Kuala

       Lumpur.
(ix)   In reply to the letter dated 14.06.2011, the defendant‟s

       solicitors by letter dated 22.06.2011 specifically wrote to state

       that any legal issue arising from the judgment of the Indian

       Supreme Court were matters for the English Court to
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 97 of 130
determine. Since this letter is significant, the relevant portion

      is reproduced hereunder for the sake of ready reference:-
"Accordingly, we do not see any reason for the
             present proceedings to be held in abeyance.
             Alternatively, if you are suggesting that the
             decision of the Supreme Court is simply
             another matter to which the Court should have
             regard, then we agree that a copy of the
             decision should be included in the hearing
             bundle................."
"Under instructions, we further inform you that
             our client will proceed to serve the Court with a
             communication for the stay of the proceedings
             to be lifted in the event that your client
             continues to insist that the present proceedings
             have become unnecessary. Any legal issue
             arising from the judgment of the Indian
             Supreme Court are matters for the English
             Court to determine................."
(x)   The order dated 14.11.2011 passed by the English Court clearly

      recorded as under:-
"For the avoidance of any doubt, neither this
             Order nor anything done pursuant to or in
             accordance with it shall constitute or give rise
             to any submission by the Defendant to the
             jurisdiction of the English Court or prejudice
             in any way the Defendant‟s challenge to that
             jurisdiction."
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 98 of 130
(xi)   Significantly, the draft order circulated in the first instance by

       the defendant‟s counsel did not include the above clause which

       was put in the English Court‟s order at the specific request of

       the plaintiff‟s solicitor.
81.    From the aforesaid conspectus of facts, in my considered

opinion, it is amply clear that the consistent stand of the plaintiff has

been that the English Court does not have jurisdiction to go into the

issue of „juridical seat of arbitration‟ and cannot assume jurisdiction

which it does not otherwise possess. It is also borne out from the

record that all the proceedings on behalf of the plaintiff (defendant

before the London Court) were without prejudice to its

aforementioned stand and there is no question            of the plaintiff‟s

submission to the English Court for seeking adjudication on the issue

of res judicata as suggested by the defendant. This is also borne out

by the letter dated 29.06.2011 written by the plaintiff‟s solicitors to

the defendant, wherein it is clearly stated as under:-
"On that basis and without prejudice to the res
              judicata point, we consent to a hearing being
              listed for a mutually convenient date............"
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                             Page 99 of 130
82.   Merely because the plaintiff participated in the Case

Management Conference and filed witness statements would not, in

my view, preclude the plaintiff from filing the present suit. More so,

when the English Court itself recorded: "For the avoidance of any

doubt, neither this Order nor anything done pursuant to or in

accordance with it shall constitute or give rise to any submission

by the Defendant to the jurisdiction of the English Court or

prejudice in any way the Defendant‟s challenge to that

jurisdiction". In such circumstances, for the defendant to contend

that the plaintiff voluntarily submitted to the jurisdiction of the

English Court would be against the record of the English Court.
83.   The Special Leave Petition filed by the defendant before the

Supreme Court also bears out the contention of the plaintiff that the

defendant invoked the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to rule on

the juridical seat of arbitration, which issue it claimed went to the root

of the matter. That there was a tacit understanding that with the

consent of the parties the Supreme Court would rule on the juridical

seat of arbitration is also borne out by the order dated 06.09.2010
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 100 of 130
passed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court on the plaintiff‟s application,

being IA No.4/2010, which reads as under:-
"Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
             the parties agreed that subject to completion of
             pleadings in the proceedings pending in both
             the courts in England as well as in Malaysia,
             neither the petitioner nor the respondent will
             proceed/take any proactive steps for hearing in
             the proceedings/applications pending in the
             Court in England as well as in the Court in
             Malaysia, till the disposal of the present SLP.
In view of the aforesaid submission, I.A. No.4 is
             disposed of recording the same."
84.   Thus, while on the one hand the plaintiff submitted to the

jurisdiction of the English Court without prejudice to its contention

that by reason of the judgment of the Supreme Court the issue of

juridical seat of arbitration was no longer open for examination, the

defendant invoked the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India to

decide upon the issue of the juridical seat of arbitration, which it

stated went to the root of the matter. Faced with a finding from the

Supreme Court that London was not the agreed juridical seat of

arbitration, the defendant took a somersault and adopted the stand that

any legal issue arising from the judgment of the Indian Supreme
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 101 of 130
Court was a matter for the English Court to determine. It is worth

mentioning, at the risk of repetition, that although the defendant in

October, 2009 had moved the High Court of Justice, Queen‟s Bench

Division, Commercial Court, London seeking a declaration that "The

seat of the First and Third Arbitrations is in London", apparently

it deliberately chose not to serve notice of the said Claim Petition

upon the plaintiff until April, 2010, despite the order of the London

Court to serve the Union of India as soon as practicable. This is

clearly reflective of the fact that the defendant had sought the

aforesaid declaration from the English Court only by way of abundant

precaution. It was on 11.11.2009 that submissions were made by the

parties before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court on the issue of juridical

seat and the judgment was reserved by the Supreme Court and it was

not until 21st April, 2010 that the plaintiff was served with notice of

the filing of the Claim Petition No.2009, Folio No.1382 pending in

the London Court.
85.   Even thereafter, it is noteworthy that the defendant consented

to the Supreme Court ruling on the issue of juridical seat of
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 102 of 130
arbitration as is evident from the order dated 06.09.2010, whereby the

defendant consented not to take any proactive steps for the hearing of

its claim petition pending in the Court in England till the disposal of

the SLP. However, finding that the decision in the SLP rendered on

11.05.2011 was in favour of the plaintiff, the defendant immediately

re-commenced proceedings at London and adopted the stand that it

disagreed with the plaintiff‟s position that the decision of the

Supreme Court of India had "finally and conclusively" decided the

issue pending before the English Court.       The very fact that the

defendant consented before the Supreme Court not to pursue its

Claim Petition in London for declaration of the seat of arbitration, in

my view, speaks volumes of the hope and expectation entertained by

the defendant that the Supreme Court would eventually rule that the

juridical seat of arbitration had shifted from Kuala Lumpur to London

in view of the order of the Arbitral Tribunal dated 15th November,

2003.    The said hope and expectation having been dashed, the

defendant adopted the stance that the legal issues determined by the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 103 of 130
Indian Supreme Court were matters for the English Court to

determine.
86.   A look at the judgment of the Supreme Court would suffice to

show that the issue of seat of arbitration stood adjudicated by the

judgment of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court intended the

said adjudication to be final and binding between the parties. Further,

the said issue was addressed before the Supreme Court by both the

parties and decided upon by the Supreme Court as the first question

raised before it. In para 9 of its judgment, the Supreme Court noted

that Shri Nariman had argued that after having expressly consented to

the shifting of the seat of arbitration from Kuala Lumpur to

Amsterdam in the first instance and effectively taken part in the

proceedings held at London till 31.03.2005, the respondent No.1

(Union of India) was estopped from claiming that the seat of

arbitration continued to be at Kuala Lumpur.        In para 10 of its

judgment, the Supreme Court noted the counter argument of the

learned Solicitor General as follows:-
"10. Shri Gopal Subramaniam, learned
             Solicitor General submitted that as per the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 104 of 130
arbitration agreement which is binding on all
             the parties to the contract, a conscious decision
             was taken by them that Kuala Lumpur will be
             the seat of any intended arbitration, Indian law
             as the law of contract and English law as the
             law of arbitration and the mere fact that the
             arbitration was held outside Kuala Lumpur due
             to the outbreak of epidemic SARS, the venue of
             arbitration cannot be said to have been
             changed from Kuala Lumpur to London.
             Learned Solicitor General emphasised that
             once Kuala Lumpur was decided as the venue
             of arbitration by written agreement, the same
             could not have been changed except by
             amending the written agreement as provided in
             Clause 35.2 of the PSC. He then argued that
             the arbitral tribunal was not entitled to
             determine the seat of arbitration and the record
             of proceedings held on 15.11.2003 at London
             cannot be construed as an agreement between
             the parties for change in the juridical seat of
             arbitration. He further argued that the PSC was
             between the Government of India and ONGC
             Ltd., Videocon Petroleum Ltd., Command
             Petroleum (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Ravva Oil
             (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd. and, therefore, the venue
             of arbitration cannot be treated to have been
             changed merely on the basis of the so called
             agreement between the appellant and the
             respondents. Learned Solicitor General
             submitted that any change in the PSC requires
             the concurrence by all the parties to the
             contract and the consent, if any, given by two of
             the parties cannot have the effect of changing
             the same. He then argued that every written
             agreement on behalf of respondent No. 1 is
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 105 of 130
required to be expressed in the name of the
             President and in the absence of any written
             agreement having been reached between the
             parties to the PSC to amend the same, the
             consent given for shifting the physical seat of
             arbitration to London did not result in change
             of juridical seat of the arbitration which
             continues to be Kuala Lumpur................."
In paragraph 12 of its judgment, the Supreme Court

significantly observed:-
"We shall first consider the question whether
             Kuala Lumpur was the designated seat or
             juridical seat of arbitration and the same had
             been shifted to London."
The Supreme Court then went on to observe as follows:-
"In terms of Clause 34.12 of the PSC entered
             into by 5 parties, the seat of arbitration was
             Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. However, due to
             outbreak of epidemic SARS, the arbitral
             tribunal decided to hold its sittings first at
             Amsterdam and then at London and the parties
             did not object to this. In the proceedings held
             on 14th and 15th October, 2003 at London, the
             arbitral tribunal recorded the consent of the
             parties for shifting the juridical seat of
             arbitration to London. Whether this amounted
             to shifting of the physical or juridical seat of
             arbitration from Kuala Lumpur to London?
             The decision of this would depend on a
             holistic consideration of the relevant clauses
             of the PSC. Though, it may appear repetitive,
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                        Page 106 of 130
we deem it necessary to mention that as per
             the terms of agreement, the seat of arbitration
             was Kuala Lumpur. If the parties wanted to
             amend Clause 34.12, they could have done so
             only by written instrument which was required
             to be signed by all of them. Admittedly, neither
             there was any agreement between the parties to
             the PSC to shift the juridical seat of arbitration
             from Kuala Lumpur to London nor any written
             instrument was signed by them for amending
             clause 34.12. Therefore, the mere fact that the
             parties to the particular arbitration had agreed
             for shifting of the seat of arbitration to
             London cannot be interpreted as anything
             except physical change of the venue of
             arbitration     from     Kuala     Lumpur        to
             London..............."
87.   Thereafter, the Supreme Court proceeded to examine the

provisions of the
English Arbitration Act
in juxtaposition to the

provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
.               In

paragraph 13, it held that under the English law the seat of arbitration

means juridical seat of arbitration, which can be designated by the

parties to the arbitration agreement or by any arbitral or other

institution or person empowered by the parties to do so or by the

arbitral tribunal, if so authorised by the parties. In contrast, it was

held, there is no provision in the Act (Arbitration and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 107 of 130
Conciliation Act, 1996
) under which the Arbitral Tribunal could

change the juridical seat of arbitration which, as per the

agreement of the parties, was Kuala Lumpur.
It concluded:-
"Therefore, mere change in the physical
             venue of the hearing from Kuala Lumpur to
             Amsterdam and London did not amount to
             change in the juridical seat of arbitration."
88.   In the very next paragraph, i.e., paragraph 14, the Supreme

Court referred to the following passage from Redfern v. Hunter:-
"The preceding discussion has been on the
             basis that there is only one "place" of
             arbitration. This will be the place chosen by or
             on behalf of the parties; and it will be
             designated in the arbitration agreement or the
             terms of reference or the minutes of
             proceedings or in some other way as the place
             or "seat" of the arbitration. This does not mean,
             however, that the arbitral tribunal must hold all
             its meetings or hearings at the place
             of arbitration. International commercial
             arbitration often involves people of many
             different nationalities, from many different
             countries. In these circumstances, it is by no
             means unusual for an arbitral tribunal to hold
             meetings - or even hearings - in a place other
             than the designated place of arbitration, either
             for its own convenience or for the convenience
             of the parties or their witnesses....
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 108 of 130
It may be more convenient for an arbitral
             tribunal sitting in one country to conduct a
             hearing in another country - for instance, for
             the purpose of taking evidence.... In such
             circumstances, each move of the arbitral
             tribunal does not of itself mean that the seat of
             the arbitration changes. The seat of the
             arbitration remains the place initially agreed
             by or on behalf of the parties."
89.   From paragraph 15 onwards, the Supreme Court considered the

next issue as to "whether the Delhi High Court could entertain the

petition filed by the respondents under
Section 9
of the Act" and held

that the three-judge Bench in
Bhatia International
(supra) and the

two-judge Bench in
Venture Global Engineering
(supra) would not

apply on account of the fact that in the present case the parties had

expressly agreed to exclude the provisions of
Part I of the Act
by

providing that the Arbitration Agreement contained in
Article 34
shall

be governed by the laws of England notwithstanding
Article 33.1.
As

a corollary, it was held, the Delhi High Court did not have jurisdiction

to entertain the petition filed by the respondents under
Section 9
of

the Act.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 109 of 130
90.   Thus, in effect, what the Supreme Court held in the former part

of its judgment was that the governing law of the arbitration would be

Indian Law, as is clear from its finding that the Production Sharing

Contract would be governed by Indian Law and it could not be varied

to amend Clause 34.12 of the contract, which provided for the

juridical seat to be at Kuala Lumpur, except by written instrument

to be signed by all the parties. In the latter part of its judgment, it

held that the Arbitration Agreement contained in
Article 34
would be

governed by the laws of England, thereby excluding the applicability

of
Part I of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
and the

jurisdiction of the Indian Courts to rule upon matters relating to the

conduct of arbitration proceedings. It also clarified that regardless of

the venue of arbitral sittings, the arbitral seat would remain at Kuala

Lumpur; that the English Law was different in this regard from Indian

Law inasmuch as under the English Law the parties to the arbitration,

the arbitral tribunal or any other person or institution vested with the

power to do so could change the seat of arbitration. In contrast, a

provision made in a contract governed by Indian Law for the juridical
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 110 of 130
seat of arbitration could not be changed under the
Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996
, except by amendment of the contract itself.

In Indian Law, there was no provision parallel to
Section 3
of the

English Arbitration Act.
91.   It is thus clear that the Supreme Court in its aforesaid judgment

clarified beyond an iota of doubt the governing law of the contract,

the curial law and the distinction between the seat of arbitration and

the venue of arbitration with a view to ensure that the arbitral

proceedings were not stultified, delayed or abandoned.          This the

Court did at the behest and with the consent of the parties as is

evident from the whole tone and tenor of the judgment. To render

such a judgment susceptible to examination by a Court of foreign

jurisdiction with the attendant risk of its overturning the judgment

would, in my opinion, be against all settled principles of legal

jurisprudence relating to international commercial arbitration,

including principles governing the comity of nations, and would

render otiose the judgment of the highest Court of this land. To be

noted at this juncture that the English Court has required the parties to
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 111 of 130
tender "expert evidence" on the Supreme Court judgment, which

concept itself is repugnant to Indian Law under which the sky is the

limit of the powers of the Supreme Court and any law
laid down by
it

is final and conclusive.
92.   The plaintiff has instituted the present suit predicated on the

doctrine of res judicata, which has been clearly enunciated and

reiterated by the Supreme Court, time and again, and is based on the

twin principles (i) that there should be an end to litigation, and (ii)

that no person should be vexed twice for the same cause. Both the

said principles, in my view, will be wholly negated if the defendant is

permitted to drag the Union of India to the English Court for the re-

determination of the question of issue of the juridical seat and it is

this re-commencement of the proceedings which is sought to be

injuncted by filing the present suit.
93.   The plaintiff contends, and I think rightly so, that re-agitation

of the question of seat of arbitration authoritatively pronounced upon

by the Supreme Court would constitute abuse of the process of law

and undoubtedly render the foreign proceedings vexatious and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 112 of 130
oppressive due to the attendant consequences. One consequence as

noted above is that the English Court may come to the conclusion that

the principle of res judicata has no application. It would then be open

to the English Court to re-examine the issue of juridical seat and quite

obviously come to a conclusion contrary to that arrived at by the

Supreme Court of India.        This would undoubtedly result in a

stalemate of the arbitration proceedings with the plaintiff insisting

that the juridical seat of arbitration remains in Kuala Lumpur and the

defendant proceeding with the matter in the English Court. Such a

situation would lead to a virtual impassé in the arbitral proceedings

and possibly an abrupt end to the arbitration, thereby placing the

whole claim of the Union of India in jeopardy.
94.   It is important to note at this juncture, at the risk of repetition,

that the Hon‟ble Supreme Court observed that under the Production

Sharing Contract between the parties, the Indian Law has been given

primacy and it has been specifically
laid down in
Article 33.2
that

nothing in the contract shall entitle the defendant/contractor to

exercise the rights, privileges and powers conferred upon it by this
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 113 of 130
contract in a manner which will contravene the laws of India. It was

also noted by the Supreme Court that
Article 33.1
also emphasizes

that the contract shall be governed and interpreted in accordance with

the laws of India, and that
Article 34.12
which pertains to the law

governing the Arbitration Agreement and the seat of arbitration is an

overriding provision qua
Article 33.1;
however, the said
Article 34.12
does not override
Article 33.2.
Thus, the contract clearly lays down

that contravention of the laws of India is wholly impermissible. Res

judicata which encompasses within its fold the principle of issue

estoppel is an intrinsic part of the laws of India and its public policy.

Conversely, the underlying object behind the doctrine of res judicata

and issue estoppel is the public policy of India. Due regard to the

laws of India and its public policy must, therefore, in my view, be

held to be of paramount importance.
95.   The defendant‟s reliance on the judgment of
National Thermal

Power Corporation
(supra) is also misplaced as the governing law in

the present case is Indian Law under
Article 33
and by virtue of
Article 34.12
,
Article 33.2
which provides that the Laws of India shall
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 114 of 130
not be contravened is the overriding provision. The defendant in its

written statement itself admits that it is not in any manner claiming

anything inconsistent with Indian Law. In any event, the present suit

is based on breach of contract and vexatious and oppressive

proceedings.       The plaintiff in the present suit is not seeking

adjudication with respect to the seat of arbitration or the applicability

of law. That part stands adjudicated by the judgment of the Supreme

Court.
96.      Significantly, the Supreme Court in the case of
Laxman

Prasad vs. Prodigy Electronics Ltd.
, (2008) 1 SCC 618 after

considering the National Thermal Power Corporation judgment held

as under:- (SCC, at page 625, para 30)

               "30. We find considerable force in the
               submission of the learned counsel for the
               respondent Company. In our view, "cause of
               action" and "applicability of law" are two
               distinct, different and independent things and
               one cannot be confused with the other."
97.      Further, as regards the contention of the defendant that an order

of anti-suit injunction ought not to be granted as it would transgress

the norms of judicial comity, indubitably the settled position in law is
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                            Page 115 of 130
that an anti-suit injunction should be granted only if there is an

impending risk of conflicting judgments and, if and only if the

proceedings in the Court of foreign jurisdiction would perpetuate

injustice. This Court is not oblivious to the fact that while granting

anti-suit injunction it must tread cautiously having regard to all the

facts and circumstances of the case, but this Court is also mindful of

the fact that an anti-suit injunction operates against the party

concerned and not against the court of foreign jurisdiction.

Moreover, this Court cannot turn a blind eye to the vexation and

oppression which would be caused to the plaintiff by compelling it to

re-litigate on an issue upon which the Supreme Court has given its

final and conclusive determination. To compel it to do so would

constitute the worst imaginable case of abuse of the process of the

Court, besides giving a complete go-by to the principle of res judicata

and issue estoppel which govern the public policy of India.
98.   Reference may be made to the decision of Supreme Court

rendered in M/s. V.O. Tractoroexport, Moscow vs. M/s. Tarapore
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 116 of 130
and Company and Anr. 1969 (3) SCC 562, wherein it was observed

as follows:
"The rule as stated in Halsbury's Laws of
                England, Vol. 21, at page 407, is that with
                regard to foreign proceedings, the court will
                restrain a person within its jurisdiction from
                instituting or prosecuting suits in a foreign
                court whenever the circumstances of the case
                make such an interposition necessary or,
                proper. This jurisdiction will be exercised
                whenever there is vexation or oppression. In
                England, Courts have been very cautious and
                have largely refrained from granting stay of
                proceedings in foreign Courts (Cheshire's
                Private Industrial Law, 7th Ed. pages 108-110).
                The injunction is, however, issued against a
                party and not a foreign court."
99.   Then again, while there can be no quibble with the proposition

that the principle of Comity of Nations must always remain in the

forefront of the judicial mind while ruling upon a matter relating to

international      commercial   arbitration   and   England   being     a

reciprocating territory, the English Courts must be given due

deference, it cannot also be lost sight of that issue estoppel will

operate in a case where the highest court of this country has rendered

its findings on a particular issue. To render the said findings open to
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 117 of 130
re-examination and a re-look by a Court of foreign jurisdiction, even

if it be a friendly foreign court, with the obvious intent from the side

of the defendant to have the said findings reversed by the foreign

court would be against all principles of Comity of Nations. In my

view, the Supreme Court of India having rendered a decision on an

issue, the Comity of Nations requires that due regard be given to
the

said decision
and it must be held that
the said decision
ought not to be

rendered susceptible to being declared non est by a Court of foreign

jurisdiction. This would be undermining the significance of the

judgment rendered by the highest Court of the country and the

authoritative nature thereof, and that too at the behest of the defendant

for its own limited ends.
100. A distinction deserves to be noted at this juncture between res

judicata and precedent in view of the defendant‟s plea that though the

Supreme Court has decided the issue of juridical seat of arbitration
,
the said decision
would not be binding because it was merely by way

of obiter.
Placing the principle of res judicata on a higher pedestal

than precedent, the Supreme Court in
Makhija Construction and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 118 of 130
Engineering Private Limited
(supra) held that a precedent operates

to bind in similar situations in a distinct case, whereas res judicata

operates to bind parties to proceedings for no other reason but that

there should be an end to litigation.
Further, in the case of
S. Nagaraj
(supra), the Supreme Court pertinently noted that the question

whether the decision is correct or erroneous has no bearing upon the

question whether it operates or does not operate as res judicata. The

Court also noted that the High Court had failed to appreciate that the

principle of per incurium has relevance to the doctrine of precedent

but has no application to the doctrine of res judicata. Thus, quite

clearly the principles relating to precedent, per incurium, obiter

and the like have no application to the doctrine of res judicata,

which is governed by cause of action estoppel and issue estoppel in

order to ensure the attainment of finality, which is the ultimate object

of all civilized systems of jurisprudence, for, otherwise legal

ingenuity would ensure the unending and vexatious pursuit of a claim

even if it is wholly spurious.       Litigation would then become

equivalent to an open and festering wound, rendering every decision
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 119 of 130
open to being impeached collaterally, turning judicial discipline into a

dead letter.
101. Further, the reliance placed by the learned counsel for the

defendant on the case of
Pawan Kumar Gupta
(supra) is also wholly

misplaced. The observation of the Supreme Court in the said case

that "if dismissal of the prior suit was on a ground affecting the

maintainability of the suit any finding in the judgment adverse to the

defendant would not operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit"
cannot be read in isolation and the judgment must be read in its

entirety. In the very same judgment the Supreme Court held that

there was "no hurdle in law for the defendant to file an appeal

against the judgment and decree in that first suit as he still disputed

the decisions on such contested issues." Admittedly, the defendant in

the present case did not file any review against the judgment dated

11.05.2011 of the Supreme Court. The second and important point of

distinction is that in the said case the Court was not dealing with an

order passed by the Supreme Court.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 120 of 130
102. The      defendant‟s   reliance   on    the   judgment     in
Sri

Athmanathaswami Devasthanam
(supra) is also inapt for the same

reason, namely, in view of the all-encompassing jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court to decide any issue raised before it. Likewise, the

reliance placed by the defendant upon the judgments of
Hasham

Abbas Sayyad
(supra) and
Muthavalli of Sha Madhari Diwan Wakf
(supra) is misplaced, as in the present case the order was passed by

the Supreme Court itself and it cannot be said that the Supreme Court

lacked jurisdiction. In any case, the question whether the judgment of

the Supreme Court is without jurisdiction can only be gone into by

the Supreme Court itself and cannot be raised in collateral

proceedings.
Reliance on the judgment of
Rachakonda Narayana
(supra) is also of no avail to the defendant as in the said case it was

laid down that the appellate court can go into any question relating to

the rights of parties which a trial court was entitled to dispose of, an

appeal being a continuation of a suit. To be noted that
the said

decision
is not on the issue of res judicata and the aforesaid
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 121 of 130
observations were made by the Supreme Court in the context of

powers of appellate courts and not with reference to its own powers.
103. The judgment in
Syed Mohd. Salie Labbai
(supra) relied upon

by the defendant is in fact in favour of the plaintiff. It categorically

lays down that before a plea of res judicata can be given effect to, the

following conditions must be fulfilled:-
"(1) that the litigating parties must be the
                  same;
(2) that the subject-matter of the suit also
                  must be identical;
(3) that the matter must be finally decided
                  between the parties; and
             (4) that the suit must be decided by a court of
                  competent jurisdiction."
All the above four conditions necessary for the applicability of

res judicata stand satisfied in the present case.
104. The observation in Essel Sports Pvt. Ltd. (supra) relied upon

by the defendant to the effect that "having to defend the same

allegations by the same party in two different jurisdiction is

unquestionably oppressive" also entirely supports the case of the

plaintiff rather than the case of the defendant.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 122 of 130
105. The defendant has cited Seismic Shipping Inc. (supra) as

adjudicated by the High Court of Justice, Queen‟s Bench Division

Admiralty Court and by the Court of Appeal for the proposition that

anti-suit injunction cannot be granted solely in aid of a judgment. The

said case stands adequately distinguished by the case of Munib Masri

(supra), wherein to protect the jurisdiction of English Court, it was

held that the English Court may injunct a foreign defendant against

whom there is an English judgment (in proceedings to which the

foreign defendant has submitted) from seeking to re-litigate the same

issues abroad.
106. The defendant‟s reliance upon the judgment in
Horlicks Ltd.
(supra) is also misplaced as the said case was intrinsically not one of

anti-suit injunction but was of applicability of „forum non

convenience‟ amongst domestic fora. The reliance placed upon page

193 of
the said judgment
wherein reference is made to a Canadian

judgment noted by the Division Bench of this Court is also of no avail

to the defendant as the same was neither the view of the Division

Bench nor it endorsed the Canadian view. The question was only
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 123 of 130
whether the principle of „forum non convenience‟ would apply to

domestic fora.
In fact, the proposition of law as sought to be

advanced on behalf of the defendant based on the
Horlicks
case

(supra) is neither followed in the said case nor in any other judgment

of any Indian Court, namely, that the decision of the foreign Court

cannot be pre-empted until a proceeding has been launched in that

Court and the applicant for an injunction in the domestic Court has

sought from the foreign court a termination of the foreign proceeding

and failed.
It merits recalling that in the ONGC case (supra), the

Supreme Court specifically held that merely because the same relief

can be obtained from the foreign court is no ground to refuse anti-suit

injunction. The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Essel

Sports Pvt. Ltd. (supra) also granted anti-suit injunction without

asking the plaintiff to first approach the London Court.
107. The recent decision of the Supreme Court in
Yograj

Infrastructure Ltd.
(supra) cited by the defendant is wholly

inapplicable to the facts of the present case. In the said case, an

appeal was filed under
Section 37(2)(b)
of the Arbitration and
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 124 of 130
Conciliation Act, 1996
for setting aside an interim order.        After

noting that there was no ambiguity that the Singapore International

Arbitration Centre Rules (for short "SIAC Rules") would be the curial

law of the arbitration proceedings and the seat of arbitration was at

Singapore, the Court observed that the immediate question which

arose was "Whether in such a case the provisions of
Section 2(2)
,

which indicates that Part I of the above Act would apply, where the

place of arbitration is in India, would be a bar to the invocation of

the provisions of
Sections 34
and
37
of the Act, as far as the present

arbitral proceedings, which are being conducted in Singapore, are

concerned."
On consideration of the decision in
Bhatia

International
(supra),
Venture Global Engineering
(supra) and
Citation Infowares Ltd.
(supra) , the Court held that the said

decisions would have no application once the parties agreed by virtue

of Clause 27.1 of the agreement that the arbitration proceedings

would be conducted in Singapore, i.e., the seat of arbitration would be

in Singapore, in accordance with the SIAC Rules as in force at the

time of the signing of the agreement. This effectively shut out the
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                         Page 125 of 130
applicability of Part I of the 1996 Act, including the right of appeal

under
Section 37
thereof. It is beyond cavil that this is precisely what

has been held by the Supreme Court in paras 15 to 20 of its judgment

in the present case.
108. As regards the test
laid down by
the Supreme Court in the case

of
Modi Entertainment Network
(supra), there is no denying the fact

that the same have been squarely met in the following manner:-
(a)    It is not denied that the plaintiff and the defendant are

             amenable to the personal jurisdiction of this court.
(b)    If the injunction is denied, ends of justice will be

             defeated as the plaintiff will be required to re-litigate on

             the aspect of „seat of arbitration‟ before the English

             Court.
(c)    In view of the clear finding of the Supreme Court that

             Kuala Lumpur was the seat of arbitration, it cannot be

             said that restraining the defendant from pursuing its

             claim before the English Court is against the principle of

             comity of nations.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 126 of 130
109. While it is well established that an injunction is granted as an

ancillary to the main relief and flows out of a cause of action which

has accrued to the plaintiff and even quia timet injunctions are

granted by Courts on the plaintiff‟s establishing to the satisfaction of

the Court that some threatened action by the defendant will constitute

an actionable civil wrong, in contrast in an anti-suit injunction action

the plaintiff does not have to establish either accrual of a cause of

action or apprehension of an actionable wrong. In that sense, an anti-

suit injunction is unique in its conception and there is no denying that

the equitable power to grant an anti-suit injunction in restraint of a

litigation in foreign soil exists only to serve equity and shut out

unconscionability.   The grant or non-grant of such an injunction

wholly depends upon whether the assumption of jurisdiction by a

foreign court in the facts and circumstances of a particular case, taken

in their entirety and viewed holistically, would be oppressive or

vexatious or an abuse of the process or would amount to the loss of

juridical or other advantage, in the context of all other factors, to one

or the other party or an injustice would be perpetuated thereby.
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                           Page 127 of 130
110. Viewed from any angle, the present case prima facie appears to

this Court to be one which could justify the passing of such an

injunction order. On the other hand, if the injunction is declined, the

plaintiff would be vexed twice over(that is, once in the natural forum

and once in the foreign forum) for establishing its plea that Kuala

Lumpur is the designated seat of arbitration which cannot be changed

without altering the contract itself.   It would be neither fair nor

equitable to compel the plaintiff to re-commence pursuit of a matter

in a foreign country when the highest court of this land has held in

favour of the plaintiff, that too, on the defendant invoking its

jurisdiction.      This would amount to perpetuating injustice and

possibly result in conflicting judgments of two courts causing

significant harm to the arbitration proceedings and delaying the same

for an indefinite period of time, possibly resulting in their abrupt

termination.
111. In conclusion, it may be stated that judged by the tri-partite test

of prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable injury,

the present case is a proper case for the grant of an injunction in
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 128 of 130
favour of the plaintiff. Prima facie the initiation of proceedings by

the defendant at London during the pendency of the Special Leave

Petition before the Supreme Court of India was unconscionable,

vexatious and oppressive and an abuse of the process of law. It

would be unduly harsh on the plaintiff to put the plaintiff through the

inconvenience and uncertainty of litigating more than once on the

same issue at a prohibitively high cost in a foreign land. The balance

of convenience also tilts in favour of the plaintiff, as a necessary

outcome of multiplicity of proceedings could be potentially

conflicting decisions.   Most importantly, the preservation of the

integrity of the proceedings before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of

India, which culminated in the final judgment and order dated

11.05.2011, must necessarily be protected. The plaintiff has a high

degree of probability of obtaining the relief sought for in the plaint,

and as noticed hereinabove, the plaintiff, as is clear from the order of

the English Court dated 14.11.2011, has made it expressly clear that

its participation in the proceedings before the English Court is

without prejudice to its challenge to the jurisdiction of the English
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 129 of 130
Court. Hence, the same cannot be an inhibiting factor in the grant of

injunction based on comity of nations. The relief sought for in the

application, if not granted, will cause irreversible loss and damage to

the plaintiff without any juridical advantage enuring to the defendant.
112. Resultantly, this Court hereby passes an order of temporary

injunction restraining the defendant from pursuing Claim No.2009,

Folio 1382 filed in the High Court of Justice, Queen‟s Bench

Division, Commercial Court, London against the plaintiff.
113. IA No.21069/2011 is allowed accordingly.

CS(OS) 3314/2011

      List on 16th April, 2012 for laying down the time frame for the

disposal of the above suit.
REVA KHETRAPAL
                                                     (JUDGE)
March 05, 2012
km
CS(OS) 3314/2011                                          Page 130 of 130
