Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: 66 of 1993
Citation: SCC 217;
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/31313835/

[Cites
30
, Cited by
7
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Sri Pankaj Panwar vs Lalit Kala Akademi & Ors on 7 July, 2014
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA
                           CONSTITUTIONAL WRIT JURISDICTION
                                   APPELLATE SIDE


   Present : The Hon'ble Justice Dipankar Datta


                            W.P. No. 5360(W) of 2014


                                Sri Pankaj Panwar
                                        Vs.
                              Lalit Kala Akademi & ors.


   For the petitioner :      Mr. Arunabha Ghosh
                             Mr. Anindya Lahiri
                             Mr. P. Roy
                             Mr. Mainak Ganguly
                             Mr. Pushpal Chakraborty

   For the             :     Mr. V.S.R. Krishna
   respondents               Mr. S. Tiwary
   1 to 7                    Mr. Kaushik Chanda



   Judgment on : July 7, 2014

1. A public notice was published by the Lalit Kala Akademi, the first respondent

   (hereafter the Akademi) in the Hindustan Times, an English daily having wide

   circulation in West Bengal, in its issue dated January 11, 2014. Upon an

   order passed in this behalf by the Chairman of the Akademi, the third

   respondent, it was sought to be notified by such notice that "Disciplinary

   Committee     has       been   set   up   by   the   Akademi   in   compliance   with

   Government/High Court orders to inquire into complaints against General

   Council Members who have violated Code of Conduct rules by promoting
    themselves/relatives in Akademi activities giving priority to personal needs over

   Akademi activities" and that "all concerned are hereby informed that the

   Competent Authority of Lalit Kala Akademi vide his order dated 07.01.2014

   issued under clause 17(11) of the Akademi Constitution has passed the

   following orders in respect of the General Council Members mentioned below."

   The notice contained names of number of persons who had either been

   censured or otherwise penalised. In respect of Sri Mukul Panwar, one of

   several persons who were proceeded against, the following punishment had

   been awarded:

         "Censure for all times. Recovery of loss to the Akademi due to his
         unauthorised visit to various countries. Withdrawal of National Award to
         his brother Pankaj Panwar including plaque and recovery of Award
         money. Publication in National Print media for information to public at
         large."


2. The challenge in this writ petition dated February 13, 2014 presented by Sri

   Pankaj Panwar is to that part of the public notice whereby he has been visited

   with penalty, viz. withdrawal of national award including plaque and recovery of

   award money and information thereof to the public, without being called upon

   to participate in any proceedings that might have been drawn up.

3. Preliminary objection to the maintainability of this writ petition has been raised

   by Mr. Krishna, learned counsel for the Akademi and its several officers who

   have been impleaded as respondents. According to him, the decision which has

   resulted in the petitioner feeling aggrieved was taken in New Delhi and since no

   part of the cause of action for presenting this writ petition has arisen within the
    territorial limits of this Court, it ought not to be entertained and merits

   dismissal.

4. I may place on record that no objection to the maintainability of the writ

   petition on the ground that the Akademi is not a 'State' within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution was raised by Mr. Krishna. In fact, he submitted

   that a writ petition questioning the action of the Akademi would be

   maintainable at the instance of the petitioner in the Delhi High Court.

5. Upon hearing the parties on the preliminary objection, I had proposed to the

   parties to go ahead with their arguments on the merits of the petitioner's claim

   observing that the preliminary objection would be dealt with while passing the

   final order on the writ petition. Mr. Krishna did not agree, and requested that

   the preliminary objection be decided first. The indication was clear and hence

   judgment on the preliminary objection was reserved. I would now proceed to

   dispose of the preliminary objection.

6. The petitioner is presently Professor of the Department of Sculpture, Kala

   Bhavan, Viswabharati University, Santiniketan, District Birbhum, West Bengal.

   His attainments in the field of art and sculpture have been given in details in

   paragraph 1 of the writ petition. It is claimed by him that although he was a

   member of the "Advisory Committee and Jury Member for National Exhibition of

   Art in respect of" the Akademi, he was "never a Member of the General Council,

   Executive Board, Finance Committee and Standing Committee" of the Akademi.

7. In paragraph 4 of the writ petition, the procedure for grant of national awards

   by the Akademi has been delineated while the following paragraph is the
   narration of his work of art being an exhibit in the 47th National Exhibition and

  selection of the same for National Akademi award, ultimately conferred on him

  in November, 2004. He had been awarded a plaque and award money as

  acknowledgement of the grant of award.

8. Paragraphs 6, 8, 9, 16 and 18 being relevant for a decision on the issue of

  territorial jurisdiction of this Court, are reproduced hereunder:

        "6. The petitioner states that he was astonished to find a publication
        made in various English National Newspapers viz. the Hindustan Times
        and others from where he acquired knowledge that while purporting to
        implement a punishment against one Mukul Panwar, it had been
        announced that the National Award granted to the petitioner, including
        the plaque would be withdrawn and the award money granted to the
        petitioner along with the national award be recovered from him. It
        transpires from such publication that the petitioner was erroneously
        construed to be the brother of such Mukul Panwar against whom the
        punishment was awarded. In this regard it is specified that Mukul
        Panwar is not the uterine brother of the petitioner and as such does not
        fall within the direct relations of the petitioner. The petitioner suffered the
        tremendous damage to his reputation at his present place of residence as
        his image and reputation in the estimation of the persons knowing him
        has been lowered and irreparable loss has been caused to the character
        of the petitioner. It is stated that since the newspapers where the
        publications have been made have a very wide circulation throughout all
        the States of this country including West Bengal, hence the reputation of
        the petitioner has been lowered in all the places where the persons
        knowing the petitioners has read the article. *****************

        8. The petitioner states that he was at no point of time served with any
        communication or notice granting him opportunity to explain his position.
        The order dated 07.01.2014 which has been claimed to have been issued
        under Clause 17(11) of the Constitution of the Akademi was not served
        upon the petitioner, and till date the petitioner is not aware of the
        contents of such order which appears to be the basis of the publication of
        the notice. The petitioner states that he has made a demand for justice
        dated 31.01.2014 wherein he has agitated this issue.

        9. The petitioner states that before causing such irreparable injury to the
        reputation of the petitioner by publication of the public notice he was not
        granted any opportunity informing him about the possibility of the
        withdrawal of the award granted to him or publication of such notice and
           as such the entire process is vitiated by non-compliance of the principle of
          natural justice.********************************************************

          16. The petitioner states that till date he has not been served or formally
          informed about the withdrawal of National Award including the plaque
          and recovery of award money, which discloses the arbitrary and mala
          fide intention of the Chairman, Lalit Kala Akademi against the petitioner.
          **********
18. The petitioner states that he originates from a family which is having
          a background in the field of creativity and art. The parents of the
          petitioner had been the students of Viswabharati, Shantiniketan and the
          petitioner has also devoted his entire life for development of the
          contemporary art and the impugned publication has caused prejudice and
          loss of reputation to the petitioner, for which he holds the Chairman of the
          respondent no. 1 responsible."
9. The petitioner has also pleaded in paragraph 24 of the writ petition how and

    in what manner, according to him, the cause of action for invoking the writ

    jurisdiction of this Court has arisen. Relevant extracts from such paragraph

    read as under :
"24. **** Moreover, the publication of the punishment in the National
          Newspapers viz., Hindustan Times causing the tremendous loss of
          reputation of the petitioner amongst his known circle has been caused
          and felt by the petitioner within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. The
          petitioner has suffered the tremendous loss of reputation within the
          jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court which has prompted the petitioner to
          challenge the impugned publication. Due to the above circumstances the
          cause of action for instituting the instant writ petition has arose within the
          territorial jurisdiction of this of this Hon'ble Court."
10. Written notes of arguments were filed by Mr. Krishna, where it is contended

    there that these pleadings are not sufficient to hold that at least a part of the

    cause of action has arisen in West Bengal for invocation of this Court's writ

    jurisdiction. While countering the claim of the petitioner that his reputation

    has taken a beating as a result of the newspaper publication, an argument

    has been advanced that "publication of advertisements do not create a cause of
     action for preferring writ petitions under
Art.226".
It also appears from such

    written notes that two other persons, similarly penalized like the petitioner,

    had invoked the jurisdiction of the Allahabad High Court but faced with the

    objection of lack of territorial jurisdiction, the writ petitions were withdrawn

    and leave obtained to move the appropriate High Court. In support of the

    arguments relating to lack of territorial jurisdiction, heavy reliance has been

    placed on the following decisions of the Supreme Court:
(i)     State of Rajasthan & ors. vs. M/s. Swaika Properties & anr., reported

               in (1985) 3 SCC 217;
(
ii)    Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs. Utpal Kumar Basu
& ors.,

               reported in (1994) 4 SCC 711;
(iii)   National Textile Corporation Ltd. & ors. vs. Haribox Swalram & ors.,

               reported in (2004) 9 SCC 786;
(
iv)    Alchemist vs. State Bank of Sikkim
, reported in AIR 2007 SC 1812;
and
(
v)     Election Commission of India vs. Saka Venkata Subba Rao
, reported

               in AIR 1953 SC 210.
11. Whenever an objection of lack of territorial jurisdiction is raised, the decisions

    in Swaika Properties (supra) and
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) are invariably

    cited by the objector. No Court, much less the Calcutta High Court, can

    choose to decide any matter touching the point of territorial jurisdiction before

    it ignoring the said decisions.
12. Bare perusal of the said decisions together with the decisions referred to

    therein would leave none in doubt that the Calcutta High Court incurred the

    displeasure of the Supreme Court on more occasion than one and had been at

    the receiving end between the mid-eighties and the mid-nineties, admonition

    having flowed thick and fast from the Supreme Court for entertaining writ

    petitions which ought not to have been entertained for lack of territorial

    jurisdiction, or where the Court proceeded to grant ex parte ad interim order

    of injunction on the first day the writ petition was moved and in effect granted

    substantial relief claimed in the writ petition at the interlocutory stage.
13. Twenty-nine years and twenty years have passed since the decisions in Swaika

    Properties (supra) and
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) respectively were rendered.

    Calcutta High Court, the oldest High Court of the country and a mother figure

    for all associated with it, has silently borne the ignominy for days, months and

    years, which many wonder whether it really deserved or not. Not only has the

    admonition of the Calcutta High Court by some very erudite Supreme Court

    judges left an indelible stigma on the functionality of its justice delivery system

    and the conduct of judges thereof, which is hard to obliterate, attribution of

    perceived misdemeanour of a particular judge to the Calcutta High Court as a

    whole is an aspect that militates against the solidness of character shown by

    the judges for whom it has been a matter of great pride to adorn the Bench, as

    well as the high attainments and rich traditions this Court has been known for.

    Now that heavy reliance has been placed on the said decisions by the

    respondents and a tendency to browbeat the Court based thereon is discernible
     to ensure that proceedings progress as per their desire, the urge to share the

    thoughts that have reverberated through the long corridors of the Calcutta

    High Court over the years is felt before the preliminary objection is decided.
14. The discussion must begin with a caveat. It is indeed not within my province

    to answer the questions that are posed, for, it is well known that a High Court

    judge would not be justified either in law or on considerations of judicial

    discipline and comity to show disrespect to any order or direction made by the

    Supreme Court or to question the propriety of such order/direction, either

    when the said judge is called upon to apply the law laid down therein for

    deciding an issue before him or while betraying remissness in compliance

    therewith. Trite it is that if such course were permissible, it would have the

    effect of destroying the hierarchical system in the administration of justice

    under the Constitution and the people bound to lose faith in the system. The

    ratio decidendi of a decision given by the Supreme Court on a point of law has

    to be loyally accepted by the High Court, unless of course there are sufficient

    grounds for the High Court to hold that there is an additional or different fact

    before it which makes a world of difference between conclusions in two cases

    even when the same principles are applied in each to similar facts. That each

    judge of a court of record is bound to maintain high standards of judicial

    conduct in Court cannot be gainsaid. Respect for any order/direction of a

    superior court, in view of the present dispensation, must flow as a matter of

    course for achieving the common good, irrespective of what a judge lower in

    the hierarchy believes about the necessity or the lack of it for passing such
     order/direction. However, bearing in mind the fact that this writ petition does

    not involve compliance with any direction by a superior court and with due

    deference to the learned judges of the Supreme Court whose decisions would

    fall for consideration at the instance of the respondents, parties like them who

    attempt to steal a march over their adversary by simply citing the decisions in

    Swaika Properties (supra) and
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) as if the ratio thereof

    were to be blindly relied on in each case where an objection to the

    maintainability of a writ petition on the ground of territorial jurisdiction is

    raised before the Calcutta High Court, must be deterred by sending the

    message loud and clear that each case requires decision on its own factual

    matrix vis-à-vis the law applicable thereto and not by mere awe and reverence

    that a celebrated decision of the Supreme Court would generate.
15. The decision in Swaika Properties (supra) is considered first. It deals with two

    important points. One is with regard to erroneous assumption of jurisdiction

    by the Calcutta High Court and the other pertaining to its making an ex parte

    ad interim order on the mere asking.
16. Insofar as the ex parte ad interim order made by the learned judge is

    concerned, the relevant passages from the said decision are quoted below:
"2. It is somewhat strange that a learned single Judge of the
          Calcutta High Court (****, J.) should have by his order dated March
          13, 1984 entertained a petition under
Art. 226
of the Constitution
          filed by the respondents, issued a rule nisi thereon requiring ***** and
          passed an ad interim ex parte prohibitory order, restraining them from
          taking any steps *****. We are distressed to find that the learned
          single Judge despite a long line of decisions of this Court starting
          from
Siliguri Municipality v. Amalendu Das
(1984) 2 SCC 436 : (AIR 1984
          SC 653) deprecating the practice prevalent in the High Court of
           passing such interlocutory orders for the mere asking, should
          have passed the impugned orders in the manner that he did. It
          seems that the pronouncements of this Court have had little effect
          on the learned single Judge."
*****
          "9. It is to be deeply regretted that despite a series of decisions of
          this Court deprecating the practice prevalent in the High Court of
          passing such interlocutory orders for the mere asking, the learned
          single Judge should have passed the impugned ad interim ex
          parte prohibitory order the effect of which, as the learned Attorney
          General rightly complains, was virtually to bring to a standstill a
          development scheme of the *****, irrespective of the fact whether or
          not the High Court had any territorial jurisdiction to entertain a
          petition under
Art. 226
of the Constitution. Such arbitrary
          exercise of power by the High Court at the public expense reacts
          against the development and prosperity of the country and is
          clearly detrimental to the national interest.
10. Quite recently, Chinnappa           Reddy, J. speaking for the Court in
Assistant Collector of Central Excise, West Bengal v. Dunlop India Ltd.
(1985) 1 SCC 260 : (AIR 1985 SC 330) administered strong admonition
          deprecating the practice of the High Court of granting ad interim ex parte
          orders which practically have the effect of the grant of the main relief in
          the petition under
Art. 226
of the Constitution irrespective of the fact
          whether the High Court had any territorial jurisdiction to entertain such a
          petition or whether the petition under
Art. 226
was intended and meant to
          circumvent the alternative remedy provided by law or filed solely for the
          purpose of obtaining interim orders and thereafter delaying and
          protracting the proceedings by one device or the other particularly in
          matters relating to public revenue or implementation of various measures
          and schemes undertaken by the Government or the local authorities for
          general public benefit. Although the powers of the High Courts under
Art.
          226
of the Constitution are far and wide and the Judges must ever be
          vigilant to protect the citizen against arbitrary executive action,
          nonetheless, the Judges have a constructive role and therefore there is
          always the need to use such extensive powers with due circumspection.
          There has to be in the larger public interest an element of self-ordained
          restraint. We hope and trust that the High Court will determine the extent
          of its territorial jurisdiction before making such interlocutory orders."
(words highlighted in bold font by me)
17. By the long line of decisions post
Amalendu Das
(supra), the Bench obviously

    meant the decision in
Dunlop India Ltd.
(supra) referred to in paragraph 10 of
     its decision and I suppose, the decisions in
Union of India v. Oswal Woollen

    Mills Ltd.
, (1984) 2 SCC 646 = AIR 1984 SC 1264 (dated March 27, 1984);

    M/s.
Samarias Trading Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. S. Samuel
, (1984) 4 SCC 666 = AIR

    1985 SC 61 (dated November 9, 1984); and
Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v.

    State of Orissa
, (1983) 2 SCC 433 = AIR 1983 SC 603 (dated April 13, 1983),

    which are all referred to in
Dunlop India Ltd.
(supra).
18. While setting aside the interim order of the Calcutta High Court restraining

    Siliguri Municipality from recovering a graduated consolidated rate, the

    Supreme Court in
Amalendu Das
(supra) observed that a levy or an impost

    does not become bad as soon as a writ petition is instituted assailing the levy

    and normally the High Court should not, as a rule, in proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution grant any stay of recovery of tax except under

    very exceptional circumstances; the grant of stay in such matters should be

    an exception and not a rule.
19.
In
Oswal Woollen Mills Ltd.
(supra), the Supreme Court observed that the

    interim order under challenge was of a drastic character having great

    potential for mischief and had the effect of practically allowing the writ

    petition at the stage of admission without hearing the opposite parties. The

    Court was of the further opinion that the nature of stay might have

    devastating consequences leaving no way of undoing the mischief and that

    granting interim relief straightway and leaving it to the respondents to move

    the Court to vacate the interim order would put public interest in jeopardy.

    Caution was sounded that the Courts ought to be circumspect in the matter of
     granting interim relief, more particularly so when interim relief was directed

    against the orders or the actions of public officials acting in discharge of their

    public duty and in exercise of statutory powers. On facts and in the

    circumstances, the Court was satisfied that no interim relief should have been

    granted by the Calcutta High Court in the terms in which it was done and the

    same was set aside.
20.
Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd.
(supra) was a decision not relating to grant of ex

    parte ad interim order. The Supreme Court, by such decision, upheld dismissal

    of the writ petition by the Orissa High Court on the ground of availability of an

    alternative remedy to the affected party who presented the writ petition.
21. The Supreme Court in
Dunlop India Ltd.
(supra) severely criticized the

    Calcutta High Court for making an interim order as soon as the writ petition

    was presented, when a second thought (or a second's thought) would have

    exposed impairment of the public interest. Referring to earlier decisions, the

    Court held that the interim directions made by a learned judge granting the

    benefit of exemption of little less than rupees three crore and directing release

    of goods on a bank guarantee being furnished were wholly unsustainable and

    should never have been made because no governmental business or for that

    matter no business of any kind can be run on mere bank guarantees. It was

    remarked that an interim order could be made restraining realization of

    government revenue when there is not the slightest indication of a likelihood

    of prejudice to the public interest.
22. The Calcutta High Court again ran into rough weather for entertaining an oral

      application and granting an ex parte ad interim order staying further

      proceedings in connection with an auction of a liquor shop at Rangat, Middle

      Andamans in
Samarias Trading Co.
(supra). The learned judge who

      entertained the oral prayer of the writ petitioner S. Samuel had also

      entertained the writ petition of Swaika Properties. The Supreme Court

      deprecated the practice prevalent in the Calcutta High Court of entertaining

      oral applications, followed by recording of an undertaking from the learned

      advocate for the writ petitioner that a written petition would be filed over the

      next couple of days, without even insisting for a petition in skeletal form and

      without even recording what led the party to approach the writ court and what

      were the prima facie reasons for grant of an ad interim order. However,

      despite noticing that such practice of moving oral applications were not

      prevalent in the High Courts of Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh

      and Rajasthan and the Patna, Madras and Bombay High Courts, the Supreme

      Court endorsed that in exceptional cases an oral application could be moved

      and urgent interim order issued on the basis of a skeletal application setting

      out the bare facts and the points involved, with permission to file a detailed

      application later.
23.   Reverting to Swaika Properties (supra), it may be noted that the decision in
Amalendu Das
(supra) was delivered by the Supreme Court on January 6,

      1984. The other decisions, which may have been in the mind of the Bench

      included in "the long line of decisions" and
referred to above
, were all delivered
     between March 27, 1984 and November 30, 1984. Internet connectivity was

    unknown in 1984 and I guess, in those days, the judges of all the High Courts

    could have a first look at decisions of the Supreme Court as and when the same

    were reported in the available journals like Supreme Court Reports, All India

    Reporter and Supreme Court Cases.
Considering the lack of promptness in

    reporting reportable decisions in those days, it is highly unlikely that
Amalendu

    Das
(supra) may have been reported prior to March 13, 1984 when the rule nisi

    was issued and ex parte injunction ordered by the learned judge of the Calcutta

    High Court on the writ petition of Swaika Properties. Having regard thereto, one

    is left to wonder whether the observations made by the Supreme Court (as

    expressed in paragraphs 9 and 10 extracted supra, that exercise of power was

    arbitrary and issuance of a rule nisi together with a prohibitory order by the

    Calcutta High Court were in disregard of the caution sounded by the Supreme

    Court in the long line of decisions), were not too harsh qua the circumstances.

    One cannot say for certain, but it could well be so that the learned judge may

    not have had the opportunity to be aware of the caution sounded by the

    Supreme Court in the long line of decisions, and passed a prohibitory order

    seemingly in disregard but possibly in ignorance thereof.
24. That apart, perusal of the decision in Swaika Properties (supra) reveals the view

    that:
"It was not necessary for the respondents to plead the service of notice on
            them by the Special Officer, Town Planning Department, Jaipur under S.
            52(2) for the grant of an appropriate writ, direction or order under
Art. 226
of the Constitution for quashing the notification issued by the State
            Government under *****."
25. The aforesaid extract was preceded by the following words:
"The mere service of notice under S. 52(2) of the Act on the respondents at
          ***** Calcutta i.e. within the territorial limits of the State of West Bengal,
          could not give rise to a cause of action within that territory unless the
          service of such notice was an integral part of the cause of action.
          The entire cause of action culminating in the acquisition of the land under
          S. 52(1) of the Act arose within the State of Rajasthan i.e. within the
          territorial jurisdiction of the Rajasthan High Court at the Jaipur Bench.
          The answer to the question whether service of notice is an integral
          part of the cause of action within the meaning of
Art. 226(2)
of the
          Constitution must depend upon the nature of the impugned order
          giving rise to a cause of action. The notification dated ****** issued by
          the State Government under S. 52(1) of the Act became effective the
          moment it was published in the official Gazette as thereupon the notified
          land became vested in the State Government free from all encumbrances."
(words highlighted in bold font by me)
26. It would, therefore, appear from the above extract that the Court introduced a

    new concept of "integral part of the cause of action", which "must depend

    upon the nature of the order impugned giving rise to a cause of action" as a test

    for determining whether cause of action had arisen within the territorial limits

    of a High Court or not. Such concept may not have been propounded in any

    decision of the Supreme Court prior to the decision in Swaika Properties

    (supra). On the contrary, the Courts all along seem to have proceeded on the

    fundamental principles that a suitor is dominus litis, and that where a law

    permits a suitor to institute a suit on the basis of accrual of the cause of

    action, either in whole or in part, the Court within whose jurisdiction a small

    fraction of the cause of action has arisen would be entitled to receive the suit.

    However, without being oblivious of
Section 16
of the Code of Civil Procedure

    (hereafter
the CPC
), it may be stated that different considerations would arise
 in regard to exercise of writ jurisdiction even in regard to immovable property

related disputes in view of clause (2) of
Article 226
of the Constitution read

with
Section 141
of the CPC. The said decision brought about a significant

development of law, for testing the point of maintainability of a writ petition

presented on the basis of accrual of a part of cause of action within the

territory of a particular High Court, from the angle that service of any and

every notice on a litigant would not entitle him to approach the Court within

whose jurisdiction the notice was received but that service of such notice

must form an integral part of the cause of action within the meaning of clause

(2) of
Article 226
i.e. it must have a nexus or relevance with the lis that is

involved in the case. The user of the adjective 'integral' before 'part of cause of

action' tends to suggest that even if a part of cause of action may have arisen

within a High Court's territorial limits, the same would not suffice unless a

nexus or relevance with the lis of the case is established and the High Court

has to be sure that an integral part of the cause of action had arisen

empowering it to receive the writ petition and to try it. The concept that unless

an integral part of the cause of action arises within the territorial limits of a

Court would be akin to no part of the cause of action having arisen, was

perhaps propounded for the first time in the decision in Swaika Properties

(supra) and, therefore, one cannot but surmise whether the Calcutta High

Court (for entertaining the writ petition of Swaika Properties ex parte) could be

taken to task for not reasonably comprehending application of a test which

hitherto before none had applied.
27. Significantly, the learned judge of the Calcutta High Court while issuing the

    rule nisi did not have the benefit of considering the version of the State of

    Rajasthan that the facts betrayed lack of bona fides on the part of the writ

    petitioner Swaika Properties in relation to the acquisition process, which was

    one other ground for the Supreme Court to hold that the writ petitioner by its

    conduct had disabled itself to exercise of discretionary jurisdiction in its

    favour.
28.
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) is the other decision where the Supreme Court

    severely criticized the Calcutta High Court for entertaining and deciding a writ

    petition despite not having territorial jurisdiction.
After discussing the case set

    up in the pleadings and holding that even if the same were accepted as correct

    no part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of the

    Calcutta High Court so as to enable the learned judge to entertain the writ

    petition filed by NICCO, reliance was placed on the decision in Swaika

    Properties (supra). It would be important at this stage to bear in mind what

    exactly the Supreme Court said in paragraph 12 of its decision. The relevant

    portions of such paragraph are quoted hereunder:
"12. *****Notwithstanding the strong observations made by this
          Court in the aforesaid decision and in the earlier decisions
          referred to therein, we are distressed that the High Court of
          Calcutta persists in exercising jurisdiction even in cases where no
          part of the cause of action arose within its territorial jurisdiction.
          It is indeed a great pity that one of the premier High Courts of the
          country should appear to have developed a tendency to assume
          jurisdiction on the sole ground that the petitioner before it resides in or
          carries on business from a registered office in the State of West Bengal.
          We feel all the more pained that notwithstanding the observations
          of this Court made time and again, some of the learned Judges
            continue to betray that tendency. Only recently while disposing of
           appeals arising out of SLP Nos. 10065-66 of 1993,
Aligarh Muslim
           University v. Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd.
, this Court observed:
'We are surprised, not a little, that the High Court of Calcutta should have
           exercised jurisdiction in a case where it had absolutely no jurisdiction.'
           In that case, ***** it instituted proceedings in the Calcutta High Court and
           the High Court exercised jurisdiction where it had none whatsoever. It
           must be remembered that the image and prestige of a court
           depends on how the members of that institution conduct
           themselves. If an impression gains ground that even in cases
           which fall outside the territorial jurisdiction of the court, certain
           members of the court would be willing to exercise jurisdiction on
           the plea that some event, however trivial and unconnected with
           the cause of action had occurred within the jurisdiction of the
           said court, litigants would seek to abuse the process by carrying
           the cause before such members giving rise to avoidable suspicion.
           That would lower the dignity of the institution and put the entire
           system to ridicule. We are greatly pained to say so but if we do
           not strongly deprecate the growing tendency we will, we are
           afraid, be failing in our duty to the institution and the system of
           administration of justice. We do hope that we will not have
           another occasion to deal with such a situation."
(words highlighted in bold font by me)
29.   A second decision of the Supreme Court that is as overtly critical of the

      conduct of members (read judges) of a High Court as the one under

      consideration may not have seen the light of the day. The contents of this

      paragraph border on attributing "motives" to the judges. There may have been

      some black sheep here and there (and one could find them even beyond the

      territorial limits of the Calcutta High Court) but, on facts and in the

      circumstances, did the Calcutta High Court and the concerned learned judge

      deserve this treatment?
30. The passage extracted above tends to suggest that the Bench was distressed

      and pained because Swaika Properties (supra) and other decisions referred to
     therein were not considered.
Apart from the fact that Swaika Properties

    (supra) did not refer to any earlier decision on the point of territorial

    jurisdiction [it had referred only to
Dunlop India Ltd.
(supra), which in turn

    had referred to certain other previous decisions referred to hereinabove on the

    point of grant of interim relief on the mere asking resulting in the final relief

    being granted, either on a written application or an oral application], one

    would be inclined to form an opinion reading the discussions in paragraph 13

    of the report, dealing with
Section 21
of the CPC. The relevant passage reads

    thus:
"13. The submission of the learned counsel for NICCO based on
Section
            21
of the Code of Civil Procedure that even if this Court comes to the
            conclusion that the High Court of Calcutta had no jurisdiction, this Court
            should, in the absence of proof of prejudice, refuse to interfere with the
            decision of the High Court unless it is otherwise found to be erroneous.
            While the spirit of
Section 21
of the Code of Civil Procedure may support
            such a submission, we are afraid, the discretion cannot be used in favour
            of a party which deliberately invokes the jurisdiction of a court which has
            no jurisdiction whatsoever for ulterior motives. ***"
31. Whatever were the reasons for the Supreme Court not exercising discretion in

    favour of NICCO, the fact that the respondents had submitted to the

    jurisdiction of the learned judge without even giving the slightest inkling that

    the Calcutta High Court lacked territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ

    petition of NICCO might have led His Lordship to proceed to hear the parties

    on the merits of their respective claims without adverting attention to the

    point of territorial jurisdiction and raising it even suo motu.
32. One also finds reference in
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) to the decision in
Aligarh

    Muslim University v. Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd.
, arising out of SLP

    Nos. 10065-66 of 1993.
On the date the decision in
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra)

    was pronounced, the decision in
Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd.
(supra)

    was not reported in any journal or else the Bench would not have referred to

    the SLP No. The decision is since reported in (1994) 4 SCC 710, and the text

    thereof immediately precedes the report of
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra).
33. The decision in
Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd.
(supra), which was

    rendered by a Bench of three Hon'ble Judges of which the author of the

    decision in
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) was the presiding judge, is no less curt.

    Exercise of jurisdiction by the Calcutta High Court was condemned by the

    words "this is a case of abuse of jurisdiction".
However, the writ petition of

    NICCO was decided by the High Court barely three months after the decision

    in Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd. (supra) and in the absence of the

    same being reported, the learned judge may not have had the occasion to

    notice it.
34. One common feature of the decisions in Swaika Properties (supra) and
Utpal

    Kumar Basu
(supra) is that the Supreme Court was approached by the

    aggrieved party direct, without carrying the relevant impugned order before

    the Division Bench in writ appeal.
It also does not appear from the decision in
Vinay Engineering Enterprises (P) Ltd.
(supra) whether the Division Bench

    was approached or not. Who knows, the relevant Division Bench of the
     Calcutta High Court, if approached, might have set things right upon hearing

    the aggrieved appellant.
35. It is the view of the Supreme Court itself that remarks or observations made

    by the High Court while exercising its power of superintendence in relation to

    a member of the subordinate judiciary, which are avoidable or uncalled for,

    should be avoided. This is because of the simple reason that the same, apart

    from being capable of leading the member to a sense of frustration or having

    the effect of demoralising him, shakes the very confidence of the people in

    judicial institutions. The Supreme Court has sounded caution that a judicial

    officer against whom aspersions are made in a judgment does not have the

    scope of appearing before a higher court to defend his order, and the judges of

    higher courts must, therefore, exercise greater judicial restraint and adopt

    greater care when they are tempted to employ strong terms against the lower

    judiciary [see
Braj Kishore Thakur v. Union of India
, reported in (1997) 4 SCC

    65].
Here, I am also reminded of the decision in
State of U.P. vs. Mohammad

    Naim
, reported in AIR 1964 SC 703, where a four-judge bench of the Supreme

    Court including two judges who had adorned the seat of judges of this premier

    institution had the sobriety and gentleness but firmness to observe as follows:
"10. *** If there is one principle of cardinal importance in the
          administration of justice, it is this : the proper freedom and
          independence of Judges and Magistrates must be maintained and
          they must be allowed to perform their functions freely and
          fearlessly and without undue interference by anybody, even by
          this court. At the same time it is equally necessary that in expressing
          their opinions Judges and Magistrates must be guided by considerations
          of justice, fair-play and restraint. It is not infrequent that sweeping
          generalisations defeat the very purpose for which they are made. It has
          been judicially recognised that in the matter of making
           disparaging remarks against persons or authorities whose
          conduct comes into consideration before courts of law in cases to
          be decided by them, it is relevant to consider (a) whether the party
          whose conduct is in question is before the court or has an
          opportunity of explaining or defending himself; (b) whether there
          is evidence on record bearing on that conduct justifying the
          remarks; and (c) whether it is necessary for the decision of the
          case as an integral part thereof, to animadvert on that conduct. It
          has also been recognised that judicial pronouncements must be judicial in
          nature, and should not normally depart from sobriety, moderation and
          reserve."
(words highlighted in bold font by me)
36. It is axiomatic that it is not for a High Court judge to say what the Supreme

    Court ought to or ought not to do. However, the variance in approach as

    discernible from the cases discussed above is conspicuous and might leave

    the judges in a quandary. No doubt, despite having the power of

    administrative and judicial superintendence over the lower judiciary, a High

    Court judge is to exercise care, circumspection, poise and restraint when

    faced with a challenge to an order that is atrocious; but the need for

    maintaining discipline on the judicial side and setting examples at all tiers

    ought not to be too different. If castigating members of the subordinate

    judiciary does no good to the system, by the same analogy castigating a High

    Court may also not bring about the desired result. Our Constitutional scheme

    for the judiciary ordains that both the Supreme Court as well as the High

    Courts would be courts of record and, therefore, the view that the High Courts

    are subordinate to the Supreme Court, is not right. The minority view

    expressed in Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar v. State of Maharshtra, AIR 1967 SC

    1, that "subordination of the High Court under the scheme of the Constitution
     was not only evident but also logical" has not been accepted as right by the

    Supreme Court in subsequent decisions.
Even a decade back, the Supreme

    Court in
Tirupati Balaji Devlopers (P) Ltd. v. State of Bihar
, (2004) 5 SCC 1 =

    AIR 2004 SC 2351, has held that "in a unified hierarchical judicial structure"
which India has accepted under its Constitution, vertically the Supreme Court

    is placed over the High Courts and that there are a few provisions which give

    an edge and assign a superior place in the hierarchy to the Supreme Court

    over the High Courts. It has also been held there that if the Supreme Court

    and the High Courts both were to be thought of as brothers in the

    administration of justice, the High Court has larger jurisdiction but the

    Supreme Court still remains the elder brother only to the extent of exercise of

    appellate jurisdiction. Certainly the Supreme Court exercises a superior

    jurisdiction and, hence, is a superior court than the High Courts which

    exercises in that context an inferior or subordinate jurisdiction, but any

    institution dealing with another institution under the Constitution shall have

    to observe grace and courtesy and not criticize each other, and should it be

    necessary, the corrective step has to be taken carefully with courtesy and

    respect and not by way of harsh criticism.
37. Regard being had to the strict standards set by the Supreme Court itself, the

    question that is often asked is whether the criticism and castigation of the

    Calcutta High Court were not avoidable, and the disparaging remarks

    necessary for the decision of the cases by the Supreme Court as an integral

    part thereof? Portrayal of the Calcutta High Court, as if it were the only High
     Court to have indulged in entertaining writ petitions without territorial

    jurisdiction, and disclosure of the names of the concerned learned judges in

    Swaika Properties (supra) and
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) and the harsh

    criticism have left an indelible impact on the administration of justice in

    matters where territorial jurisdiction has been in issue, leading to possible

    deflection of justice. Notably, subsequent reported cases where the Supreme

    Court interfered with decisions of other High Courts either declining

    interference on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction or entertaining a

    writ petition despite having no jurisdiction are not rare, but the Supreme

    Court has preferred not to name the learned judge whose order was

    interdicted.
It is true that the the Supreme Court in
National Textile

    Corporation Ltd.
(supra), while arriving at the conclusion that the Division

    Bench erred in holding that the Calcutta High Court had territorial

    jurisdiction and upholding the order of the single judge refusing to entertain

    the writ petition, did not name the author of the decision of the Division

    Bench under challenge before it. The records say that by then, the author had

    been elevated as a judge of the Supreme Court.
38. Be that as it may, judges being humans, all are not possessed of the same

    qualities and probably each suffers from one or the other disability. It is

    difficult, if not impossible, to find a judge who is an exception and suffers from

    no disability at all. Insofar as judgments are concerned, I doubt as to whether

    any judge, who has been on the bench for quite some time and has delivered

    judgements in numbers, can claim that none of his judgements has ever been
     overruled or upset by a superior court. The Supreme Court itself has

    acknowledged that a judge who has not committed an error is yet to be born

    [see
V.K. Jain v. High
Court of Delhi, reported in (
2008) 17 SCC 538 and

    Mona Panwar v. High
Court of Judicature of Allahabad, reported in (2011) 3

    SCC 496]]. To err is human, is an age old adage and none is infallible.
The

    decision in
ADM, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla
, (1976) 2 SCC 521, where

    suspension of fundamental rights of citizens by a Presidential Order was

    upheld by the majority, thereby approving that the judiciary could, in certain

    circumstances, be rendered impotent by the executive, is one decision of the

    Supreme Court that is famous for the wrong reasons. One of the most

    respected Chief Justices the Supreme Court has ever had, Hon'ble M.N.

    Venkatachaliah, C.J. (as His Lordship then was) in a lecture delivered by His

    Lordship on February 25, 2009 observed that the same "should be confined to

    the dustbin of history."
39.
ADM, Jabalpur
(supra) may not be a stray incident of the learned judges of the

    Supreme Court committing an error, but an error when detected and rectified

    ex debito justitiae is doing what is right. That precisely is the reason why a

    mistake is reviewed in exercise of inherent powers and justice administered.
In

    the words of the Supreme Court itself, to own up the mistake when judicial

    satisfaction is reached does not militate against its status or authority; perhaps

    it would enhance both [see
A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak
, reported in (1988) 2

    SCC 602]. What emerges is that the judiciary is manned by none other than

    human beings and even though those who are elevated as High Court judges
     are mature, wise and prudent persons, who have the independence to express

    their mind and are bound by their oath to uphold the Constitution and the

    laws, there could be situations where a judge might miss an evidence or

    misinterpret the law and based on his erroneous perception of law or facts or

    both, an erroneous decision is rendered making a party to the lis feel aggrieved.

    A judge is entitled to form his own views and if at all his view is patently

    erroneous and there is no material to doubt his integrity, it may not always be

    right to view it as anything more than an aberration. The point that resonates

    with relevance and immediacy is that a sweeping generalisation based on

    personal perceptions and impressions, apart from being far from fair and just,

    might result in more disservice than service to the institution and affect the

    independence of the judiciary as a whole. It would be perfectly justified for a

    superior court to criticise a judgment that is assailed before it, if it appears to

    be clearly wrong, but criticism of the author of the judgment might prove to be

    counter-productive in the administration of justice. It would be equally unfair to

    single out a particular High Court for admonition for any perceived

    misdemeanour of any of its judges. If misbehaviour or misconduct is detected,

    the course mandated by the Constitution without anything more should follow

    against such judge instead of giving the High Court a bad name, and the error

    committed by him undone in course of an appeal.
40. It may sound parochial but robbing the Calcutta High Court of its pristine

    glory has created a situation which could not have been overlooked by anyone

    owing to the institution a great debt of gratitude. It is time for the silenced
     voice to be heard and to signal the resurgence of the 'terribly independent'

    Calcutta High Court.
41. Turning to the objection at hand, it must be decided in view of the pleadings

    and not on the basis of the conclusions reached in Swaika Properties (supra)

    and
Utpal Kumar Basu
(supra) that the Calcutta High Court assumed a

    jurisdiction that it did not possess. The decision in the former case never laid

    down the law that receipt of a notice within the territorial limits of a High

    Court is not sufficient to clothe such Court with jurisdiction. On facts, it was

    found that it was not necessary to plead the service of the notice. What the

    Supreme Court said was that the receipt of the notice, in order to confer

    jurisdiction on the Calcutta High Court, must have been an integral part of

    the cause of action. In the latter case, every event or incident material for a

    decision on the lis was held to have occurred beyond the territorial limits of

    the Calcutta High Court and even if the averments in the writ petition were

    taken as true, it could not be said that any part of the cause of action arose

    within the jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court.
42. Here, the facts are different. Although the decision to withdraw the honour that

    was earlier conferred on the petitioner was taken in New Delhi, the chain of

    events could not have been complete without the public notice being

    published in terms of the direction of the Chairman. There cannot be any

    doubt that the contents of the public notice itself bears a vital link in the

    entire chain of events commencing from grant of award to the petitioner with

    plaque, initiation of proceedings for withdrawal, and the decisions to withdraw
     the award and the plaque and to notify the public including the petitioner the

    decision   regarding   withdrawal,   ultimately   culminating    in   the   paper

    publication wherefrom the petitioner could come to know of the impugned

    decision resulting in consequences, as alleged.
43. The claim of the petitioner that this Court has territorial jurisdiction is also

    based on the situs of affectation of rights. Mr. Krishna has referred me the

    decisions in
National Textile Corporation Ltd.
(supra) and
Alchemist
(supra).
The reasons for upsetting the judgment and order of the Division Bench of the

    Calcutta High Court are recorded in paragraphs 12 and 12.1 of the decision in
National Textile Corporation Ltd.
(supra). It is clear that the point based

    whereon the Division Bench had held that part cause of action had arisen

    within its territorial limits was found by the Supreme Court not to have been

    pleaded in the writ petition, and that mere carrying on of business by the writ

    petitioner at Calcutta or receipt of correspondence in Calcutta were not

    integral part of the cause of action.
Although in
Alchemist
(supra) the point of

    consequence of the letter of revocation was raised [paragraph 8(vii) of the

    decision], the Supreme Court held, while affirming the order of the High Court

    holding the writ petition to be not maintainable before it, that none of the

    facts pleaded constitute essential, integral or material facts so as to constitute

    a part cause of action within the meaning of
Article 226(2)
of the Constitution.

    The decisions are, therefore, distinguishable on facts.
44. It cannot be disputed that whether or not cause of action in part has arisen

    within the territorial limits of a particular High Court has to be examined
     having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case as well as what is

    pleaded in support of the claim, irrespective of what the defence of the

    adversary is. Each case must therefore be decided on its peculiar facts and

    the nature of infringement of right that the aggrieved voices in his writ

    petition.
45. Hon'ble Chittatosh Mookerji, J. (as the Hon'ble Chief Justice then was) while

    authoring the Division Bench decision of this Court in
Everest Coal Co. v.

    Coal Controller
, reported in 90 CWN 438, ruled as follows:
"5. The question whether or not cause of action, wholly or in part, for
          filing a writ petition has arisen within the territorial limits of a particular
          High Court ought to be also decided in the light of nature and character of
          proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution. Every High Court has
          jurisdiction to issue directions or orders or writs for enforcement of
          Fundamental Rights and for 'any other purpose'. The pertinent question
          would be whether within the limits of the High Court in which a writ
          application has been filed, any of the facts which would entitle the
          petitioner to obtain relief under
Article 226
of the Constitution has arisen.
          In other words, in order to maintain his writ application the petitioner has
          to establish that within the territorial limits of the court's jurisdiction
          prima facie a legal right claimed by him has been either infringed or is
          threatened to be infringed by the respondents. Such infringement may
          take place by causing him actual injury or threat thereof.
Accordingly,
          when the impugned act of the respondents takes effect within the
          territorial jurisdiction of a particular High Court, it may entertain the writ
          petition of the person aggrieved notwithstanding that the respondents
          have the offices or residences outside its territorial jurisdiction. An order
          has been made by an authority or person at a place beyond the territorial
          limits of a particular High Court but the same is given effect to against the
          petitioner within the said High Court's jurisdiction. In such a cause, at
          least a part of the cause of action arises, where the impugned order is
          implemented. Thus, when an order becomes effective only when it is
          communicated or served, the service of the order of receipt of a notice
          thereof would form part of cause of action for filing a writ petition by the
          person aggrieved thereby (vide
Damomal Kausomal Raisinghani v. Union
          of India
& ors. AIR 1967 Bom.
355,
The State of Maharashtra v.
          Sarvodaya Industries
AIR 1975 Bom. 197).
A Division Bench of this curt
          in
Umasankar v. Union of India
86 CWN 355 (para 18) held inter alia that
          an order of dismissal had become effective only when the same was
             served at Calcutta and therefore, this Court had jurisdiction to entertain
            the writ petition (see the decision of A. K. Sen, J. in the case of
Serajuddin
            & Co. v. State of Orissa
AIR 1971 Cal. 414, where a notice revoking a
            lease of a mine in Orissa was served upon the petition at Calcutta).
Although the Division Bench in the case of
Serajuddin & Co. v. State of
            Orissa
71 CWN 61, on another point reversed the ultimate decision of A.
            K. Sen, J., the Division Bench did not over rule the learned trial Judge's
            finding about accrual of cause of action of notice upon the petitioner at
            Calcutta.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Rajasthan v. M/s.
            Swaika Properties (supra), has pointed out that mere service of notice
            would not give rise to cause of action unless service of a notice was
            integral part of the cause of action. In other words, service of such notice
            must give occasion for filing the writ petition. For the purpose of accrual
            of cause of action for filing a writ petition, it is also necessary to make a
            distinction between actual or apprehended injury to the writ petitioner
            and indirect effect or remote consequences upon him. Obviously, for giving
            rise to cause of action for filing writ petition what is material is whether or
            not within the territorial limits of the said High Court, there has been any
            proximate or direct effect upon the petitioner. Indirect or remote result of
            the impugned acts of the respondents cannot be pleaded for establishing
            that cause of action, either whole or in part, had arisen within the
            territorial limits of a particular High Court."
(underlining for emphasis by me)
46.
In
Umasankar
(supra), Hon'ble M. M. Dutt, J. (as His Lordship then was)

      speaking for a Division Bench of this Court held that an order of dismissal or

      removal from service is effective on the authority concerned as soon it is sent

      out, but so far as the Government servant is concerned, it becomes effective

      only when he is apprised of it either by oral communication or by actual

      service of it upon him; consequently, the order of removal became effective

      when the appellant (employee) received it through post office in Calcutta, he

      having no prior knowledge of the same by any other means, and part cause of

      action arose in Calcutta conferring jurisdiction on this Court to entertain the

      writ petition.
This view was taken bearing in mind the decisions of the

      Supreme Court in
State of Punjab v. Amar Singh
, reported in AIR 1966 SC
       1313, State of Punjab v. Khemi Ram, reported in AIR 1970 SC 214, and B. J.

      Shelat v. State of Gujarat, reported in AIR 1978 SC 1109.
47.   These decisions have stood the test of time and provide guidance that is

      invaluable.
48. To hold that service of an order or a notice on the addressee would never give

      rise to a cause of action to move the Court within whose territorial limits the

      order/notice is received, may not be reasonably sound. If service of an order

      or a notice is an event of substance i.e. an event which is a material, essential

      or integral part of the lis connected with the action that is impugned in a writ

      petition, there is no plausible reason as to why the same should not be

      construed as constituting a material, essential or integral part of the cause of

      action. The plea of affectation of right or interest by reason of such

      order/notice being served, if based on a substantial fact forming a part of the

      bundle of facts constituting the cause of action, would indeed be relevant for

      determination of the question as to whether the writ petition ought to be

      entertained or not. Here, the decision to withdraw the award and the plaque

      from the petitioner was never communicated to him prior to the public notice

      being published in the print media and it is such publication, the only one in

      the series to make the public aware of the penalty imposed on the petitioner,

      that vitally affects the reputation and respect that he has earned over the

      years. Such affectation having taken place in Santiniketan, where the

      petitioner alleges he read the public notice for the first time and derived

      knowledge of the impugned decision of the Akademi (there being no material
     at least at this stage that the decision was formally served on the petitioner in

    any territory beyond West Bengal prior to the public notice being published), it

    is an integral, essential and material part of the lis constituting the cause of

    action to approach the Court and conferring jurisdiction on this Court to

    entertain the writ petition. The fact that the petitioners before the Allahabad

    High Court withdrew their writ petitions with liberty to approach the

    appropriate High Court is absolutely irrelevant and immaterial for a decision

    on the preliminary objection to the maintainability of this writ petition.
49. The preliminary objection, thus, stands overruled.
50. It has been admitted before me that the decision to withdraw the award and

    the plaque were taken behind the petitioner's back. I have also heard Mr.

    Krishna submit that since the decision to withdraw the honour is the subject

    matter of challenge in this writ petition, presently no interim order need be

    made as the impugned decision would not be immediately implemented. In

    view thereof, no interim protection is required and granted at this stage.
51. Place the writ petition under the heading "New Motion" on Monday next (July

    14, 2014).
Urgent certified copy of this judgment and order, if applied for, may be furnished

    to the applicant at an early date.
(DIPANKAR DATTA, J.)
