Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: AIR 2010(SC) 1907, relevant whereof reads
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/32839741/

[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Punjab-Haryana High Court
Iqbal Saini vs M/S Harjeet Singh Raghuvansh Singh And ... on 12 November, 2025
IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT
                      CHANDIGARH




261                                         CRR Nos.1973, 1979
                                            & 1984 of 2025 (O&M)
                                            Date of decision: 12.11.2025
Iqbal Saini
                                                              ....Petitioner
                                 V/s
M/s Harjeet Singh Raghuvansh Singh and another
                                                              ....Respondents

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMEET GOEL

Present:      Mr. Deepak Kumar Bartia, Advocate
              for the petitioner(s).

              Mr. Jarnail Singh Saneta, Advocate for respondent No.1

              Mr. Deepak Kumar Grewal, DAG, Haryana
              for respondent No.2.


                                          *****
SUMEET GOEL, J. (Oral)
1.            By this common order, the aforesaid three revision petitions i.e.

CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 of 2025, are being disposed off together, as

the same involve commonality of facts and issue(s).
For the sake of convenience, the facts are being drawn out from

CRR-1973-2025 (titled as Iqbal Saini Vs. M/s Harjeet Singh Raghuvansh

Singh and another).
2.            The present criminal revision petitions have been filed

impugning the judgment dated 31.05.2025 passed by the learned Additional

Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra & the judgment and order of sentence dated

07.08.2023/10.08.2023 passed by Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Kurukshetra

whereby the petitioner has been convicted and sentenced for offence under
Section 138
of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
1 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:48 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                          Page |2
3.           Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that during the

pendency of proceedings, the petitioner and the complainant have entered

into a settlement/compromise dated 07.11.2025 before the Mediation and

Conciliation Centre of this Court. Learned counsel for the petitioner has

further submitted that since the parties have amicably settled their

dispute(s), the matter may be compounded and the petitioner be acquitted.
4.           Learned counsel appearing for the respondent No.1 has ratified

the factum of compromise/settlement having been arrived at between the

parties   and     has    further          vouched   the    genuineness       of   the

compromise/settlement dated 07.11.2025 stated to be arrived between the

parties before the Mediation and Conciliation Centre of this Court.

Accordingly, he has iterated that the respondent-complainant has no

objection in case the offence is permitted to be compounded and the

petitioner is ordered to be acquitted.
5.           I have heard learned counsel for the rival parties and have

perused the available record.
6.           It would be apposite to refer herein to a judgment passed by

three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court titled as
Damodar S.

Prabhu vs. Sayed Babalal H.
, AIR 2010(SC) 1907, relevant whereof reads

thus:
"15. With regard to the progression of litigation in cheque bouncing
             cases, the learned Attorney General has urged this Court to frame
             guidelines for a graded scheme of imposing costs on parties who unduly
             delay compounding of the offence. It was submitted that the requirement
             of deposit of the costs will act as a deterrent for delayed composition,
             since at present, free and easy compounding of offences at any stage,
             however belated, gives an incentive to the drawer of the cheque to delay
             settling the cases for years. An application for compounding made after
             several years not only results in the system being burdened but the
             complainant is also deprived of effective justice. In view of this
             submission, we direct that the following guidelines be followed:-
2 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                         Page |3

                 THE GUIDELINES
(i) In the circumstances, it is proposed as follows:
(a) That directions can be given that the Writ of Summons be
                 suitably modified making it clear to the accused that he could
                 make an application for compounding of the offences at the first or
                 second hearing of the case and that if such an application is made,
                 compounding may be allowed by the court without imposing any
                 costs on the accused.
(b) If the accused does not make an application for compounding
                 as aforesaid, then if an application for compounding is made
                 before the Magistrate at a subsequent stage, compounding can be
                 allowed subject to the condition that the accused will be required
                 to pay 10% of the cheque amount to be deposited as a condition
                 for compounding with the Legal Services Authority, or such
                 authority as the Court deems fit.
(c) Similarly, if the application for compounding is made before
                 the Sessions Court or a High Court in revision or appeal, such
                 compounding may be allowed on the condition that the accused
                 pays 15% of the cheque amount by way of costs.
(d) Finally, if the application for compounding is made before the
                 Supreme Court, the figure would increase to 20% of the cheque
                 amount.
Let it also be clarified that any costs imposed in accordance with these
          guidelines should be deposited with the Legal Services Authority
          operating at the level of the Court before which compounding takes place.
          For instance, in case of compounding during the pendency of proceedings
          before a Magistrate's Court or a Court of Sessions, such costs should be
          deposited with the District Legal Services Authority. Likewise, costs
          imposed in connection with composition before the High Court should be
          deposited with the State Legal Services Authority and those imposed in
          connection with composition before the Supreme Court should be
          deposited with the National Legal Services Authority.
xxx                   xxx                    xxx                  xxx
          xxx                   xxx                    xxx                  xxx
17.    We are also conscious of the view that the judicial endorsement of
          the above quoted guidelines could be seen as an act of judicial law-
          making and therefore an intrusion into the legislative domain. It must be
          kept in mind that
Section 147
of the Act does not carry any guidance on
          how to proceed with the compounding of offences under the Act. We have
          already explained that the scheme contemplated under
Section 320
of the
          CrPC cannot be followed in the strict sense. In view of the legislative
          vacuum, we see no hurdle to the endorsement of some suggestions which

                              3 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                           Page |4

            have been designed to discourage litigants from unduly delaying the
            composition of the offence in cases involving
Section 138
of the Act. The
            graded scheme for imposing costs is a means to encourage compounding
            at an early stage of litigation. In the status quo, valuable time of the Court
            is spent on the trial of these cases and the parties are not liable to pay any
            Court fee since the proceedings are governed by the
Code of Criminal
            Procedure
, even though the impact of the offence is largely confined to
            the private parties. Even though the imposition of costs by the competent
            court is a matter of discretion, the scale of costs has been suggested in the
            interest of uniformity. The competent Court can of course reduce the costs
            with regard to the specific facts and circumstances of a case, while
            recording reasons in writing for such variance. Bona fide litigants should
            of course contest the proceedings to their logical end. Even in the past,
            this Court has used its power to do complete justice under
Article 142
of
            the Constitution to frame guidelines in relation to subject-matter where
            there was a legislative vacuum."
6.1.        Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment titled as M/s

New Win Export &Anr. vs. A. Subramaniam 2024 INSC 535 : 2024(3)

Law Herald (SC) 2098, relevant whereof reads as under:
"6.      At this juncture, we would also like to reiterate a few words
            regarding the principles of compounding of offences in the context of
NI
            Act
. It is to be remembered that dishonour of cheques is a regulatory
            offence which was made an offence only in view of public interest so that
            the reliability of these instruments can be ensured. A large number of
            cases involving dishonour of cheques are pending before courts which is
            a serious concern for our judicial system. Keeping in mind that the
            'compensatory aspect' of remedy shall have priority over the 'punitive
            aspect', courts should encourage compounding of offences under the
NI
            Act
if parties are willing to do so. (See:
Damodar S. Prabhu v. Sayed
            Babalal H.
(
2010) 5 SCC 663 (Para 18), Gimpex Private Limited v.
            Manoj Goel
(
2022) 11 SCC 705 (Para 29), Meters And Instruments
            Private Limited And Anr. v. Kanchan Mehta
(2018) 1 SCC 560(Para
            18.2)"
6.2.        More recently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment tiled

as
Sanjabij Tari vs. Kishore S. Borcar and another
= 2025 INSC 1158, has

held as under:
"38. Since a very large number of cheque bouncing cases are still
            pending and interest rates have fallen in the last few years, this Court is
                                 4 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                         Page |5

            of the view that it is time to 'revisit and tweak the guidelines'.
            Accordingly, the aforesaid guidelines of compounding are modified as
            under:-
(a) If the accused pays the cheque amount before recording of his
            evidence (namely defence evidence), then the Trial Court may allow
            compounding of the offence without imposing any cost or penalty on the
            accused.
(b) If the accused makes the payment of the cheque amount post the
            recording of his evidence but prior to the pronouncement of judgment by
            the Trial Court, the Magistrate may allow compounding of the offence on
            payment of additional 5% of the cheque amount with the Legal Services
            Authority or such other Authority as the Court deems fit.
(c) Similarly, if the payment of cheque amount is made before the Sessions
            Court or a High Court in Revision or Appeal, such Court may compound
            the offence on the condition that the accused pays 7.5% of the cheque
            amount by way of costs.
(d) Finally, if the cheque amount is tendered before this Court, the figure
            would increase to 10% of the cheque amount."
6.3.        The statutory provision of Section 359 of BNSS, 2023 (
Section

320
of Cr.P.C., 1973) and
Section 147
of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881

when examined alongwith Section 528 of BNSS, 2023 in the guiding light

of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in cases of
Damodar S.

Prabhu
(supra),M/s New Win Export (supra) and
Sanjabij Tari
(supra),

lead to the unequivocal conclusion that the offence under
Section 138
of

Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 can be compounded at all stages of

litigation, including when the matter has reached the High Court after

having been conclusively dealt with by the Magisterial as also the Sessions

Court. In other words, such an offence can be compromised/compounded

even after the petitioner-accused has been convicted by the Court of learned

Magistrate and his appeal against the same has been dismissed by the

learned Sessions Court.
6.4.        The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment of
Damodar S.

Prabhu
(supra) has also enunciated that, ordinarily, costs ought to be


                                5 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                   Page |6

imposed when the offence under
Section 138
of Negotiable Instruments Act

of 1881 is compounded at a stage when substantial proceedings have

already been undertaken by the Courts so as to dissuade the unscrupulous

litigant from unduly delaying the compounding of such offences. However,

discretion has been reserved in favour of the concerned Court to

reduce/waive such costs, in case facts/circumstances of a given case so

warrant.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of
Sanjabij Tari
(supra) has

revisited the guidelines, insofar as it relates to the quantum of imposition of

costs upon the accused, but has not modified the leeway granted in the

judgment of
Damodar S. Prabhu
(supra) which permits reduction or waiver

of costs based on the factual milieu of a particular case albeit subject to the

recording of reasons for such variance. For the sake of clarity it is reiterated

that liberty reserved in favour of the courts to waive the imposition of costs

may be exercised by any of the courts seized of the matter--be it the High

Court, the Sessions Court or the magisterial Court conducting trial. It is,

however, imperative to bear in mind that discretion to waive the imposition

of costs is not to be invoked as a matter of ordinary course. The exercise of

such discretion must be predicated upon exceptional, compelling and

accentuating circumstances which, in the considered opinion of the

concerned Court seized of the matter, warrant deviation from the general

rule of imposition of cost. The Court, while invoking such discretion, must

record clear, cogent and reasoned findings delineating the special factors

that justify the waiver. This requirement is in consonance with the

legislative intent and the underlying purpose sought to be achieved by the

criminalization of the act of dishonor of cheque, i.e. to inculcate financial

discipline and uphold the credibility and sanctity of negotiable instruments.
6 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                   Page |7
6.5.         Still further, the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under

Section 528 BNSS, 2023is primarily aimed at preventing abuse of judicial

process and securing the ends of justice. Thus, where the dispute is

essentially personal in nature and a genuine compromise has been reached,

the High Court may intervene to quash the conviction, recognizing that

continued proceedings would be non-productive and unjust in the given

circumstances. The inherent powers of a High Court are incidental replete

powers, in the absence of which, the Court would be obliged to sit still and

helplessly witness the process of law being abused for the purposes of

injustice. In other words; such power(s) is intrinsic to the High Court,

forming its very life-blood, its very essence, its immanent attribute. Without

such power(s), a High Court would retain form but lack substance. These

powers of a High Court hence deserve to be construed with the widest

possible amplitude. These inherent powers are in consonance with the

nature of a High Court which ought to be, and has in fact been, invested

with power(s) to maintain its authority to prevent the process of law/Courts

from being obstructed or abused. It is a trite posit of jurisprudence that

though laws attempt to deal with all cases that may arise, the infinite variety

of circumstances which shape events and the imperfections of language

make it impossible to lay down provisions capable of governing every case,

which in fact arises. A High Court which exists for the furtherance of justice

in an indefatigable manner, should therefore, have unfettered power(s) to

deal with situations which, though not expressly provided for by the law,

need to be dealt with, to prevent injustice or the abuse of the process of law

and Courts. The juridical basis of these plenary power(s) is the authority; in

fact the seminal duty and responsibility of a High Court; to uphold, to

protect and to fulfill the judicial function of administering justice, in

                               7 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                        Page |8

accordance with law, in a regular, orderly and effective manner. In other

words; Section 528 of BNSS, 2023 reflects peerless and inherent powers, of

a High Court which may be invoked whenever it is just and equitable to do

so, in particular to ensure the observance of the due process of law, to

prevent vexation or oppression, to do justice nay substantial justice between

the parties and to secure the ends of justice. Therefore, the High Court, in

the exercise of its inherent power under section 528 BNSS, 2023 has the

discretion to quash a conviction where the parties have reached an amicable

settlement, provided that such compromise neither impinge upon the public

interest nor undermine the cause justice, as well as the substantial justice.
7.            Reverting to the facts of the case in hand, it is not disputed by

the concerned rival parties that an amicable settlement has been arrived at

between them and, therefore, compounding of the offence and necessary

further directions have been sought from this Court. A perusal of the

compromise/settlement dated 07.11.2025 stated to be arrived between the

parties reflects that the parties have sought to resolve their dispute(s) in toto

and bury the hatchet. Consequently, in the considered opinion of this Court,

the factual matrix of the case requires that the offence(s) ought to be

permitted to be compounded and the petitioner deserves to be acquitted.

7.1.          Keeping      in    view     the   entirety    of   the     attending

facts/circumstances of the case; especially factum of the petitioner having

suffered incarceration for about 3 months & 22 days after having been

convicted by the Sessions Court, the petitioner having faced the wrath of

criminal litigation since about the year 2018, the petitioner being a person

aged 47 years of age and the petitioner being pleaded to be a first time

offender; this Court does not deem it appropriate to saddle the petitioner

with costs.
8 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
CRR Nos.1973, 1979 & 1984 (O&M)                                     Page |9
8.           In view of the prevenient ratiocination, it is ordained thus:
(i)          The impugned judgment dated 31.05.2025 passed by the

learned Additional Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra & the judgment and order

of sentence dated 07.08.2023/10.08.2023 passed by Judicial Magistrate 1st

Class, Kurukshetra are set-aside and the petitioner is acquitted.
(ii)         The rival parties shall remain bound by the terms of the

settlement/compromise dated 07.11.2025 entered into between the parties

before the Mediation and Conciliation Center of this Court. In case of non-
compliance thereof, the aggrieved party shall be at liberty to seek recall of

this order, albeit upon showing sufficient cause. It is clarified that in case

non-compliance is found to be shown, the erring party may be saddled with

exemplary punitive measure(s).
(iii)        No order as to costs.

(iv)         Pending application(s), if any, shall also stands disposed of.

(v)          Photocopy of this order be placed on the file of other connected

case(s).




                                                   (SUMEET GOEL)
                                                     JUDGE
November 12, 2025
Naveen


             Whether speaking/reasoned:               Yes
             Whether reportable:                      Yes




                               9 of 9
::: Downloaded on - 14-11-2025 07:35:49 :::
