Title: Search
Court: High Court, in the fact
Date: 57 of 2020
Citation: SCC 750", the Hon'ble Supreme Court taking into
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/35984387/

[Cites
48
, Cited by
17
]
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
V. Padmakumar vs Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund ... on 12 March, 2020
NATIONAL COMPANY LAW APPELLATE TRIBUNAL, NEW DELHI

        Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 57 of 2020

IN THE MATTER OF:

V. Padmakumar                                              ...Appellant

Vs.

Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund (SASF) & Anr.       ...Respondents


Present:   For Appellant: - Mr. Jayesh Dolia, Mr. R. Chandrachud
           and Mr. Nitin Thukral, Advocates.
           For Respondents:- Mr. Abhijeet Sinha, Ms. Anju Bhushan
           Gupta and Mr. Kanishk Rana, Advocates for R-1.
           Mr. Parthasarathy Bose, Mr. Mayank Kshirsagar and Ms.
           Pankhuri, Advocates for R-2.


                      J U D G M E N T
SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA, J.
'M/s. Stressed Assets Stabilization Fund (SASF)'- ('Financial

Creditor') filed an application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and

Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ("I&B Code" for short) for initiation of the

'Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process' against 'M/s. Uthara Fashion

Knitwear Limited'- ('Corporate Debtor'). The Adjudicating Authority

(National Company Law Tribunal), Division Bench, Chennai, by

impugned order dated 21st November, 2019 admitted the application.
2.    Initially the plea that was taken by the Appellant is that the

Demand Notice was not served before the order of admission was passed
2
on 21st November, 2019. Otherwise, the Appellant would have shown that

the application under Section 7 was barred by limitation, the account of

the 'Corporate Debtor' having been declared as NPA in the year 2009 and

the case being decreed in the year 2013.
3.      On notice, the Respondents appeared and relied on decision of the

three Hon'ble Members of this Appellate Tribunal dated 22nd January,

2020 in "M/s. Ugro Capital Limited v. M/s. Bangalore Dehydration

and Drying Equipment Co. Pvt. Ltd. (BDDE)─ Company Appeal (AT)

(Insolvency) No. 984 of 2019". In the said case, the Hon'ble Members

of this Appellate Tribunal taking into consideration that the suit was

decreed on 22nd May, 2015, held that non-payment of debt thereafter

amounts to "committed default" in terms of Section 3(12) of the 'I&B Code'

for the first time and in terms of
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
,

for the purpose of filing application under
Section 7
of the 'I&B Code'

three years from the date the right to apply accrued for the first time from

the date of default in terms of decree.
4.      As the Judgment was doubted, the matter was referred to Larger

Bench to decide the issue.
5.      The brief facts of the case are as follows:
At the request of the 'Corporate Debtor', the 'Industrial

Development Bank of India' ('IDBI' for short) granted financial assistance

of Rs.600 lacs by way of Term Loan Agreement dated 2nd March, 2000 to

the 'Corporate Debtor' and the loan disbursed was primarily secured by


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
3
hypothecation of plant and machinery together with machinery spares,

tools and accessories, raw materials, semi-finished and finished goods,

consumable stores, book debts and such other movables and equitable

mortgage of properties at an estimated value of Rs.790.70 lakhs as was

specified in the Memorandum of Entry dated 24th August, 2000. The

account of the 'Corporate Debtor' was classified as "Non-Performing

Asset" on 29th May, 2002.
In the year 2003, at the instance of the 'IDBI Bank', Debt Recovery

proceeding was initiated under
Section 19
of the '
Recovery of Debts Due

to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993
' (OA No. 289 of 2003 now

re-numbered as O.A. No. 413 of 2007). It was decreed on 19th June, 2009

and Recovery Certificate was issued on 31st August, 2009, which was

reflected in the Balance Sheet dated 31st March, 2012.
6.      In the aforesaid background, it was argued that the application

under
Section 7
filed in the year 2019 was barred by limitation.
7.
Section 7
relates to 'initiation of corporate insolvency resolution

process by financial creditor'. As per
Section 7(1)
, the 'Financial Creditor'

may file an application for initiation of 'Corporate Insolvency Resolution

Process' against a 'Corporate Debtor' before the Adjudicating Authority

when 'a default has occurred'.
8.
In "
B.K. Educational Services Private Limited Vs. Parag Gupta

and Associates─
(2019) 11 Supreme Court Cases 633", the Hon'ble

Supreme Court held that for the purpose of
Section 7
, the Limitation Act,


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
4
1963 is applied from the date of inception of the Code. The Hon'ble

Supreme Court noticed Section 238A, inserted by
Insolvency and

Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act, 2018
, which relates to the

'proceedings' or 'appeals' before the Adjudicating Authority, the National

Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt

Recovery Appellate Tribunal.
However, as Section 238A does not deal with application under
Sections 7
,
9
or 10 of the 'I&B Code', the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in "
B.K. Educational Services Private Limited Vs. Parag Gupta

and Associates" (Supra
) being law of land under
Article 141
of the

Constitution of India,
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
will be

applicable to application under
Sections 7
,
9
or 10 of the 'I&B Code' since

the date of inception of the Code (commencement of the Code i.e. 1st

December, 2016).
9.
In "
Jignesh Shah and another vs. Union of India and another
- (2019) 10 SCC 750", the Hon'ble Supreme Court taking into

consideration the fact of filing of an application under
Sections 433
and
434
of the Companies Act, 2013 observed as follows:
"13. Dr Singhvi relied upon a number of judgments
                in which proceedings under
Section 433
of the
                Companies Act, 1956 had been initiated after suits
                for recovery had already been filed. These judgments
                have held that the existence of such suit cannot be
                construed as having either revived a period of


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
5
limitation or having extended it, insofar as the
                winding-up proceeding was concerned. Thus, in
Hariom Firestock Ltd. v. Sunjal Engg. (P) Ltd.
, a
                Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court, in the fact
                situation of a suit for recovery being filed prior to a
                winding-up petition being filed, opined:
"8. ... To my mind, there is a fallacy in
                        this argument because the test that is required
                        to be applied for purposes of ascertaining
                        whether the debt is in existence at a particular
                        point of time is the simple question as to
                        whether it would have been permissible to
                        institute a normal recovery proceeding before
                        a civil court in respect of that debt at that point
                        of time. Applying this test and dehors that fact
                        that the suit had already been filed, the
                        question is as to whether it would have been
                        permissible to institute a recovery proceeding
                        by way of a suit for enforcing that debt in the
                        year 1995, and the answer to that question
                        has to be in the negative. That being so, the
                        existence of the suit cannot be construed as
                        having either revived the period of limitation or
                        extended       it.   It       only   means    that     those
                        proceedings are pending but it does not give
                        the party a legal right to institute any other
                        proceedings on that basis. It is well-settled
                        law that the limitation is extended only in
                        certain     limited       situations    and     that     the
                        existence of a suit is not necessarily one of
                        them. In this view of the matter, the second



Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
6
point will have to be answered in favour of the
                        respondents and it will have to be held that
                        there was no enforceable claim in the year
                        1995, when the present petition was

                        instituted."
14. Likewise, a Single Judge of the Patna High
                Court in
Ferro Alloys Corpn. Ltd. v. Rajhans Steel
                Ltd.
also held:
"12. ... In my opinion, the contention
                        lacks merit. Simply because a suit for
                        realisation of the debt of the petitioner
                        Company against Opposite Party 1 was
                        instituted in the Calcutta High Court on its
                        original side, such institution of the suit and
                        the pendency thereof in that Court cannot
                        ensure for the benefit of the present winding-
                        up proceeding. The debt having become time-
                        barred when this petition was presented in
                        this Court, the same could not be legally
                        recoverable through this Court by resorting to
                        winding-up proceedings because the same
                        cannot legally be proved under
Section 520
of
                        the Act. It would have been altogether a
                        different matter if the petitioner Company
                        approached this Court for winding-up of
                        Opposite Party 1 after obtaining a decree from
                        the Calcutta High Court in Suit No. 1073 of
                        1987, and the decree remaining unsatisfied,
                        as provided in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
                        Section 434. Therefore, since the debt of the
                        petitioner Company has become time-barred


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
7
and cannot be legally proved in this Court in
                        course of the present proceedings, winding up
                        of Opposite Party 1 cannot be ordered due to
                        non-payment of the said debt."
Finally, the Hon'ble Supreme Court after taking into consideration

       the date of default observed: -
"21. The aforesaid judgments correctly hold that a

                suit for recovery based upon a cause of action that is

                within limitation cannot in any manner impact the

                separate and independent remedy of a winding-up

                proceeding. In law, when time begins to run, it can

                only be extended in the manner provided in the
Limitation Act
. For example, an acknowledgment of

                liability under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act would

                certainly extend the limitation period, but a suit for

                recovery, which is a separate and independent

                proceeding distinct from the remedy of winding up

                would, in no manner, impact the limitation within

                which the winding-up proceeding is to be filed, by

                somehow keeping the debt alive for the purpose of

                the winding-up proceeding.
xxx                     xxx             xxx




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
8
28. A reading of the aforesaid provisions would

                show that the starting point of the period of limitation

                is when the company is unable to pay its debts, and

                that Section 434 is a deeming provision which refers

                to three situations in which a company shall be

                deemed to be "unable to pay its debts" under Section

                433(e). In the first situation, if a demand is made by

                the creditor to whom the company is indebted in a

                sum exceeding one lakh then due, requiring the

                company to pay the sum so due, and the company

                has for three weeks thereafter "neglected to pay the

                sum", or to secure or compound for it to the

                reasonable satisfaction of the creditor. "Neglected to

                pay" would arise only on default to pay the sum due,

                which would clearly be a fixed date depending on

                the facts of each case. Equally in the second

                situation, if execution or other process is issued on a

                decree or order of any court or tribunal in favour of a

                creditor of the company, and is returned unsatisfied

                in whole or in part, default on the part of the debtor

                company occurs. This again is clearly a fixed date

                depending on the facts of each case. And in the third

                situation, it is necessary to prove to the "satisfaction

                of the Tribunal" that the company is unable to pay


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
9
its debts. Here again, the trigger point is the date on

                which default is committed, on account of which the

                company is unable to pay its debts. This again is a

                fixed date that can be proved on the facts of each

                case. Thus, Section 433(e) read with
Section 434
of

                the Companies Act, 1956 would show that the trigger

                point for the purpose of limitation for filing of a

                winding-up petition under Section 433(e) would be

                the date of default in payment of the debt in any of

                the three situations mentioned in Section 434."
10.     Similar issue fell for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in "
Gaurav Hargovindbhai Dave vs. Asset Reconstructions

Company (India) Limited and another
- (2019) 10 SCC 572". In the

said case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has noticed that the Respondent

was declared NPA on 21st July, 2011. The Bank had filed two OAs before

the Debts Recovery Tribunal in 2012 to recover the total debt. Taking

into consideration the facts, the Supreme Court held that the default

having taken place and as the account was declared NPA on 21st July,

2011, the application under
Section 7
was barred by limitation.
For proper appreciation, it is better to note the facts of the

judgment as follows: -
"In the present case, Respondent 2 was declared
                NPA on 21-7-2011. At that point of time, State Bank


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
10
of India filed two OAs in the Debts Recovery Tribunal
                in 2012 in order to recover a total debt of 50 crores
                of rupees. In the meanwhile, by an assignment dated
                28-3-2014, State Bank of India assigned the
                aforesaid debt to Respondent 1. The Debts Recovery
                Tribunal proceedings reached judgment on 10-6-
                2016, the Tribunal holding that the OAs filed before
                it were not maintainable for the reasons given
                therein.
2.       As against the aforesaid judgment, Special
                Civil Application Nos. 10621-622 were filed before
                the Gujarat High Court which resulted in the High
                Court remanding the aforesaid matter. From this
                order, a special leave petition was dismissed on 27-
                3-2017.
3.       An independent proceeding was then begun
                by Respondent 1 on 3-10-2017 being in the form of a
Section 7
application filed under the Insolvency and
                Bankruptcy Code in order to recover the original debt
                together with interest which now amounted to about
                124 crores of rupees. In Form-I that has statutorily to
                be annexed to the
Section 7
application in Column II
                which was the date on which default occurred, the
                date of the NPA i.e. 21-72011 was filled up. The
                NCLT applied
Article 62
of the
Limitation Act
which
                reads as follows:
"Description of suit        Period of Time from which period
                                                 limitation begins to run




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
11
62. To enforce              Twelve       When the money sued
                     payment of money            years        for becomes
                     secured by a                             due."
mortgage or
                     otherwise charged
                     upon immovable
                     property



                Applying the aforesaid Article, the NCLT reached the
                conclusion that since the limitation period was 12
                years from the date on which the money suit has
                become due, the aforesaid claim was filed within
                limitation     and hence           admitted    the
Section 7
application. The NCLAT vide the impugned judgment
                held, following its earlier judgments, that the time of
                limitation would begin running for the purposes of
                limitation only on and from 1-12-2016 which is the
                date on which the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
                was brought into force. Consequently, it dismissed
                the appeal.
4.       Mr Aditya Parolia, learned counsel appearing
                on behalf of the appellant has argued that
Article
                137
being a residuary article would apply on the
                facts of this case, and as right to sue accrued only
                on and from 21-7-2011, three years having elapsed
                since then in 2014, the
Section 7
application filed in
                2017 is clearly out of time. He has also referred to
                our judgment in
B.K. Educational Services (P) Ltd. v.
                Parag Gupta
and
Associates [B.K. Educational
                Services (P) Ltd. v. Parag Gupta and Associates
,
                (2019) 11 SCC 633] in order to buttress his argument
                that it is
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act
which will
                apply to the facts of this case.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
12
5.      Mr Debal Banerjee, learned Senior Counsel,
                appearing on behalf of the respondents, countered
                this by stressing, in particular, para 11 of B.K.
                Educational Services (P) Ltd. and reiterated the
                finding of the NCLT that it would be
Article 62
of the
Limitation Act
that would be attracted to the facts of
                this case. He further argued that, being a commercial
                Code, a commercial interpretation has to be given so
                as to make the Code workable.
6.      Having heard the learned counsel for both
                sides, what is apparent is that
Article 62
is out of the
                way on the ground that it would only apply to suits.
                The present case being "an application" which is
                filed under
Section 7
, would fall only within the
                residuary
Article 137.
As rightly pointed out by the
                learned     counsel      appearing    on   behalf   of   the
                appellant, time, therefore, begins to run on 21-7-
                2011, as a result of which the application filed under
Section 7
would clearly be time-barred. So far as Mr
                Banerjee's reliance on para 11 of B.K. Educational
                Services (P) Ltd., suffice it to say that the Report of
                the Insolvency Law Committee itself stated that the
                intent of the Code could not have been to give a new
                lease of life to debts which are already time-barred.
7.      This being the case, we fail to see how this
                para could possibly help the case of the respondents.
                Further, it is not for us to interpret, commercially or
                otherwise, articles of the
Limitation Act
when it is
                clear that a particular article gets attracted. It is well
                settled that there is no equity about limitation -
                judgments have stated that often time periods




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
13
provided by the
Limitation Act
can be arbitrary in
                nature.
8.      This being the case, the appeal is allowed and
                the judgments of the NCLT and NCLAT are set
                aside."
11.
In "
Vashdeo R. Bhojwani vs. Abhyudaya Co-operative Bank

Limited and another
- (2019) 9 SCC 158", the Hon'ble Supreme Court

referring to
B.K. Education
(Supra) observed: -
"3. Having heard the learned counsel for both
                parties, we are of the view that this is a case covered
                by our recent judgment in
B.K. Educational Services
                (P) Ltd. v. Parag Gupta and Associates
, para 42 of
                which reads as follows:
"42. It is thus clear that since the
Limitation
                        Act
is applicable to applications filed under
Sections 7
and
9
of the Code from the inception
                        of the Code,
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act
gets attracted. "The right to sue", therefore,
                        accrues when a default occurs. If the default
                        has occurred over three years prior to the date
                        of filing of the application, the application
                        would be barred under
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act
, save and except in those cases
                        where, in the facts of the case,
Section 5
of the
                        Limitation Act may be applied to condone the
                        delay in filing such application."
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
14
Dealing with
Section 23
of the Limitation Act, 1963, the
        Hon'ble Supreme Court observed:
"xxx                        xxx                xxx

                 Following this judgment, it is clear that when the
                recovery certificate dated 24-12-2001 was issued,
                this certificate injured effectively and completely the
                appellant's rights as a result of which limitation
                would have begun ticking"
12.     This Appellate Tribunal also considered the same issue in "
V

Hotels Limited vs. Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited -

Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.525
of 2019" decided on 11th

December, 2019, by referring to the aforesaid judgment of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court and observed: -
"17. In the present case, in fact the default took
                place much earlier. It is admitted that the debt of
                the 'Corporate Debtor' was declared NPA on 1st
                December, 2008 as has been noticed by the
                Adjudicating Authority.
xxx                       xxx         xxx
19.
Section 13(2)
of the '
SARFAESI Act, 2002
'
                reads as follows:
"13. Enforcement of security interest.--
......(2) Where any borrower, who is under a


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
15
liability to a secured creditor under a security
                        agreement, makes any default in repayment
                        of secured debt or any instalment thereof, and
                        his account in respect of such debt is classified
                        by the secured creditor as nonperforming
                        asset, then, the secured creditor may require
                        the borrower by notice in writing to discharge
                        in full his liabilities to the secured creditor
                        within sixty days from the date of notice
                        failing which the secured creditor shall be
                        entitled to exercise all or any of the rights
                        under sub-section (4).
20.     Admittedly, the 'Financial Creditor' took action
                under the '
SARFAESI Act, 2002
' in the year 2013.
                Therefore, the second time it become NPA in the year
                2013 when action under
Section 13(2)
was taken."



                Referring to
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963, this

        Appellate Tribunal further observed: -
"22. The aforesaid provision makes it clear that for
                the purpose of filing a suit or application in respect of
                any property or right, an acknowledgment of liability
                in respect of such property or right has to be made in
                writing duly signed by the party against whom such
                property or right is claimed.
23. In the present case, 'Asset Reconstruction
                Company (India) Ltd.'- ('Financial Creditor') has
                failed to bring on record any acknowledgment in


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
16
writing by the 'Corporate Debtor' or its authorised
                person acknowledging the liability in respect of debt.
                The Books of Account cannot be treated as an
                acknowledgment of liability in respect of debt
                payable to the 'Asset Reconstruction Company
                (India) Ltd.'- ('Financial Creditor') signed by the
                'Corporate Debtor' or its authorised signatory.
24.
In "
Sampuran Singh and Ors. v. Niranjan

                Kaur and Ors.─
(1999) 2 SCC 679", the Hon'ble
                Supreme Court observed that the acknowledgment,
                if any, has to be prior to the expiration of the
                prescribed period for filing the suit. In the present
                case, the account was declared NPA since 1st
                December, 2008 and therefore, the suit was filed.
Thereafter, any document or acknowledgment, even
                after the completion of the period of limitation i.e.
                December, 2011 cannot be relied upon. Further, in
                absence of any record of acknowledgment, the
                Appellant cannot derive any advantage of
Section 18
of the Limitation Act. For the said reason, we hold
                that the application under
Section 7
is barred by
                limitation, the accounts of the 'Corporate Debtor'
                having declared NPA on 1st December, 2008."
13.     The aforesaid decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and this

Appellate Tribunal make it clear that for the purpose of computing the

period of limitation of application under
Section 7
, the date of default is

'NPA' and hence a crucial date.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
17
14.
In "
Jignesh Shah and another vs. Union of India and another
- (2019) 10 SCC 750", the Hon'ble Supreme Court noticed the decision

of the Hon'ble Patna High Court in "
Ferro Alloys Corpn. Ltd. v. Rajhans

Steel Ltd.
", wherein the Hon'ble Patna High Court held that simply

because a suit for realisation of the debt of the petitioner Company

against Opposite Party 1 was instituted in the Calcutta High Court on its

original side, such institution of the suit and the pendency thereof in that

Court cannot enure for the benefit of the present winding-up proceeding.
15.
In the said case, Hon'ble Patna High
Court further held
that since

the debt of the petitioner Company has become time-barred and cannot

be legally proved in this Court in course of the present proceedings,

winding up of Opposite Party 1 cannot be ordered due to non-payment of

the said debt.
16.     Appreciating the aforesaid Judgment of the Hon'ble Patna High

Court, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "
Jignesh Shah and another vs.

Union of India and another
" (Supra) observed that the aforesaid

judgments correctly hold that a suit for recovery based upon a cause of

action that is within limitation cannot in any manner impact the separate

and independent remedy of a winding-up proceeding.
Thus, while holding so, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the

date of default to be taken into consideration for computing the period of

limitation of application under
Section 7
.            As the decision of Hon'ble




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
18
Supreme Court is binding, we hold that mere filing of a suit for recovery

or a decree passed by a Court cannot shift forward the date of default.
17.     A suit for recovery of money can be filed only when there is a default

of dues. Even if the decree is passed, the date of default cannot be shift

forward to the date of decree or date of payment for execution as a decree

can be executed within specified period i.e. 12 years. If it is executable

within the period of limitation, one cannot allege that there is a default of

decree or payment of dues.
18.     Therefore, we hold that a Judgment or a decree passed by a Court

for recovery of money by Civil Court/ Debt Recovery Tribunal cannot shift

forward the date of default for the purpose of computing the period for

filing an application under
Section 7
of the 'I&B Code'.
19.     In "M/s. Ugro Capital Limited v. M/s. Bangalore Dehydration

and Drying Equipment Co. Pvt. Ltd. (BDDE)─ Company Appeal (AT)

(Insolvency) No. 984 of 2019", as other decisions have not been brought

to the notice of the Hon'ble Bench, it cannot be cited as a precedent.
20.     It is next submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the

Respondents that the application under
Section 7
was not barred by

limitation as the 'Corporate Debtor' has acknowledged the claim in its

Audited Balance Sheet for the F.Y. 2011-2012 & 2012-2013 onwards.
21.     The question as to whether reflection of debt in a Balance Sheet of

the 'Corporate Debtor' prepared pursuant to Section 92 of the Companies




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
19
Act, 2013 amounts to acknowledgment of debt fell for consideration

before this Appellate Tribunal in "
Sh. G Eswara Rao v. Stressed Assets

Stabilisation Fund─ Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.
1097 of

2019". In the said case, this Appellate Tribunal by Judgment dated 7th

February, 2020 noticed the provision of acknowledgment in writing under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963 and
Section 92
of the Companies

Act, 2013. This Appellate Tribunal also noticed the decree passed by the

Debt Recovery Tribunal to find out whether the same can be held to be

acknowledgment of debt under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963,

and held:
"12. The date of default can be forwarded to a future date

          only under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963, which

          reads as follows: -
18. Effect of acknowledgment in writing.--
(1) Where, before the expiration of the prescribed
                period for a suit or application in respect of any
                property or right, an acknowledgment of liability in
                respect of such property or right has been made in
                writing signed by the party against whom such
                property or right is claimed, or by any person through
                whom he derives his title or liability, a fresh period of
                limitation shall be computed from the time when the
                acknowledgment was so signed.
(2) Where        the          writing   containing   the
                acknowledgment is undated, oral evidence may be
                given of the time when it was signed; but subject to
                the provisions of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of


Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
20
1872), oral evidence of its contents shall not be
                received.
Explanation.--For               the      purposes   of   this
                section,--
(a)     an acknowledgment may be sufficient
                                though it omits to specify the exact
                                nature of the property or right, or avers
                                that the time for payment, delivery,
                                performance or enjoyment has not yet
                                come or is accompanied by a refusal to
                                pay, deliver, perform or permit to enjoy,
                                or is coupled with a claim to set-off, or is
                                addressed to a person other than a
                                person entitled to the property or right;
(b)     the word "signed" means signed either
                                personally            or   by     an   agent    duly
                                authorised in this behalf; and
                        (c)     an application for the execution of a
                                decree or order shall not be deemed to
                                be an application in respect of any
                                property or right."
13. As the Decree passed by DRT on 17th August, 2018

           cannot be said to be an acknowledgement of debt by the

           'Corporate Debtor' in terms of
Section 18
of the Limitation

           Act, 1963 learned Counsel for the Respondent relied on

           Balance Sheet of the 'Corporate Debtor' for the years ending

           2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-2017 to suggest that the




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
21
'Corporate Debtor' admitted the liability in its Independent

           Auditor's Report and Balance Sheet.
14.
Section 92
of the Companies Act, 2013 mandates a

           Company to prepare a return in the prescribed form as they

           stood on the close of the financial year regarding providing

           different details. Under Section 92(5), if a Company fails to

           file its annual return under sub-section (4), before the expiry

           of the period specified, it is punishable with fine and the

           Officers of the Company on such default are also

           punishable with imprisonment or fine or both as under: -
Companies Act
section 92(1), (4), (5) and (6) to be reproduced

                "92. Annual return.--(1)               Every company shall
                prepare a return (hereinafter referred to as the
                annual return) in the prescribed form containing the
                particulars as they stood on the close of the financial
                year regarding--
(a) its registered office, principal business
                activities, particulars of its holding, subsidiary and
                associate companies;
(b) its shares, debentures and other securities
                and shareholding pattern;
***
(d) its members and debenture-holders along
                with changes therein since the close of the previous
                financial year;
(e) its promoters, directors, key managerial
                personnel along with changes therein since the close
                of the previous financial year;
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
22
(f) meetings of members or a class thereof,
                Board and its various committees along with
                attendance details;
(g) remuneration              of   directors   and      key
                managerial personnel;
(h) penalty or punishment imposed on the
                company, its directors or officers and details of
                compounding of offences and appeals made against
                such penalty or punishment;
(i) matters       relating         to   certification    of
                compliances, disclosures as may be prescribed;
(j) details, as may be prescribed, in respect of
                shares held by or on behalf of the Foreign
                Institutional Investors; and
(k) such other matters as may be prescribed,
                and signed by a director and the company secretary,
                or where there is no company secretary, by a
                company secretary in practice:
Provided that in relation to One Person
                Company and small company, the annual return
                shall be signed by the company secretary, or where
                there is no company secretary, by the director of the
                company.
Provided further that the Central Government
                may prescribe abridged form of annual return for
                "One Person Company, small company and such
                other class or classes of companies as may be
                prescribed".
xxx                       xxx                   xxx




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
23
(4) Every company shall file with the Registrar
                a copy of the annual return, within sixty days from
                the date on which the annual general meeting is held
                or where no annual general meeting is held in any
                year within sixty days from the date on which the
                annual general meeting should have been held
                together with the statement specifying the reasons
                for not holding the annual general meeting, with such
                fees or additional fees as may be prescribed.
(5) If a company fails to file its annual return
                under sub-section (4), before the expiry of the period
                specified [therein], the company shall be punishable
                with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
                rupees but which may extend to five lakhs rupees
                and every officer of the company who is in default
                shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
                which may extend to six months or with fine which
                shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which
                may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
(6) If a company secretary in practice certifies
                the annual return otherwise than in conformity with
                the requirements of this section or the rules made
                there under, he shall be punishable with fine which
                shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which
                may extend to five lakh rupees."
15.         As the filing of Balance Sheet/ Annual Return

            being mandatory under Section 92(4), failing of which

            attracts penal action under Section 92(5) & (6), the

            Balance Sheet / Annual Return of the 'Corporate Debtor'



Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
24
cannot be treated to be an acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963.
16.      If the argument is accepted that the Balance

               Sheet / Annual Return of the 'Corporate Debtor' amounts

               to acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the Limitation

               Act, 1963 then in such case, it is to be held that no

               limitation would be applicable because every year, it is

               mandatory for the 'Corporate Debtor' to file Balance

               Sheet/ Annual Return, which is not the law."
22.     In view of the aforesaid findings, agreeing with the decisions

aforesaid, at the cost of repetition, we hold:
(i)       As the filing of Balance Sheet/ Annual Return being

        mandatory under
Section 92(4)
of the Companies Act, 2013, failing

        of which attracts penal action under Section 92(5) & (6), the Balance

        Sheet / Annual Return of the 'Corporate Debtor' cannot be treated to

        be an acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act,

        1963.
(ii)      If the argument is accepted that the Balance Sheet / Annual

        Return of the 'Corporate Debtor' amounts to acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963 then in such case, it is to be

        held that no limitation would be applicable because every year, it is

        mandatory for the 'Corporate Debtor' to file Balance Sheet/ Annual

        Return, which is not the law.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
25
23.     In the present case, as we find that the account of the 'Corporate

Debtor' was declared NPA on 31st October, 2002 and decree was passed

on 19th June, 2009/ 31st August, 2009, we hold that the application

under
Section 7
filed by 'M/s. Stressed Assets Stabilization Fund (SASF)'

against 'M/s. Uthara Fashion Knitwear Limited'- ('Corporate Debtor') is

barred by limitation and was not maintainable.
24.     For the said reasons, we are not remitting the matter to the Bench

for fresh decision on facts. The impugned order dated 21st November,

2019 passed by the Adjudicating Authority (National Company Law

Tribunal), Division Bench, Chennai, is set aside.
25.     In   effect, order(s), passed by              the   Adjudicating Authority

appointing 'Interim Resolution Professional', declaring moratorium,

freezing of account, and all other order (s) passed by the Adjudicating

Authority pursuant to impugned order and action, if any, taken by the

'Interim Resolution Professional', including the advertisement, if any,

published in the newspaper calling for applications all such orders and

actions are declared illegal and are set aside. The application preferred

by Respondent under
Section 7
of the 'I&B Code' is dismissed. Learned

Adjudicating Authority will now close the proceeding. The 'Corporate

Debtor' (company) is released from all the rigour of law and is allowed

to function independently through its Board of Directors from

immediate effect.
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
26
26.     The Adjudicating Authority will fix the fee of 'Interim Resolution

Professional' and 'corporate insolvency resolution process cost' and 'M/s.

Stressed Assets Stabilization Fund (SASF)' will pay the fee of the 'Interim

Resolution Professional' and 'corporate insolvency resolution process

cost', as may be determined.
The appeal is allowed with aforesaid observation and direction.

However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no

order as to cost.
[Justice S.J. Mukhopadhaya]
                                                                      Chairperson



                                                           (Justice Bansi Lal Bhat)
                                                                 Member(Judicial)



                                                           (Justice Venugopal M.)
                                                                 Member(Judicial)



                                                               [Kanthi Narahari]
                                                              Member (Technical)
NEW DELHI
12th March, 2020

/AR/




Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.57 of 2020
           NATIONAL COMPANY LAW APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
                        NEW DELHI

               Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020

IN THE MATTER OF:
V. Padmakumar                                             ...Appellant

     Versus

Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund (SASF) & Anr.          ...Respondents



                           JUDGEMENT
                           (12th March, 2020)
A.I.S. Cheema, J. :
1.   I have had the opportunity to go through the draft of erudite

Judgement by the Hon'ble Chairperson. With great respect and all humility

at my command I have reservations regarding part of the Judgement where

it relates to Annual Returns/audited Balance Sheets.
2.   I am not recording here particulars of how the Appeal has arisen and

facts of the case and why present Bench of Chairperson and 4 Members

was required to be constituted as it is dealt with in the Judgement crafted

by Hon'ble Chairperson.
3.   I have gone through Judgement in the matter of "
V Hotels Limited

Vs. Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited" - Company Appeal

(AT) (Insolvency) No.
525 of 2019 and its finding in Para - 23 that "Books

of Account" cannot be treated as acknowledgement.
I have also gone

through the Judgement in the matter of "
Sh G Eswara Rao Vs Stressed
2
Assets Stabilisation Fund
" in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 1097

of 2019 dated 7th February, 2020, especially, Paragraphs - 15 and 16 of

that Judgement which is also relied on, and the finding recorded in

Para - 22 that:-
"(i)  As the filing of Balance Sheet/ Annual
                   Return being mandatory under
Section 92(4)
of
                   the Companies Act, 2013, failing of which
                   attracts penal action under Section 92(5) & (6),
                   the Balance Sheet / Annual Return of the
                   'Corporate Debtor' cannot be treated to be an
                   acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the
                   Limitation Act, 1963.
(ii)  If the argument is accepted that the
                   Balance Sheet / Annual Return of the
                   'Corporate       Debtor'      amounts         to
                   acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the
                   Limitation Act, 1963 then in such case, it is to
                   be held that no limitation would be applicable
                   because every year, it is mandatory for the
                   'Corporate Debtor' to file Balance Sheet/
                   Annual Return, which is not the law."
4.    With respect, I am unable to agree. I find that there are various

Judgements passed by various Hon'ble High Courts including High Court

of Delhi which have dealt with the Balance Sheet/Annual Returns of

Companies and where entries in the same have been treated as

"acknowledgement of debt" and even accepted the same for the purpose of
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963.
5.    In Judgement in the matter of "Gautam Sinha Versus UV Asset

Reconstruction Company Limited and others" in Company Appeal (AT)



                                          Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
3
(Ins) No.1382 of 2019 dated 25th February, 2020 passed by this Tribunal

by a Bench also comprising myself, I had the occasion to deal with some

of the Judgements relating to Balance Sheets/Annual Returns/Entries in

books of accounts. I will extract portion of the analysis of those

Judgements which I recorded in that Judgement of ours in "Gautam

Sinha" (supra). The said portions are as under:-
7. Before us, the learned Counsel for the Respondent No.1
       (Respondent - in short) referred to the Judgements in the
       matters of "
Sheetal Fabrics versus Coir Cushions Ltd
."
reported as 2005 SCC OnLine DEL 247; "
The
       Commissioner of Income Tax-III v. Shri Vardhman
       Overseas Ltd.
" reported as 2011 SCC OnLine DEL 5599 and
       "M/s Mahabir Cold Storage Versus C.I.T., Patna" reported
       as 1991 Supp (1) Supreme Court Cases 402. The argument
       is that acknowledgement of debt in the Balance Sheet also
       amounts to acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the
       Limitation Act.
8. The Judgement in the matter of "
The Commissioner of
       Income Tax
" (supra) was in the context of provisions of the
Income Tax Act
. In Para - 17 of the Judgement, it was
       observed:-
17. In the case before us, as rightly pointed out by
           the Tribunal, the assessee has not transferred the
           said amount from the creditors' account to its profit
           and loss account. The liability was shown in the
           balance sheet as on 31st March, 2002. The assessee
           being a limited company, this amounted to
           acknowledging the debts in favour of the
           creditors.
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963
           provides for effect of acknowledgement in writing. It
           says where before the expiration of the prescribed
           period for a suit in respect of any property or right,
           an acknowledgement of liability in respect of such
           property or right has been made in writing signed by
           the party against whom such property or right is
           claimed, a fresh period of limitation shall commence
           from the time when the acknowledgement was so
           signed. In an early case, in England, in Jones v.
Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
4
Bellgrove Properties, (1949) 2KB 700, it was held that
    a statement in a balance sheet of a company
    presented to a creditor- share holder of the company
    and duly signed by the directors constitutes an
    acknowledgement of the debt.
In
Mahabir Cold
    Storage v. CIT
(1991) 188 ITR 91, the Supreme
    Court held:
"The entries in the books of accounts of the appellant
    would amount to an acknowledgement of the liability
    to Messrs. Prayagchand Hanumanmal within the
    meaning of
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963,
    and extend the period of limitation for the discharge
    of the liability as debt."
In several judgments of this Court, this legal position
    has been accepted."
The Hon'ble High Court then referred to some of the
Judgements.*
9. In the Judgement in the matter of "Sheetal Fabrics"
(supra), Hon'ble High Court of Delhi referred to Judgement
in the matter of "In re. Padam Tea Company Ltd." AIR 1974
Calcutta 170 and referred to the said Judgement as under:-
"10. Let me first deal with the case of
Padam
    Tea Co. Ltd.
(supra). This case relied upon by learned
    Counsel for the respondent company in support of his
    plea that acknowledgement contained in the balance
    sheet could not be relied upon by the petitioner.
    However, on going through this judgment, one would
    clearly notice that it does not lay down the
    proposition which is sought to be advanced by the
    learned Counsel. That was a case where balance
    sheet was not confirmed or passed by the
    shareholders. The Court observed that such a
    balance sheet, before it could be relied upon, must be
    duly passed by the shareholders at the appropriate
    meeting and must be accompanied by a report, if any,
    made by the Directors for its validation. The principle
    of law laid down was that statement in the balance
    sheet indicating liability is to be read along with the
    Directors' report to see whether both so read would
    amount to an acknowledgement. There is no dispute
    about this proposition of law. However
,
in that case
,

                                 Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
5
the Court refused to accept entry in the balance sheet
as acknowledgement of debt because of two reasons:
(a) The balance sheet was not passed by the
      shareholders at the appropriate meeting.
(b) The Directors' report, in the balance sheet,
      contained the following statement:
11. Your Directors are of the opinion that the
liabilities shown in Schedules 'A' and 'B' of the
balance sheet excepting those of United Bank of
India, M/s. Goenka and Co. Private Ltd. and Caritt,
Moran and Co. Pvt. Ltd. are barred by limitations,
hence these liabilities are not confirmed by your
Directors.
12. These were the two considerations which
led the Court to conclude that even the debt shown
in the balance sheet in respect of the said petitioning
creditor would not amount to an acknowledgement as
contemplated under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act
and following observations in this regard are
reported:
"Therefore, in understanding the balance
      sheets and in explaining the statements in the
      balance-sheets, the balance-sheets together
      with the Directors' report must be taken
      together to find out the true meaning and
      purport of the statements. Counsel appearing
      for petitioning creditor contended that under
      the statute the balance sheet was a separate
      document and as such if there was unequivocal
      acknowledgement on the balance-sheet is a
      statutory document and perhaps is a separate
      document but the balance sheet not confirmed
      or passed by the shareholders at the
      appropriate meeting and in order to do so it
      must be accompanied by a report, if any, made
      by the Directors. Therefore, even though the
      balance sheet may be a separate document
      these two documents in the facts and
      circumstances of the case should be read
      together and should be construed together.
13. In the same breath, the High Court also
explained as to what would constitute an
acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the Limitation

                             Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
6
Act by referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court
    and this discussion would be found in the following
    passage:
"It was held by the Supreme Court in the case
          of L.C. Mills v. Aluminium Corpn. of India
          Ltd., (1971) 1 SCC 67 : AIR 1971 SC 1482, that
          it was clear that the statement on which the
          plea of acknowledgement did not create a new
          right of action but merely extended the period
          of limitation. The statement need not indicate
          the exact nature or the specific character of the
          liability. The words used in the statement in
          question must, however, relate to a present
          subsisting liability and indicate the existence of
          a jural relationship between the parties such
          as, for instance, that of a debtor and a creditor
          and the intention to admit such jural
          relationship. Such an intention need not,
          however, be in express terms and could be
          inferred by implication from the nature of the
          admission and the surrounding circumstances.
          Generally speaking, a liberal construction of
          the statement in question should be given. That
          of course did not mean that where a statement
          was made without intending to admit the
          existence of jural relationship, such intention
          should be fastened on the person making the
          statement by an involved and far-fetched
          reasoning. In order to find out the intention of
          the document by which acknowledgement was
          to be construed the document as a whole must
          be read and the intention of the parties must be
          found out from the total effect of the document
          read as a whole."
10. Then the High Court after referring to the Judgement in
the matter of "Padam Tea Company" examined the case,
which was before the Hon'ble High Court, and in the facts of
that matter, found that the list of Creditors maintained by
the Respondent Company before High Court or in the balance
sheet, was without any conditions or any strings attached."
[Emphasis supplied]




                                 Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
7
6.   Thereafter, this Tribunal in Judgement in the matter of "Gautam

Sinha" discussed facts regarding the Balance Sheet as was relied on in

that matter and concluded as under:-
"14. We have already referred to the Judgements in
           the matters of "Sheetal Fabrics" and "Padam Tea"
which show that the Balance Sheet would be required
           to be read with Directors' Report. In the Directors
           Report which is before us, there does not appear to
           be any acknowledgement of debt. The statement
           recorded by the Auditor with regard to the pending
           litigation in the facts of the present matter, we find,
           cannot be read as an acknowledgement by Company
           under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act."
7.   In the above reference to Judgement in the matter of "Gautam Sinha"
while referring the Judgement of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the

matter of "
The Commissioner of Income Tax-III v. Shri Vardhman

Overseas Ltd.
" reported as 2011 SCC OnLine DEL 5599, only part of Para
- 17* of that Judgement was reproduced.
In Judgement in the matter of

"
Commissioner of Income Tax
" (supra), the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi

after referring to Judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "M/s

Mahabir Cold Storage Versus C.I.T." (supra) and the legal positon in Para
- 17, observed that in several Judgements of the High Court, the legal

position has been accepted and added:-
"In
Daya Chand Uttam Prakash Jain vs. Santosh Devi
           Sharma
67 (1997) DLT 13, S.N. Kapoor J. applied the
           principle in a case where the primary question was
           whether a suit under
Order 37 CPC
could be filed on
           the basis of an acknowledgement.
In
Larsen & Tubro
           Ltd. v. Commercial Electric Works
67 (1997) DLT 387
           a Single Judge of this Court observed that it is well
           settled that a balance sheet of a company, where the

                                        Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
8
defendants had shown a particular amount as due to
              the plaintiff, would constitute an acknowledgement
              within the meaning of
Section 18
of the Limitation
              Act.
In
Rishi Pal Gupta v. S.J. Knitting & Finishing
              Mills Pvt. Ltd.
73 (1998) DLT 593, the same view was
              taken.
The last two decisions were cited by Geeta
              Mittal, J. in S.C. Gupta v. Allied Beverages Company
              Pvt. Ltd. (decided on 30/4/2007) and it was held that
              the acknowledgement made by a company in its
              balance sheet has the effect of extending the period of
              limitation for the purposes of
Section 18
of the
              Limitation Act.
In
Ambika Mills Ltd. Ahmedabad v.
              CIT Gujarat
(1964) 54 ITR 167, it was further held
              that a debt shown in a balance sheet of a company
              amounts to an acknowledgement for the purpose
              of
Section 19
of the Limitation Act and in order to be
              so,    the     balance     sheet   in    which     such
              acknowledgement is made need not be addressed to
              the creditors. In light of these authorities, it must be
              held that in the present case, the disclosure by the
              assessee company in its balance sheet as on 31st
              March, 2002 of the accounts of the sundry creditors
              amounts to an acknowledgement of the debts in their
              favour for the purposes of
Section 18
of
              the Limitation Act. The assessee's liability to the
              creditors, thus, subsisted and did not cease nor was
              it remitted by the creditors. The liability was
              enforceable in a court of law."
8.    Another Bench of this Tribunal has in the matter of "
Mr. Gouri

Prasad Goenka Vs. Punjab National Bank and another
" in Company

Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 28 of 2019 reported as MANU/NL/0518/2019

held that letter emanating from Corporate Debtor in that matter,

addressed to the Financial Creditor where Corporate Debtor agreed to

settle all outstanding dues of the Financial Creditor on "One Time

Settlement (OTS) basis" amounted to acknowledgment of outstanding debt

in writing.
Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
9
9.
In Judgement in the matter of "
ITC Limited Vs. Blue Coast

Hotels    Ltd.   and   Ors.
"    dated       19th   March,     2018   reported    as

MANU/SC/0263/2018, Hon'ble Supreme Court was dealing with question

whether    Sub-Section   (3A)    of
Section      13
of   Securitisation    and

Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest

Act, 2002 (SARFAESI - in short) was mandatory or directory in nature and

in the context, dealt with the matter where the Creditor had not replied to

debtors' representation and it was claimed that there was breach of
Section 13(3A)
. In that context, Hon'ble Supreme Court dealt with

attendant circumstances and the Notices which were issued by the

Creditor and the different proposals debtor made including a "Letter of

Undertaking" dated 25th November, 2013 and in Para - 35 of that

Judgement observed:-
Letter of Undertaking "Without Prejudice"
35. Much was sought to be made of the words
            "without prejudice" in the letter containing the
            undertaking that if the debt was not paid, the creditor
            could take over the secured assets. The submission
            on behalf of the debtor that the letter of undertaking
            was given in the course of negotiations and cannot be
            held to be an evidence of the acknowledgement of
            liability of the debtor, apart from being untenable in
            law, reiterates the attempt to evade liability and must
            be rejected. The submission that the letter was
            written without prejudice to the legal rights and
            remedies available under any law and therefore the
            acknowledgement or the undertaking has no legal
            effect must likewise be rejected. This letter is
            reminiscent of a letter that fell for consideration in
            Spencer's case as pointed out by Mr. Harish Salve,
            "as a Rule the debtor who writes such letters has no
            intention to bind himself further than is bound
            already, no intention of paying so long as he can avoid

                                              Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
10
payment, and nothing before his mind but a desire,
           somehow or other, to gain time and avert pressure."
It was argued in a subsequent case that an
           acknowledgment made "without prejudice" in the
           case of negotiations cannot be used as evidence of
           anything expressly or impliedly admitted. The House
           of Lords observed as follows:
"But when a statement is used as
                acknowledgement for the purpose of
Section
                29 (5)
, it is not being used as evidence of
                anything. The statement is not an evidence
                of an acknowledgement. It is the
                acknowledgement."
Therefore, the without prejudice Rule could have no
           application.
It said:
Here, the respondent, Mr. Rashid was not
                offering any concession. On the contrary, he
                was seeking one in respect of an undisputed
                debt. Neither an offer of payment nor actual
                payment.
We, thus, find that the mere introduction of the words
           "without prejudice" have no significance and the
           debtor clearly acknowledged the debt even after
           action was initiated under the Act and even after
           payment of a smaller sum, the debtor has
           consistently refused to pay up."
[Emphasis supplied]
10.   Carefully going through "ITC Ltd." Judgement, I am aware that the

context there was not
Limitation Act
but the substance emanating is that

even "Letter of Undertaking" issued "without prejudice" clause could

contain an "acknowledgement of debt".
Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
11
11.   Going through the Judgements of Hon'ble High Courts of Delhi and

other High courts, what appears to me is that it is well settled position of

law that Annual Returns/Audited Balance Sheets can be referred to and

relied on to see if contents therein amount to acknowledgement or not. The

above discussion of the Judgements shows that even after referring to the

Annual Reports/ Balance Sheets, there are instances where the contents

are not relied on to conclude that there is acknowledgement of debt. For

such reasons, I find it difficult to accept that only because
Section 129
of

the Companies Act, 2013 makes filing of Financial Statements and
Section

92
of the Companies Act, 2013 requires filing of Annual Returns by the

Company mandatory and the default attracts penal action, the same

cannot be treated as an acknowledgement under
Section 18
of the

Limitation Act, 1963. The law requires preparation of Financial Statements

and Annual Returns and filing of the same. The default in filing attracts

action. There is no compulsion or force regarding the contents disclosing

acknowledgement. This is clear from Para - 11 of the Judgement in the

matter of "In re. Padam Tea Company Ltd." (referred supra in Para - 5).

There the Directors recorded their opinion with regard to the liabilities

shown to say that the same are barred by limitations and hence, the

liabilities are not being confirmed by the Directors. Thus the provisions of

the
Companies Act
mandating filing of Annual Return/Balance Sheet

cannot be treated as if they are coercive and so should be treated as

inadmissible.
Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
12
12.   Apart from Judgements of the High Courts, as referred, Judgement

in the matter of "
Mahabir Cold Storage
" (supra) clearly recorded in Para -

12 that entries in the books of accounts would amount to an

acknowledgement of the liability within the meaning of
Section 18
of the

Limitation Act, 1963.
As such, I have difficulty with the Judgement in the

matter of "
V Hotels Limited
" (supra) relied on where in Para - 23, the Bench

of this Tribunal observed that "The books of accounts cannot be treated

as an acknowledgement of liability in respect of debt ............." If books of

accounts can be considered, I find it difficult to hold that the audited

Balance Sheet prepared on the basis of books of accounts, needs to be

ignored.
Apart from the above, in Judgement in the matter of "
Kashinath

Sankarappa Wani Vs. New Akot Cotton Ginning
&; Pressing Co., Ltd."

reported as MANU/SC/0007/1958, while dealing with Resolution of Board

of Directors and while considering Balance Sheet with regard to question

of limitation, Hon'ble Supreme Court examined the Resolution and also

the Balance Sheet and in the context of the facts of that matter came to a

conclusion that the Resolution or the Balance Sheet did not help the

Appellant. It is not that it was held that for the purpose of limitation,

Balance Sheet cannot be considered at all.
13.   In the matter of "A.V. Murthy Versus B.S. Nagabasavanna"
reported as (2002) 2 SCC 642, while dealing with a complaint under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 when dispute came

up whether the cheque drawn was in respect of a debt or liability not legally


                                          Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
13
enforceable, and the Additional Sessions Judge had held that there was

error in taking cognizance of the offence, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed

in Para - 5 as under:-
"Moreover, in the instant case, the appellant has
           submitted before us that the respondent, in his
           balance sheet prepared for every year subsequent to
           the loan advanced by the appellant, had shown the
           amount as deposits from friends. A copy of the
           balance sheet as on 31-3-1997 is also produced
           before us. If the amount borrowed by the respondent
           is shown in the balance sheet, it may amount to
           acknowledgement and the creditor might have a fresh
           period of limitation from the date on which the
           acknowledgement was made. However, we do not
           express any final opinion on all these aspects, as
           these are matters to be agitated before the Magistrate
           by way of defence of the respondent."
[Emphasis supplied]
14.   Judgement in the matter of "
A.V. Murthy
" (supra) was relied on by

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of "
S. Natarajan Vs. Sama

Dharman
" reported as MANU/SC/0698/2014. Thus, what appears to me

is that even the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that if the amount

borrowed by the party is shown in the Balance Sheet, it may amount to

acknowledgement and the creditor might have a fresh period of limitation

from the date on which the acknowledgement was made.
15.   Thus, I find it is settled law appearing from the Judgements of the

High Court of Delhi and other High Courts that Balance Sheets can be

looked into to see if there is acknowledgement of debt. Perusing

Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court I find that even Hon'ble Supreme

                                        Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
14
Court has looked into Balance Sheets and Books of Account to see if there

is Acknowledgement of Liability. If the amount borrowed is shown in the

Balance Sheet, it may amount to Acknowledgement. I find the Judgements

of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India are binding and Balance Sheets cannot

be outright ignored.
16.   For the above reasons, I am of the opinion that Annual

Returns/Audited     Balance   Sheets,    one   time   settlement   proposals,

proposals to restructure loans, by whatever names called, cannot be

simply ignored as debarred from consideration and in every given matter,

it would be a question of applying the facts to the law and vice versa, to

see whether or not the specific contents, spell out an acknowledgement

under the
Limitation Act
.
16.   For such reasons, in my view, the present Company Appeal (AT)

(Insolvency) No.57 of 2020 should be placed before the regular Bench to

consider whether or not the audited Balance Sheets and OTS proposals

referred would on facts read with the law, amount to acknowledgements,

so as to save limitation.
17.   Except for the above aspects, I agree with the erudite Judgement of

the Hon'ble Chairperson.
18.   I direct accordingly.
[Justice A.I.S. Cheema]
                                                           Member (Judicial)
rs
                                         Company Appeal (AT) (Ins) No.57 of 2020
