Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 3 AIR 2017
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1652, (2019) 17 SCALE 37, (2020) 1 BANKCAS 277, (2020) 1 MAD LJ 65
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/37755267/

[Cites
50
, Cited by
322
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Embassy Property Developments Pvt. ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 3 December, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1652, (2019) 17 SCALE 37, (2020) 1 BANKCAS 277, (2020) 1 MAD LJ 65
Author:
V. Ramasubramanian
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Aniruddha Bose
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    Civil Appeal No. 9170 of 2019
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 22596 of 2019)



M/s Embassy Property Developments Pvt. Ltd.                             ...Appellant(s)

                                             Versus

 State of Karnataka & Ors.                                              ...Respondent(s)
                                                  WITH
                                    Civil Appeal No. 9171 of 2019
                             (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 22684 of 2019)

                                                   and
                                    Civil Appeal No. 9172 of 2019
                             (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 22724 of 2019)

                                           JUDGMENT
V. Ramasubramanian, J.
1.              Leave Granted.
2.              Two seminal questions of importance namely:­
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
i) Whether the High Court ought to interfere, under
Date: 2019.12.03
17:00:14 IST
Reason:
Article 226/227 of the Constitution, with an Order
1
passed by the National Company Law Tribunal in a

           proceeding under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,

           2016, ignoring the availability of a statutory remedy of

           appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal

           and if so, under what circumstances; and
ii)     Whether questions of fraud can be inquired into by

     the NCLT/NCLAT in the proceedings initiated under the

     Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016,

arise for our consideration in these appeals.

Brief background facts
3.   There are three appeals on hand, one filed by the

Resolution Applicant, the second filed by the Corporate Debtor

through the Resolution Professional and the third filed by the

Committee of Creditors, all of which challenge an Interim

Order passed by the Division Bench of High Court of

Karnataka in a writ petition, staying the operation of a

direction    contained   in   the   order   of   the   NCLT,   on   a

Miscellaneous Application filed by the Resolution Professional.
2
4.     The background facts leading to the filing of the above

appeals, in brief, are as follows:
i)     A company by name M/s. Udhyaman Investments Pvt.
Ltd. which is the twelfth Respondent in the first of these three
appeals, claiming to be a Financial Creditor, moved an
application before the NCLT Chennai, under Section 7 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to
as the IBC, 2016), against M/s. Tiffins Barytes Asbestos &
Paints Ltd., the Corporate Debtor (which is the fourth
Respondent in the first of these three appeals and which is
also the appellant in the next appeal).
ii)    By an Order dated 12.03.2018, NCLT Chennai admitted
the application, ordered the commencement of the Corporate
Insolvency Resolution Process and appointed an Interim
Resolution Professional. Consequently, a Moratorium was also
declared in terms of Section 14 of the IBC, 2016.
iii)   At that time, the Corporate Debtor held a mining lease
granted by the Government of Karnataka, which was to expire
by 25.05.2018. Though a notice for premature termination of
the lease had already been issued on 09.08.2017, on the
allegation of violation of statutory rules and the terms and
conditions of the lease deed, no order of termination had been
passed till the date of initiation of the Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process (hereinafter referred to as CIRP).
3
iv)   Therefore, the Interim Resolution Professional appointed
by NCLT addressed a letter dated 14.03.2018 to the Chairman
of the Monitoring Committee as well as the Director of Mines &
Geology informing them of the commencement of CIRP. He
also wrote a letter dated 21.04.2018 to the Director of Mines &
Geology, seeking the benefit of deemed extension of the lease
beyond 25.05.2018 upto 31.3.2020 in terms of Section 8­A (6)
of the
Mines & Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957
(hereinafter referred to as
MMDR Act, 1957
).
v)    Finding   that   there   was   no   response,   the   Interim
Resolution Professional filed a writ petition in WP No. 23075 of
2018 on the file of the High Court of Karnataka, seeking a
declaration that the mining lease should be deemed to be valid
upto 31.03.2020 in terms of
Section 8A(6)
of the MMDR Act,
1957.
vi)   During the pendency of the writ petition, the Government
of Karnataka passed an Order dated 26.09.2018, rejecting the
proposal for deemed extension, on the ground that the
Corporate Debtor had contravened not only the terms and
conditions of the Lease Deed but also the provisions of Rule 37
of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and Rule 24 of the
Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy
Minerals) Rules, 2016.
4
vii)   In view of the Order of rejection passed by the
Government of Karnataka, the Corporate Debtor, represented
by the Interim Resolution Professional, withdrew the Writ
Petition No.23075 of 2018, on 28.09.2018, with liberty to file a
fresh writ petition.
viii) However, instead of filing a fresh writ petition (in
accordance     with     the       liberty       sought),    the   Resolution
Professional moved a Miscellaneous Application No.632 of
2018, before the NCLT, Chennai praying for setting aside the
Order of the Government of Karnataka, and seeking a
declaration that the lease should be deemed to be valid upto
31.03.2020    and      also   a     consequential          direction   to   the
Government of Karnataka to execute Supplement Lease Deeds
for the period upto 31.03.2020.
ix)    By an Order dated 11.12.2018, NCLT, Chennai allowed
the Miscellaneous Application setting aside the Order of the
Government of Karnataka on the ground that the same was in
violation of the moratorium declared on 12.03.2018 in terms
of
Section 14(1)
of IBC, 2016. Consequently the Tribunal
directed the Government of Karnataka to execute Supplement
Lease Deeds in favour of the Corporate Debtor for the period
upto 31.03.2020.
5
x)   Aggrieved by the order of the NCLT, Chennai, the
Government of Karnataka moved a writ petition in WP
No.5002 of 2019, before the High Court of Karnataka. When
the writ petition came up for hearing, it was conceded by the
Resolution Professional before the High Court of Karnataka
that the order of the NCLT could be set aside and the matter
relegated to the Tribunal, for a decision on merits, after giving
an opportunity to the State to respond to the reliefs sought in
the Miscellaneous Application. It is relevant to note here that
the Order of the NCLT dated 11.12.2018, was passed ex­parte,
on the ground that the State did not choose to appear despite
service of notice.
xi) Therefore, by an Order dated 22.03.2019, the High Court
of Karnataka set aside the Order of the NCLT and remanded
the matter back to NCLT for a fresh consideration of the
Miscellaneous Application No.632 of 2018.
xii) Thereafter, the State of Karnataka filed a Statement of
Objections before the NCLT, primarily raising two objections,
one relating to the jurisdiction of the NCLT to adjudicate upon
disputes arising out of the grant of mining leases under the
MMDR Act, 1957
, between the State­Lessor and the Lessee
and another relating to the fraudulent and collusive manner in
which the entire resolution process was initiated by the related
parties of the Corporate Debtor themselves, solely with a view
to corner the benefits of the mining lease.
6
xiii) Overruling the objections of the State, the NCLT Chennai
passed an Order dated 03.05.2019 allowing the Miscellaneous
Application, setting aside the order of rejection and directing
the Government of Karnataka to execute Supplemental Lease
Deeds.
xiv) Challenging the Order of the NCLT, Chennai, the
Government of Karnataka moved a writ petition in WP
No.41029 of 2019 before the High Court of Karnataka. When
the writ petition came up for orders as to admission, the
Corporate Debtor represented by the Resolution Professional
appeared through counsel and took notice and sought time to
get instructions. Therefore, the High Court, by an Order dated
12.09.2019 adjourned the matter to 23.09.2019 and granted a
stay of operation of the direction contained in the impugned
Order of the Tribunal. Interim Stay was necessitated in view of
a Contempt Application moved by the Resolution Professional
before the NCLT against the Government of Karnataka for
their failure to execute Supplement Lease deeds.
xv) It is against the said ad Interim Order granted by the High
Court    that   the   Resolution   Applicant,   the   Resolution
Professional and the Committee of Creditors have come up
with the present appeals.
7
Rival Contentions
5.   Sh. K. V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Counsel appearing

on behalf of the Resolution Applicant assailed the impugned

Order on the ground that when an efficacious alternative

remedy is available under Section 61 of IBC, 2016, the High

Court of Karnataka ought not to have entertained a writ

petition and that too against an Order passed by the Chennai

Bench of NCLT. He drew our attention to a series of

judgments, wherein it was held that when a statutory forum is

created for the redressal of grievances, a writ petition should

not be entertained. Since the essence of IBC, 2016 is the

revival of a Corporate Debtor and the resolution of its

problems to enable it to survive as a going concern, through

the maximization of the value of its assets, the learned Senior

Counsel     contended     that    the    Interim    Resolution

Professional/Resolution Professional had a right to move the

NCLT for appropriate reliefs for the preservation of the

properties of the Corporate Debtor and therefore the only way

the steps taken by the Resolution Professional could be set at
8
naught, is to take recourse to the provisions of the IBC alone.

Relying upon the observations made by this Court in a couple

of decisions that IBC, 2016 is a unified umbrella of code, the

learned Senior Counsel contended that the remedies provided

thereunder are all pervasive and exclusive.
6.    Sh. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for

the   Resolution   Applicant   supplemented     the   aforesaid

arguments and contended that though he would not go to the

extent of saying that the jurisdiction of the High Court stood

completely ousted, the High Court was obliged to switch over

to the hands off mode, in matters of this nature. The learned

Senior Counsel also contended that the NCLT has already

approved the Resolution Plan, by an order dated 12.06.2019

and that therefore the High Court cannot do anything that will

tinker with or destroy the very Resolution Plan approved by

the NCLT.
7.    Sh. Kapil Sibal, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for

the Resolution Professional contended that the whole object of

IBC, 2016 will get defeated, if the Orders of NCLT are declared
9
amenable to review by the High Court under Article 226/227.

He also contended that the provisions of IBC, 2016 are given

overriding effect under Section 238, over all other statutes. It

is his further contention that after taking a stand in their first

writ petition in WP No.5002 of 2019 that the dispute relating

to the refusal to grant deemed extension of the mining lease

falls squarely within the jurisdiction of the Mining Tribunal

and after raising a plea that the rejection of the benefit of

deemed extension, ought to have been challenged by way of a

revision before the Central Government under
Section 30
of

the MMDR Act, 1957 the State of Karnataka agreed to go back

to the NCLT for raising all contentions. Therefore, according to

the learned counsel, it was not open to the Government to

question the jurisdiction of the NCLT in the next round of

litigation. Since the expression “Property” as defined in
Section 3 (27)
of IBC, 2016 includes every description of

interest including present or future or vested or contingent

interest arising out of or incidental to property, and also since

the right to deemed extension of lease would come within the
10
purview of the expression “Property”, it was contended by the

learned Senior Counsel that the Resolution Professional has a

duty to preserve the property. The only ground on which the

Government     of   Karnataka    opposed    the   Miscellaneous

Application of the Resolution Professional, according to the

learned Senior Counsel, was fraud and collusion on the part of

the Corporate Debtor and the creditor who initiated the CIRP.

Therefore, it is contended by him that in view of the sweep of

the jurisdiction conferred upon NCLT under Section 60 (5) (c)

of the IBC, 2016, the Tribunal was entitled to investigate even

into allegations of fraud. Once it is conceded that NCLT will

have jurisdiction even to enquire into allegations of fraud, then

the question of invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court

under
Article 226
as against an order passed by NCLT,

according to the learned counsel, does not arise. Any

recognition by this court, of the jurisdiction of the High Court

under
Article 226
to interfere with the Orders of the NCLT

under IBC, 2016, according to the learned Senior Counsel,

would completely derail the resolution process which is bound
11
to happen within a time frame. Therefore, he appealed that the

Order of the High Court should be set aside on the ground of

lack of jurisdiction.
8.   Sh. Arvind P. Datar and Sh. E. Om Prakash, learned

Senior Counsel appearing for the Committee of Creditors

submitted that IBC, 2016 being a complete code in itself does

not provide any room for challenging the Orders of NCLT,

otherwise than in a manner prescribed by the code itself. What

was sought by the Resolution Professional, according to the

learned Senior Counsel, was a mere recognition of the

statutory right of deemed extension of lease conferred by
Section 8A
of the MMDR Act, 1957 and that therefore NCLT

cannot be taken to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in

it in law, so as to enable the High Court to invoke the

jurisdiction under
Article 226.
9.   In response, Sh. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney

General submitted that if a case falls under the category of

inherent lack of jurisdiction on the part of a Tribunal, the

exercise of jurisdiction by the Tribunal would certainly be
12
amenable to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article
226. Since the contours of jurisdiction of NCLT are defined in

Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub­section (5) of Section 60 and

also since the powers of the NCLT are defined in Sub­section

(4) of Section 60, to be akin to those of the Debts Recovery

Tribunal under the
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and

Financial Institutions Act
of 1993 (hereinafter referred to as
DRT Act, 1993
), it was contended by the learned Attorney

General that the jurisdiction of the NCLT is confined only to

contractual matters inter­parties. An order passed by a

statutory/quasi­judicial   authority   under   certain   special

enactments such as the
MMDR Act, 1957
falls in the realm of

public law and hence it was contended by the learned Attorney

General that the NCLT would have no power of judicial review

of such orders. The learned Attorney General also drew our

attention to the minutes of the 10 th meeting of the Committee

of Creditors held on 27.02.2019, in which a Company other

than the present Resolution Applicant was recorded to have

made a better offer. But the present Resolution Applicant was
13
able to have his plan approved, despite the offer being lesser,

only because they were willing to take the risk of the mining

lease not being renewed. Therefore, it was his contention that

a person who was willing to take a chance, cannot now take

shelter under the approval of the Resolution Plan. On the

contention that the Government of Karnataka had an

efficacious alternative remedy before the NCLAT, the learned

Attorney General submitted, on the basis of the decision in

Barnard and Others vs. National Dock Labour Board and

Others1 that when an inferior Tribunal passes an Order which

is a nullity, the superior Court need not drive the party to the

appellate forum stipulated by the Act.
The learned Attorney

General also relied upon the decision of this Court in
The

State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Mohammad Nooh.2
Question No. 1
10. In the backdrop of the facts narrated and in the light of

the rival contentions extracted above, the first question that

arises for consideration is as to whether the High Court ought

1 (1953) 2 WLR 995
2 (1958) SCR 595
14
to interfere, under Article 226/227 of the Constitution, with

an order passed by NCLT in a proceeding under the IBC, 2016,

despite the availability of a statutory alternative remedy of

appeal to NCLAT.
11. It is beyond any pale of doubt that IBC, 2016 is a

complete Code in itself. As observed by this Court in M/s
Innoventive Industries Limited vs. ICICI Bank,3
it is an

exhaustive code on the subject matter of insolvency in relation

to corporate entities and others. It is also true that IBC, 2016

is a single Unified Umbrella Code, covering the entire gamut of

the law relating to insolvency resolution of corporate persons

and others in a time bound manner. The code provides a

three­tier mechanism namely (i) the NCLT, which is the

Adjudicating Authority (ii) the NCLAT which is the appellate

authority and (iii) this court as the final authority, for dealing

with all issues that may arise in relation to the reorganisation

and insolvency resolution of corporate persons. In so far as

insolvency resolution of corporate debtors and personal


3 AIR 2017 SC 4084
15
guarantors are concerned, any order passed by the NCLT is

appealable to NCLAT under Section 61 of the IBC, 2016 and

the orders of the NCLAT are amenable to the appellate

jurisdiction of this court under Section 62. It is in this context

that the action of the State of Karnataka in by­passing the

remedy of appeal to NCLAT and the act of the High Court in

entertaining the writ petition against the order of the NCLT are

being questioned.
12. For finding an answer to the question on hand, the scope

of the jurisdiction and the nature of the powers exercised by –
(i) the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution and (ii)

the NCLT and NCLAT under the provisions of IBC, 2016 are to

be seen.
Jurisdiction and the powers of the High Court under
Article 226
13. What is recognized by
Article 226 (1)
is the power of every

High Court to issue (i) directions, (ii) orders or (iii) writs. They

can be issued to (i) any person or (ii) authority including the

Government. They may be issued (i) for the enforcement of any
16
of the rights conferred by Part III and (ii) for any other

purpose. But the exercise of the power recognized by Clause

(1) of
Article 226
, is restricted by the territorial jurisdiction of

the High Court, determined either by its geographical location

or by the place where the cause of action, in whole or in part,

arose. While the nature of the power exercised by the High

Court is delineated in Clause (1) of
Article 226
, the jurisdiction

of the High Court for the exercise of such power, is spelt out in

both Clauses (1) and (2) of
Article 226.
14. Traditionally, the jurisdiction under
Article 226
was

considered as limited to ensuring that the judicial or quasi­

judicial tribunals or administrative bodies do not exercise their

powers in excess of their statutory limits. But in view of the

use of the expression “any person” in
Article 226 (1)
, courts

recognized that the jurisdiction of the High Court extended

even over private individuals, provided the nature of the duties

performed by such private individuals, are public in nature.

Therefore, the remedies provided under
Article 226
are public

law remedies, which stand in contrast to the remedies
17
available in private law. As observed by this Court in
Nilabati

Behera @ Babita Behera vs. State of Orissa
, 4 public law

proceedings serve a different purpose than private law

proceedings.
15. One of the well recognized exceptions to the self­imposed

restraint of the High Courts, in cases where a statutory

alternative remedy of appeal is available, is the lack of

jurisdiction         on   the   part   of   the   statutory/quasi­judicial

authority, against whose order a judicial review is sought.

Traditionally, English courts maintained a distinction between

cases where a statutory/quasi­judicial authority exercised a

jurisdiction not vested in it in law and cases where there was a

wrongful exercise of the available jurisdiction. An “error of

jurisdiction” was always distinguished from “in excess of

jurisdiction”, until the advent of the decision rendered by the

House of Lords, by a majority of 3:2 in
Anisminic Ltd. vs.

Foreign Compensation Commission.5 After
acknowledging

that a confusion had been created by the observations made in

4 (1993) 2 SCC 746
5 (1969) 2 WLR 163
18
Reg. vs. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Armah 6 to

the effect that if a Tribunal has jurisdiction to go right, it

has jurisdiction to go wrong, it was held in Anisminic that

the real question was not whether an authority made a wrong

decision but whether they enquired into and decided a matter

which they had no right to consider.
16. Anisminic, hailed as a break­through and a legal

landmark (see In Re Racal Communications Ltd7) abolished

the old distinction between errors of law that went to

jurisdiction and errors of law that did not. Anisminic was

hailed in O’Reilly vs. Mackman8        to have liberated English

public law from the fetters that the courts had theretofore

imposed upon themselves so far as determinations of inferior

courts and statutory tribunals were concerned, by drawing

esoteric distinctions between errors of law committed by such

tribunals that went to their jurisdiction, and errors of law

committed by them within their jurisdiction.


6 (1968) AC 192
7 (1981) AC 374
8 (1983) 2 AC 237
19
17. But In Re Racal made a distinction between courts of

law      on      the      one      hand        and        administrative            tribunal/

administrative authority on the other and held that in so far

as (inferior) courts of law are concerned, the subtle distinction

between errors of law that went to jurisdiction and errors of

law that did not, would still survive, if the decisions of such

courts are declared by the Statute to be final and conclusive.

Thus one distinction was gone with Anisminic, but another

was born with Re Racal. This could be seen from the after

effects of Anisminic.9
18. Interestingly just four days before the House of Lords

delivered the judgment in Anisminic (on 17.12.1968), an

identical view was taken by a three member bench of this

court (delivered on 13.12.1968) in Official Trustee, West

9  Anisminic had its own quota of problems. Prof. Wade, as pointed out in
R. v. Lord President
of the Privy Council Ex
p. Page, [1993] A.C. 682, seems to have opined that the true effect of
Anisminic was still in doubt.
People like Sir John Laws, quoted by Prof. Paul Craig, and which
was extracted in the decision in Regina (Privacy International) v. Investigatory Powers Tribunal,
[2019] UKSC 22, seems to have opined that once the distinction between jurisdictional and non-
jurisdictional errors was discarded, there was no longer any need for the ultra vires principle
and that ultra vires is, in truth, a fig-leaf which has enabled the courts to intervene in decisions
without an assertion of judicial power which too nakedly confronts the established authority of
the Executive or other public bodies. According to Sir John Laws, Anisminic has produced the
historical irony that with all its emphasis on nullity, it nevertheless erected the legal milestone
which pointed towards a public law jurisprudence in which the concept of voidness and the
ultra vires doctrine have become redundant. In Regina (Privacy International) the U.K Supreme
court also quoted the editors of De Smith’s Judicial Review to the effect: “The distinction
between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional error is ultimately based upon foundations of
sand. Much of the superstructure has already crumbled.
What remains is likely quickly to fall
away as the courts rightly insist that all administrative action should be simply, lawful, whether
or not jurisdictionally lawful.”
20
Bengal & Others vs. Sachindra Nath Chatterjee &

Another,10
approving the view taken by the Full bench of the

Calcutta High Court in Hirday Nath Roy vs. Ramachandra

Barna Sarma.11 It was held therein that “before a court can

be held to have jurisdiction to decide a particular matter

it must not only have jurisdiction to try the suit brought,

but must also have the authority to pass the orders

sought for.”                 This court also pointed out that it is not

sufficient that it has some jurisdiction in relation to the

subject matter of the suit, but its jurisdiction must include (1)

the power to hear and decide the questions at issue and (2) the

power to grant the relief asked for.
This decision in Official

Trustee was followed in a recent decision in Indian Farmers

Fertiliser Co­operative
Ltd. vs. Bhadra Products,12
quite

independent of Anisminic and its followers.
19. Though the decision in Official Trustee preceded

Anisminic and can proudly be claimed as the Indian

10 (1969) 3 SCR 92
11 ILR LXVIII Calcutta 138
12 (2018) 2 SCC 534
21
precursor to an English legal landmark, several subsequent

decisions of this court considered Anisminic alone to have

provided the breakthrough. In Mafatlal Industries & Others

vs. Union of India,13 Paripoornan, J. provided the list of

Indian cases which cited Anisminic with approval. They are:
(
1) Union of India vs. Tarachand Gupta & Bros.
, (
1971) 1 SCC
486
(2) A. R. Antulay vs. R. S. Nayak & Another
, (
1988) 2 SCC 602
       (3) R. B. Shreeram Durga Prasad & Fatehchand Nursing
       Das vs. Settlement Commission (IT & WT) & Another
,
       (
1989) 1 SCC 628
       (4) Associated Engineering Co. vs. Govt. of Andhra
       Pradesh & Another
, (
1991) 4 SCC 93 and
       (5) Shiv Kumar Chadha vs. Municipal Corporation of
       Delhi & Others
, (1993) 3 SCC 161
20. But in
M.L. Sethi vs. R.P. Kapur,14 K. K. Mathew, J.
,

made certain interesting observations about Anisminic. The

learned Judge observed that the effect of the dicta in

Anisminic is to reduce the difference between jurisdictional

error and error of law within jurisdiction almost to a vanishing
13 (1997) 5 SCC 536
14 (1972) 2 SCC 427
22
point and that it came perilously close to saying that there is

jurisdiction if the decision is right in law, but none if it is

wrong. Anisminic, according to him virtually left a court or

tribunal with no margin of legal error.
21. Again in Hari Prasad Mulshanker Trivedi vs. V.B

Raju,15 K. K. Mathew, J., speaking for the Constitution Bench,

pointed out that though the dividing line between lack of

jurisdiction or power and the erroneous exercise of it has

become thin with Anisminic, the distinction had not been

wiped out completely.
22. But           it   is        relevant   to   note   that   Official

Trustee/Anisminic and what followed both, were mostly in

the context of the power of the superior court to interfere with

the      decisions          of     subordinate    courts/tribunals   or

administrative authorities. Most of these decisions were not in

the context of the exercise of jurisdiction despite the

availability of alternative remedy. That there exists such a

distinction between (i) cases where the jurisdiction of a


15 (1974) 3 SCC 415
23
superior court is questioned on the basis of ouster clauses and
(ii) cases where the exercise of jurisdiction by a superior court

is questioned on the ground of availability of alternative

remedy, was recognized even in Anisminic, when Lord Reid

referred to the decision in Smith vs. East Elloe Rural

District Council16 as posing some difficulty.
As a result, the

Court of Appeal held in
R vs. Secretary of State
for the

Environment, Ex p. Ostler17               that the availability of a

statutory right to challenge within a specified time limit,

among        other   points,   provided    a   sufficient   basis   for

distinguishing Anisminic. This was taken note of by the UK

Supreme Court in Regina (Privacy International). Therefore

the question whether the error committed by an administrative

authority/tribunal or a court of law went to jurisdiction or

whether it was within jurisdiction may still be relevant to test

whether a statutory alternative remedy should be allowed to

be bypassed or not.
16 (1956) AC 736
17 (1977) QB 122
24
23. In several cases, both in England and India, the ancient

rule     stated           by   Willes,   J.,   in   Wolverhampton   New

Waterworks Co. vs. Hawkesford18 to the effect that where a

liability not existing at Common Law is created by a statute,

which also gives a special and particular remedy for enforcing

it, the remedy provided by the statute must be followed, has

been quoted with approval.
For instance,
Union Bank of

India vs. Satyawati Tandon19
held that the availability of a

remedy of appeal under the
DRT Act, 1993
and
SARFAESI Act,

2002
should deter the High Courts from exercising the

jurisdiction under
Article 226.
Similarly, the availability of

remedy of appeal under
Section 173
of the Motor Vehicles Act,

1988 as against an award of the Accidents Claims Tribunal

was held in
Sadhana Lodh vs. National Insurance Co.20
as

sufficient for the High Court to refuse to exercise its

supervisory jurisdiction.
The same principle was applied in (
1)

Nivedita Sharma vs. Cellular Operators Association
of


18 [1859] 6 CB (NS) 336
19 (2010) 8 SCC 110
20 (2003) 3 SCC 524
25
India21 and (2) Cicily Kallarackal vs. Vehicle Factory22 in

relation to the awards passed by the special fora constituted

under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
.
24.      Therefore in so far as the question of exercise of the

power conferred by
Article 226
, despite the availability of a

statutory alternative remedy, is concerned, Anisminic cannot

be relied upon. The distinction between the lack of jurisdiction

and the wrongful exercise of the available jurisdiction, should

certainly be taken into account by High Courts, when
Article

226
is sought to be invoked bypassing a statutory alternative

remedy provided by a special statute.
25. On the basis of this principle, let us now see whether the

case of the State of Karnataka fell under the category of (1)

lack of jurisdiction on the part of the NCLT to issue a direction

in relation to a matter covered by
MMDR Act, 1957
and the

Statutory Rules issued thereunder or (2) mere wrongful

exercise of a recognised jurisdiction, say for instance, asking




21 (2011) 14 SCC 337
22 (2012) 8 SCC 524
26
a wrong question or applying a wrong test or granting a

wrong relief.
26.
The MMDR Act, 1957
is a Parliamentary enactment

traceable to Entry 54 of the Union List in Seventh Schedule of

the Constitution. The object of the Act as it stood originally,

was the regulation of mines and development of minerals.

After the Amendment Act 38 of 1999, the object of the Act is to

provide for the development and regulation of mines and

minerals.
Section 2
of the Act declares that it is expedient in

public interest that the Union should take under its control,

the regulation of mines and the development of minerals.
Section 4 (1)
of the Act prohibits the undertaking of mining

operations (and reconnaissance and prospecting operations),

in any area, except under and in accordance with the terms

and conditions of a mining lease granted under the Act and

the Rules made thereunder. After the insertion of Sub­section

(1A) in
Section 4
, by the Amendment Act 38 of 1999, even

transportation or storage of any mineral otherwise than in

accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made
27
thereunder is prohibited.
The Act
also imposes restrictions on

the grant of mining leases.
Section 8A
of the Act, inserted by

the Amendment Act 10 of 2015 provides for deemed grant and

deemed extension of different kinds. Primarily
Section 8A
applies only to minerals other than those specified in Parts A

and B of the First Schedule. In so far as minor minerals are

concerned, the State government is empowered to make rules

for regulating the grant of mining leases. It is important to

note that
Section 19
of the Act declares any mining lease

granted,   renewed   or   acquired    in   contravention   of   the

provisions of the Act or any rule or order made thereunder to

be void and of no effect.
The Act
confers powers of search,

entry and inspection upon officers authorised by the Central

or State governments.
Section 30
of the Act empowers the

Central government, either of its own motion or on an

application made by the aggrieved party, to revise any order

made by a State government in exercise of the powers

conferred under the Act with respect to any mineral other than

a minor mineral. The procedure for filing a revision is
28
prescribed in Rule 54 and the method of disposal of such

revisions is prescribed in Rule 55 of the Mineral Concession

Rules, 1960.
27.     Though in Thressiamma Jacob vs. Deptt. of Mining &

Geology,23 this court held that the mineral wealth in the sub­

soil would go along with the ownership of the land, the

question of entitlement of the government to charge royalty

was left open, as it was pending reference to the constitution

bench. But in the case on hand, the land which formed the

subject matter of mining lease, belongs to the State of

Karnataka.            The liberties    and   privileges granted to   the

Corporate Debtor by the Government of Karnataka under the

mining lease, are delineated in Part IV of the mining lease. The

mining lease was issued in accordance with the statutory rules

namely       Mineral Concession          Rules, 1960.    Therefore the

relationship           between   the    Corporate    Debtor   and    the

Government of Karnataka under the mining lease is not just

contractual but also statutorily governed. As we have indicated

elsewhere, the
MMDR Act, 1957
is a Parliamentary enactment
23 (2013) 9 SCC 725
29
traceable to Entry 54 in List I of the Seventh Schedule. This

Entry 54 speaks about regulation of mines and development of

minerals to     the   extent    to   which    such     regulation      and

development under the control of the Union, is declared by

Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest. In fact

the expression “public interest” is used only in 3 out of

97 Entries in List I, one of which is Entry 54, the other

two being Entries 52 and 56. Interestingly, Entry 23 in List

II does not use the expression “public interest”, though it also

deals with regulation of mines and mineral development,

subject to the provisions of List I. It is this element of “public

interest” that finds a place in
Section 2
of the MMDR Act,

1957, in the form of a declaration.
Section 2
of MMDR Act,

1957 reads as follows:
“It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public
           interest that Union should take under its control the
           regulation of mines and the development of minerals to
           the extent hereinafter provided.”
28.   Therefore as rightly contended by the learned Attorney

General, the decision of the Government of Karnataka to
30
refuse the benefit of deemed extension of lease, is in the public

law domain and hence the correctness of the said decision can

be called into question only in a superior court which is vested

with the power of judicial review over administrative action.
The NCLT, being a creature of a special statute to discharge

certain specific functions, cannot be elevated to the status of a

superior court having the power of judicial review over

administrative action. Judicial review, as observed by this

court in Sub­Committee on
Judicial Accountability vs.

Union of India,24
flows from the concept of a higher law,

namely the Constitution. Paragraph 61 of
the said decision
captures this position as follows:
“But  where, as in this country and unlike in England,
               there is a written Constitution which constitutes the
               fundamental and in that sense a “higher law” and acts
               as a limitation upon the legislature and other organs of
               the State as grantees under the Constitution, the usual
               incidents of parliamentary sovereignty do not obtain
               and the concept is one of ‘limited government’. Judicial
               review is, indeed, an incident of and flows from this
               concept of the fundamental and the higher law being
               the touchstone of the limits of the powers of the various
               organs of the State which derive power and authority
               under the Constitution and that the judicial wing is the
               interpreter of the Constitution and, therefore, of the
               limits of authority of the different organs of the State. It

24 (1991) 4 SCC 699
31
is to be noted that the British Parliament with the
          Crown is supreme and its powers are unlimited and
          courts have no power of judicial review of legislation.”
29.    The NCLT is not even a Civil Court, which has

jurisdiction by virtue of
Section 9
of the Code of Civil

Procedure to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits, of

which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred.
Therefore NCLT can exercise only such powers within the

contours of jurisdiction as prescribed by the statute, the law

in respect of which, it is called upon to administer. Hence, let

us now see the jurisdiction and powers conferred upon NCLT.

Jurisdiction and powers of NCLT
30.   NCLT and NCLAT are constituted, not under the IBC,

2016 but under
Sections 408
and
410
of the Companies Act,

2013. Without specifically defining the powers and functions

of the NCLT,
Section 408
of the Companies Act, 2013 simply

states that the Central Government shall constitute a National

Company Law Tribunal, to exercise and discharge such

powers and functions as are or may be, conferred on it by or

under the
Companies Act
or any other law for the time being
32
in force. Insofar as NCLAT is concerned,
Section 410
of the

Companies Act merely states that the Central Government

shall constitute an Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals

against the Orders of the Tribunal. The matters that fall within

the jurisdiction of the NCLT, under the
Companies Act, 2013
,

lie scattered all over the
Companies Act
. Therefore,
Sections

420
and
424
of the Companies Act, 2013 indicate in broad

terms, merely the procedure to be followed by the NCLT and

NCLAT before passing orders. However, there are no separate

provisions in the
Companies Act
, exclusively dealing with the

jurisdiction and powers of NCLT.
31. In contrast, Sub­sections (4) and (5) of Section 60 of IBC,

2016 give an indication respectively about the powers and

jurisdiction of the NCLT. Section 60 in entirety reads as

follows:­

            “Adjudicating Authority for corporate persons.­(1)
            The Adjudicating Authority, in relation to insolvency
            resolution and liquidation for corporate persons
            including corporate debtors and personal guarantors
            thereof shall be the National Company Law Tribunal
            having territorial jurisdiction over the place where the
            registered office of the corporate person is located.
            (2) Without prejudice to sub­section (1) and
            notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
33
this Code, where a corporate insolvency resolution
process or liquidation proceeding of a corporate debtor
is pending before the National Company Law Tribunal,
an application relating to the insolvency resolution or
[liquidation or bankruptcy of a corporate guarantor or
personal guarantor, as the case may be, of such
corporate debtor] shall be filed before such National
Company Law Tribunal.
(3) An insolvency resolution process or [liquidation or
bankruptcy of a corporate guarantor or personal
guarantor, as the case may be, of the corporate debtor]
pending in any court or tribunal shall stand transferred
to the Adjudicating Authority dealing with insolvency
resolution process or liquidation proceeding of such
corporate debtor.
(4)    The National Company Law Tribunal shall be
vested with all the powers of the Debt Recovery
Tribunal as contemplated under Part III in of this Code
for the purpose of sub­section (2).
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any other law for the time being in force, the National
Company Law Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to
entertain or dispose of –
(a)    any application or proceeding by or against
       the corporate debtor or corporate person;
(b)    any claim made by or against the corporate
       debtor or corporate person, including
       claims by or against any of its subsidiaries
       situated in India; and
(c)    any question of priorities or any question of
       law or facts, arising out of or in relation to
       the insolvency resolution or liquidation
       proceedings of the corporate debtor or
       corporate person under this Code.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963) or in any other law for
the time being in force, in computing the period of
limitation specified for any suit or application by or
against a corporate debtor for which an order of
moratorium has been made under this Part, the period
during which such moratorium is in place shall be
excluded.”
34
32.   Sub­section (4) of Section 60 of IBC, 2016 states that the

NCLT will have all the powers of the DRT as contemplated

under Part III of the Code for the purposes of Sub­section (2).

Sub­section (2) deals with a situation where the insolvency

resolution or liquidation or bankruptcy of a corporate

guarantor or personal guarantor of a corporate debtor is taken

up, when CIRP or liquidation proceeding of such a corporate

debtor is already pending before NCLT.      The object of Sub­

section (2) is to group together (A) the CIRP or liquidation

proceeding of a corporate debtor and (B) the insolvency

resolution or liquidation or bankruptcy of a corporate

guarantor or personal guarantor of the very same corporate

debtor, so that a single Forum may deal with both. This is to

ensure that the CIRP of a corporate debtor and the insolvency

resolution of the individual guarantors of the very same

corporate debtor do not proceed on different tracks, before

different Fora, leading to conflict of interests, situations or

decisions.
35
33. If the object of Sub­section (2) of Section 60 is to ensure

that the insolvency resolutions of the corporate debtor and its

guarantors are dealt with together, then the question that

arises is as to why there should be a reference to the powers of

the DRT in Sub­section (4). The answer to this question is to

be found in Section 179 of IBC, 2016. Under Section 179 (1), it

is the DRT which is the Adjudicating Authority in relation to

insolvency matters of individuals and firms. This is in contrast

to Section 60(1) which names the NCLT as the Adjudicating

Authority in relation to insolvency resolution and liquidation of

corporate persons including corporate debtors and personal

guarantors. The expression “personal guarantor” is defined in
Section 5(22)
to mean an individual who is the surety in a

contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor. Therefore the

object of Sub­section (2) of Section 60 is to avoid any

confusion that may arise on account of Section 179(1) and to

ensure that whenever a CIRP is initiated against a corporate

debtor, NCLT will be the Adjudicating Authority not only in

respect of such corporate debtor but also in respect of the
36
individual who stood as surety to such corporate debtor,

notwithstanding the naming of the DRT under Section 179(1)

as the Adjudicating Authority for the insolvency resolution of

individuals. This is also why Sub­section (2) of Section 60 uses

the   phrase   “notwithstanding     anything   to   the   contrary

contained in this Code”.
34. Sub­section (2) of Section 179 confers jurisdiction upon

DRT to entertain and dispose of (i) any suit or proceeding by or

against the individual debtor (ii) any claim made by or against

the individual debtor and (iii) any question of priorities or any

other question whether of law or facts arising out of or in

relation to insolvency and bankruptcy of the individual debtor.

Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub­section (2) of Section 179 are

identical to Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub­section (5) of Section
60. Therefore the only reason why Sub­section (4) is

incorporated in Section 60 is to ensure that NCLT will exercise

jurisdiction – (1) not only to entertain and dispose of matters

referred to in Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub­section (5) of

Section 60 in relation to the corporate debtor, (2) but also to
37
entertain and dispose of the matters specified in Clauses (a),
(b) and (c) of Sub­section (2) of Section 179, whenever the

contingency stated in Section 60(2) arises.
35.     Interestingly there are separate provisions both in Part II

and Part III of IBC, 2016 ousting the jurisdiction of civil

courts. While Section 63 contained in Part II bars the

jurisdiction of a civil court in respect of any matter on which

NCLT or NCLAT will have jurisdiction, Section 180 contained

in Part III bars the jurisdiction of civil courts in respect of any

matter on which DRT or DRAT has jurisdiction. But curiously

there is something more in Section 180 than what is found in

Section 63, which can be appreciated if both are presented in

a tabular column.
Section 63                             Section 180
      No civil court or authority shall       (1) No civil court or authority
      have jurisdiction to entertain any     shall have jurisdiction to
      suit or proceedings in respect of      entertain     any     suit    or
      any matter on which National           proceedings in respect of any
      Company Law Tribunal or the            matter on which the Debt
      National Company Law Appellate         Recovery Tribunal or the Debt
Tribunal has jurisdiction under this   Recovery Appellate Tribunal
      Code. Civil court not to have          has jurisdiction under this
      jurisdiction.                          Code.
(2) No injunction shall be
                                             granted by any court, tribunal
                                             or authority in respect of any
38
action taken, or to be taken, in
                                   pursuance of any power
                                   conferred on the Debt Recovery
                                   Tribunal or the Debt Recovery
                                   Appellate Tribunal by or under
                                   this Code.
Though what is found in Sub­section (2) of Section 180 is not

found in the corresponding provision in Part II namely, Section

63, a similar provision is incorporated in an unrelated

provision namely Section 64, which primarily deals with

expeditious disposal of applications. Thus, there appears to

be some mix­up.     However, we are not concerned about the

same in this case and we have made a reference to the same

only because of Sub­section (4) of Section 60, vesting upon the

NCLT, all the powers of the DRT.
36.   From a combined reading of Sub­section (4) and Sub­

section (2) of Section 60 with Section 179, it is clear that none

of them hold the key to the question as to whether NCLT

would have jurisdiction over a decision taken by the
39
government under the provisions of
MMDR Act, 1957
and the

Rules issued there­under. The only provision which can

probably throw light on this question would be Sub­section (5)

of Section 60, as it speaks about the jurisdiction of the NCLT.

Clause (c) of Sub­section (5) of Section 60 is very broad in its

sweep, in that it speaks about any question of law or fact,

arising out of or in relation to insolvency resolution. But a

decision taken by the government or a statutory authority in

relation to a matter which is in the realm of public law,

cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be brought within the

fold of the phrase “arising out of or in relation to the

insolvency resolution” appearing in Clause (c) of Sub­section

(5). Let us take for instance a case where a corporate debtor

had suffered an order at the hands of the Income Tax

Appellate Tribunal, at the time of initiation of CIRP. If Section

60(5)(c) of IBC is interpreted to include all questions of law or

facts    under     the     sky,    an     Interim     Resolution

Professional/Resolution Professional will then claim a right to

challenge the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
40
before the NCLT, instead of moving a statutory appeal under
Section 260A
of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Therefore the

jurisdiction of the NCLT delineated in Section 60(5) cannot be

stretched so far as to bring absurd results. (It will be a

different matter, if proceedings under statutes like
Income Tax

Act
had attained finality, fastening a liability upon the

corporate debtor, since, in such cases, the dues payable to the

Government would come within the meaning of the expression

“operational    debt”   under
Section   5(21)
,   making     the

Government an “operational creditor” in terms of
Section 5(20)
.

The moment the dues to the Government are crystalised and

what remains is only payment, the claim of the Government

will have to be adjudicated and paid only in a manner

prescribed in the resolution plan as approved by the

Adjudicating Authority, namely the NCLT. )
37.   It was argued by all the learned Senior Counsel on the

side of the appellants that an Interim Resolution Professional

is duty bound under
Section 20(1)
to preserve the value of the

property   of   the   Corporate   Debtor    and   that   the   word
41
“property” is interpreted in
Section 3(27)
to include even

actionable claims as well as every description of interest,

present or future or vested or contingent interest arising

out of or incidental to property and that therefore the

Interim Resolution Professional is entitled to move the NCLT

for appropriate orders, on the basis that lease is a property

right and NCLT has jurisdiction under Section 60(5) to

entertain any claim by the Corporate Debtor.
38.   But the said argument cannot be sustained for the

simple reason that the duties of a resolution professional are

entirely different from the jurisdiction and powers of NCLT. In

fact
Section 20(1)
cannot be read in isolation, but has to be

read in conjunction with
Section 18(f)(vi)
of the IBC, 2016

together with the Explanation thereunder.
Section 18 (f) (vi)
reads as follows:­

          “18. Duties of interim resolution professional. ­ The
          interim resolution professional shall perform the
          following duties, namely:­
(a) …
(b)…
(c) …
(d)…
42
(e)…
(f) take control and custody of any asset over which the
           corporate debtor has ownership rights as recorded in
           the balance sheet of the corporate debtor, or with
           information utility or the depository of securities or any
           other registry that records the ownership of assets
           including—
(i)…
(ii)…
(iii)…
(iv) …
(v)…
(vi) assets subject to the determination of ownership by
           a court or authority;
(g) …
           Explanation. ­ For the purposes of this section, the term
           ‘assets’ shall not include the following namely:­
(a)      assets owned by a third party in possession of
           the corporate debtor held under trust or under
           contractual arrangements including bailment;
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the
           corporate debtor; and
(c) such other assets as may be notified by the Central
           Government in consultation with any financial sector
           regulator.”
39.   If NCLT has been conferred with jurisdiction to decide all

types of claims to property, of the corporate debtor,
Section

18(f)(vi)
would not have made the task of the interim resolution

professional in taking control and custody of an asset over

which the corporate debtor has ownership rights, subject to

the determination of ownership by a court or other
43
authority. In fact an asset owned by a third party, but which

is in the possession of the corporate debtor under contractual

arrangements, is specifically kept out of the definition of the

term “assets” under the Explanation to
Section 18
. This

assumes significance in view of the language used in
Sections

18
and
25
in contrast to the language employed in
Section 20
.
Section 18
speaks about the duties of the interim resolution

professional and
Section 25
speaks about the duties of

resolution professional. These two provisions use the word

“assets”, while
Section 20(1)
uses the word “property” together

with the word “value”.
Sections 18
and
25
do not use the

expression “property”. Another important aspect is that under
Section 25 (2) (b)
of IBC, 2016, the resolution professional is

obliged to represent and act on behalf of the corporate debtor

with third parties and exercise rights for the benefit of the

corporate debtor in judicial, quasi­judicial and arbitration

proceedings.
Section 25(1)
and
25(2)(b)
reads as follows:
“25. Duties of resolution professional –
          (1) It shall be the duty of the resolution professional to
          preserve and protect the assets of the corporate
44
debtor, including the continued business operations of
          the corporate debtor.
(2) For the purposes of sub­section (1), the resolution
          professional shall undertake the following actions:­
(a)………….
(b) represent and act on behalf of the corporate debtor
          with third parties, exercise rights for the benefit of
          the corporate debtor in judicial, quasi judicial
          and arbitration proceedings.”


This shows that wherever the corporate debtor has to exercise

rights in judicial, quasi­judicial proceedings, the resolution

professional cannot short­circuit the same and bring a claim

before NCLT taking advantage of Section 60(5).
40.   Therefore in the light of the statutory scheme as culled

out from various provisions of the IBC, 2016 it is clear that

wherever the corporate debtor has to exercise a right that falls

outside the purview of the IBC, 2016 especially in the realm of

the   public   law,   they   cannot,      through    the   resolution

professional, take a bypass and go before NCLT for the

enforcement of such a right.
41.   In fact the Resolution Professional in this case appears

to have understood this legal position correctly, in the initial

stages. This is why when the Government of Karnataka did not
45
grant the benefit of deemed extension, even after the expiry of

the lease on 25.05.2018, the Resolution Professional moved

the High Court by way of a writ petition in WP No. 23075 of

2018. The prayer made in WP No. 23075 of 2018 was for a

declaration that the mining lease should be deemed to be valid

upto 31.03.2020. If NCLT was omnipotent, the Resolution

Professional would have moved the NCLT itself for such a

declaration. But he did not, as he understood the legal

position correctly.
42. After the filing of the first writ petition (WP No. 23075 of

2018), the Government of Karnataka passed an order dated

26.09.2018 rejecting the claim. Therefore the Resolution

Professional, representing the Corporate Debtor filed a memo

before the High Court seeking withdrawal of the writ petition

“with liberty to file a fresh writ petition”. However the

High Court, while dismissing the writ petition by order dated

28.09.2018 was little considerate and it disposed of the writ

petition as withdrawn with liberty to take recourse to

appropriate remedies in accordance with law. Perhaps taking
46
advantage of this liberty, the Resolution Applicant moved the

NCLT against the order of rejection passed by the Government

of Karnataka. If NCLT was not considered by the Resolution

Professional, in the first instance, to be empowered to issue a

declaration of deemed extension of lease, we fail to understand

how NCLT could be considered to have the power of judicial

review over the order of rejection.
43.   The fact that the Government of Karnataka agreed in the

second writ petition WP No. 5002 of 2019 to go back to the

NCLT and contest the Miscellaneous Application filed by the

Resolution Professional, would not tantamount to conceding

the jurisdiction of NCLT. In any case a tribunal which is the

creature of a statute cannot be clothed with a jurisdiction, by

any concession made by a party.
44. A lot of stress was made on the effect of
Section 14
of

IBC, 2016 on the deemed extension of lease. But we do not

think that the moratorium provided for in
Section 14
could

have any impact upon the right of the Government to refuse

the extension of lease. The purpose of moratorium is only to
47
preserve the status quo and not to create a new right.

Therefore nothing turns on
Section 14
of IBC, 2016. Even
Section 14 (1) (d)
, of IBC, 2016, which prohibits, during the

period of moratorium, the recovery of any property by an

owner or lessor where such property is occupied by or in the

possession of the corporate debtor, will not go to the rescue of

the corporate debtor, since what is prohibited therein, is only

the right not to be dispossessed, but not the right to have

renewal of the lease of such property. In fact the right not to

be dispossessed, found in
Section 14 (1) (d)
, will have nothing

to do with the rights conferred by a mining lease especially on

a government land. What is granted under the deed of mining

lease in ML 2293 dated 04.01.2001, by the Government of

Karnataka, to the Corporate Debtor, was the right to mine,

excavate and recover iron ore and red oxide for a specified

period of time. The Deed of Lease contains a Schedule divided

into several parts. Part­I of the Schedule describes the location

and area of the lease. Part­II indicates the liberties and

privileges of the lessee. The restrictions and conditions subject
48
to which the grant can be enjoyed are found in Part­III of the

Schedule. The liberties, powers and privileges reserved to the

Government, despite the grant, are indicated in Part­IV. This

Part­IV entitles the Government to work on other minerals

(other than iron ore and red oxide) on the same land, even

during the subsistence of the lease. Therefore, what was

granted to the Corporate Debtor was not an exclusive

possession of the area in question, so as to enable the

Resolution Professional to invoke
Section 14 (1) (d)
.
Section 14

(1) (d)
may have no application to situations of this nature.
45. Therefore, in fine, our answer to the first question would

be that NCLT did not have jurisdiction to entertain an

application against the Government of Karnataka for a

direction to execute Supplemental Lease Deeds for the

extension of the mining lease. Since NCLT chose to exercise a

jurisdiction not vested in it in law, the High Court of

Karnataka was justified in entertaining the writ petition, on

the basis that NCLT was coram non judice.
49
Question No. 2
46.   The second question that arises for our consideration is

as to whether NCLT is competent to enquire into allegations of

fraud, especially in the matter of the very initiation of CIRP.
47. This question has arisen, in view of the stand taken by

the Government of Karnataka before the High Court that they

chose to challenge the order of the NCLT before the High

Court, instead of before NCLAT, due to the fraudulent and

collusive manner in which the CIRP was initiated by one of the

related parties of the Corporate Debtor themselves. In the writ

petition filed by the Government of Karnataka before the High

Court, it was specifically pleaded (i) that the Managing

Director of the Corporate Debtor entered into an agreement on

06.02.2011 with one M/s. D. P. Exports, for carrying out

mining operations on behalf of the Corporate Debtor and also

for managing its affairs and selling 100% of the extracted iron

ore; (ii) that the said M/s. D. P. Exports was a partnership

firm of which one Mr. M. Poobalan and his wife were partners;
(iii) that another agreement dated 11.12.2012 was entered into
50
between the Corporate Debtor and a proprietary concern by

name M/s. P. & D. Enterprises, of which the very same person

namely, Mr. M. Poobalan was the sole proprietor; (iv) that the

said agreement was for hiring of machinery and equipment; (v)

that a finance agreement was also entered into on 12.12.2012

between the Corporate Debtor and a company by name M/s.

Udhyaman     Investments      Pvt.   Ltd.,   represented     by    its

authorized signatory Mr. M. Poobalan; (vi) that there were a

few communications sent by the said Mr. Poobalan to various

authorities, claiming himself to be the authorized signatory of

the Corporate Debtor; (vii) that an MOU was entered into on

16.04.2016   between    the     Corporate     Debtor   and        M/s.

Udhyaman Investments Pvt. Ltd., represented by the said Mr.

Poobalan, whereby the Corporate Debtor agreed to pay Rs.

11.5 crores; (viii) that the said agreement was purportedly

executed at Florida, but witnessed at Chennai; (ix) that Mr.

Poobalan even communicated to the Director, Department of

Mines & Geology as well as the Monitoring Committee, taking

up the cause of the Corporate Debtor as its authorized
51
signatory; (x) that the CIRP was initiated by M/s. Udhyaman

Investments Pvt. Ltd. represented by its authorized signatory,

Mr. Poobalan; (xi) that the Resolution Applicant namely, M/s.

Embassy Property Development Pvt. Ltd. as well as the

Financial Creditor who initiated CIRP namely, M/s. Udhyaman

Investments Pvt. Ltd. are all related parties and (xii) that Mr.

Poobalan had not only acted on behalf of the Corporate Debtor

before the statutory authorities, but also happened to be the

authorized signatory of the Financial Creditor who initiated

the CIRP, eventually for the benefit of the Resolution Applicant

which is a related party of the Financial Creditor.
48. In the light of the above averments, the Government of

Karnataka thought fit to invoke the jurisdiction of the High

Court under
Article 226
without taking recourse to the

statutory alternative remedy of appeal before the NCLAT. But

the contention of the appellants herein is that allegations of

fraud and collusion can also be inquired into by NCLT and

NCLAT and that therefore the Government could not have

bypassed the statutory remedy.
52
49. The objection of the appellants in this regard is well

founded. Section 65 specifically deals with fraudulent or

malicious initiation of proceedings. It reads as follows :
“65.      Fraudulent or malicious initiation                of
           proceedings. – (1) If, any person initiates the insolvency
           resolution process or liquidation proceedings fraudulently or
           with malicious intent for any purpose other than for the
           resolution of insolvency or liquidation, as the case may be,
           the adjudicating authority may impose upon such person a
           penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but
           may extend to one crore rupees.
(2) If, any person initiates voluntary liquidation proceedings
           with the intent to defraud any person the adjudicating
           authority may impose upon such person a penalty which
           shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one
           crore rupees.”
50.   Even fraudulent tradings carried on by the Corporate

Debtor during the insolvency resolution, can be inquired into

by the Adjudicating Authority under Section 66. Section 69

makes an officer of the corporate debtor and the corporate

debtor liable for punishment, for carrying on transactions with

a view to defraud creditors. Therefore, NCLT is vested with the

power to inquire into (i) fraudulent initiation of proceedings as

well as (ii) fraudulent transactions.           It is significant to note

that Section 65(1) deals with a situation where CIRP is
53
initiated fraudulently “for any purpose other than for the

resolution of insolvency or liquidation”.
51. Therefore, if, as contended by the Government of

Karnataka, the CIRP had been initiated by one and the same

person taking different avatars, not for the genuine purpose of

resolution of insolvency or liquidation, but for the collateral

purpose of cornering the mine and the mining lease, the same

would fall squarely within the mischief addressed by Section

65(1).   Therefore, it is clear that NCLT has jurisdiction to

enquire into allegations of fraud. As a corollary, NCLAT will

also have jurisdiction. Hence, fraudulent initiation of CIRP

cannot be a ground to bypass the alternative remedy of appeal

provided in Section 61.
Conclusion
52.       The upshot of the above discussion is that though

NCLT and NCLAT would have jurisdiction to enquire into

questions of fraud, they would not have jurisdiction to

adjudicate upon disputes such as those arising under
MMDR

Act, 1957
and the rules issued thereunder, especially when
54
the disputes revolve around decisions of statutory or quasi­

judicial authorities, which can be corrected only by way of

judicial review of administrative action. Hence, the High Court

was justified in entertaining the writ petition and we see no

reason to interfere with the decision of the High Court.

Therefore, the appeals are dismissed. There will be no order as

to costs.
…..…………....................J
                                        (Rohinton Fali Nariman)


                                        …..…………....................J
                                        (Aniruddha Bose)


                                        .…..………......................J
                                         (V. Ramasubramanian)
New Delhi
December 03, 2019.
55
