Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 94 of 2014
Citation: AIR 1975 SC 1470 to
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/38063720/

[Cites
66
, Cited by
15
]
Bombay High Court
Mukesh Nanji Gala And 2 Ors vs M/S Heritage Enterprises And Anr on 8 December, 2014
Author:
R.D. Dhanuka
Bench:
R.D. Dhanuka
Kvm
                                           1/31
                                                                                     ARBP515.13



              IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY




                                                                                
                   ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION
                    ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 515 OF 2013




                                                        
    1. Mukesh Nanji Gala,                    )
    of Mumbai, Indian Inhabitant,            )
    Aged 49 years, Occupation : Business,    )




                                                       
    residing at 502, Aster Co-operative Housing)
    Society, Opp.Agri Samaj Road,            )
    Gatla Village Road, Chembur East,        )
    Mumbai - 400071                          )




                                              
    2. D.Venugopal,            ig                 )
    of Mumbai, Indian Inhabitant,                 )
    Aged 48 years, Occupation : Service,          )
    residing at D-13, Yogakshema Building,        )
                             
    Nath Pai Nagar, Ghatkopar (East),             )
    Mumbai - 400071                               )

    3. C.S.Srinivasan                        )
            


    of Mumbai, Indian Inhabitant,            )
    Aged 83 years, Occupation : Retired,     )
         



                                      st
    residing at Flat No.10, Apsara, 21 Road, )
    Chembur East, Mumbai - 400071            )        ..... Petitioners

                            VERSUS





    1. M/s.Heritage Enterprises,                  )
    a partnership firm, having its office at      )
    18, Charisma Centre, 19th Road,               )
    Chembur East, Mumbai - 400071                 )





    2. Justice Arvind V.Savant (Retd.)            )
    of Mumbai Indian Inhabitant, having its       )
    office at 1004-A, Mittal Towers, A Wing,      )
    10th Floor, Nariman Point,                    )
    Mumbai-400021                                 )   ..... Respondents




                                                        ::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
     Kvm
                                              2/31
                                                                                          ARBP515.13


    Mr.Hiralal Thacker, Senior Advocate, a/w. Mr.Jeetendra Ranawat, Ms.Urvi Patel,
    i/b.Mr.Manoj Kadam for the Petitioners.




                                                                                     
    Mr.P.K.Samdhani, Senior Advocate, a/w. Mr.Aashish Kamat, Mr.S.A.Oak,




                                                             
    Mr.C.M.Jadhav, i/b. Mahesh Menon & Co. for Respondent no.1.

                                     CORAM : R.D. DHANUKA, J.




                                                            
                                     RESERVED ON : 28th NOVEMBER, 2014

                                     PRONOUNCED ON : 8th DECEMBER, 2014
    JUDGMENT
By this petition filed under
section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation
                                
    Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the said 'Act') the petitioners have prayed for
    leave to file this petition for raising their objections to the impugned award dated
                               
    19th March, 2013 and have prayed that the said award be quashed and set aside.
    The learned arbitrator is impleaded as respondent no. 2. The petitioner has also
    prayed that this court shall direct the learned arbitrator to deposit in this court all
            


    the records, paper and proceedings of the arbitration between the respondent no. 1
         



    (original claimant) and the society i.e. Apsara Coop. Hsg. Soc. Ltd. By the
    impugned award the learned arbitrator had declared that the MOU dated 30 th April,
    2008 executed between M/s. Heritage Enterprises (original claimant in arbitration





    proceedings and respondent no. 1 herein) and Apsara Coop. Hsg. Soc. Ltd. is valid
    subsisting, enforceable and binding upon those parties and that the claimant is
    entitled to specific performance thereof.
2.    At the threshold Mr. Samdani learned senior counsel for the respondent no. 1
    raises a preliminary objection to the maintainability of this petition. In view of the
    issue of maintainability raised by the learned senior counsel for respondent no. 1 I
    have heard the learned senior counsel for the petitioner as well as the respondent
    no. 1 on the issue of maintainability of this petition filed by the petitioners.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
3/31
ARBP515.13
3.    Mr.Samdani learned senior counsel for the respondent no. 1 submits that the




                                                                                  
    memorandum of understanding which recorded an arbitration agreement was
    between the respondent no. 1 developer and M/s. Apsara Co-op. Hsg. Soc., Ltd a




                                                          
    society registered under the provisions of
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act,
    1960
. The said society consists of 24 tenements allotted to 24 persons who are
    members of the said society.    Petitioners are   three of the members of the said




                                                         
    society. Learned senior counsel submits that the petitioners were not parties to the
    said memorandum of understanding which contained arbitration agreement.                   It is




                                              
    submitted that the society had passed a resolution pursuant to which dispute was
    referred to arbitration. The petitioners were not parties to the arbitration
                               
    proceedings as they were not parties to the arbitration agreement.
4.    It is submitted that since the petitioners were not parties to the arbitration
    agreement, petitioners cannot file a petition under
section 34
of the Arbitration and
    Conciliation Act, for impugning an arbitral award. In support of this submission
            


    learned senior counsel invited my attention to
section 34
and also definition of
         



    'Party' defined under
section 2(1) (h)
of the Act. It is submitted by the learned
    senior counsel that only a party to the arbitration agreement can file a petition





    under
section 34
of the Act and not an outsider. It is submitted that
section 34
has
    to be read with
section 2(1) (h)
of the Act. There is no general power under
section
    34
of the Act to permit a person who is not a party to the arbitration agreement to
    file a petition for impugning an arbitral award. It is submitted that the said Apsara





    Co. Hsg. Soc. Ltd. who was party to the arbitration agreement and also before the
    learned arbitrator has accepted the arbitral award by passing a resolution. The
    impugned award has been acted upon by the society. The petitioners who are
    members of the society thus cannot be allowed to impugn the arbitral award as
    they were not parties to the arbitration agreement.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
4/31
ARBP515.13
5.    Learned senior counsel submits that this court has no power to grant any




                                                                                   
    leave to the petitioners to file arbitration petition and to impugn the arbitral award.
    It is submitted that this is not an appellate proceeding in which a party aggrieved




                                                           
    can apply for leave to file an appeal. Learned senior counsel placed reliance on
section 36
of the Mah. Coop. Societies Act, 1960 and submits that the society
    having registered is a body corporate and thus society only can be sued or sue in its




                                                          
    own name. Society has to act through the committee. No members can file any
    proceedings on behalf of the society. It is submitted that the members of the




                                               
    society speak through society and has no independent say.
In support of this
    submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Division
                                
    Bench of this court in case of
Girish Mulchand Mehta Vs. Mahesh S.Mehta &
    Anr.
2010 (1) All MR 719 and in particular paragraphs 15 and 16 which read thus :
15. The Appellants would then rely on the decision of the Apex
              Court in
Ramesh Himmatlal Shah v. Harsukh Jadhavji Joshi
reported in MANU/SC/0531/1975 : AIR 1975 SC 1470 to
            

              contend that the flats in question occupied by them have been
              allotted to them by the Housing Society which allotment is
         



              coupled with the right to transfer their shares of the Society
              and interest in the said flat which is the property of the Society.
In
the said decision
, the Apex Court has observed that the right
              so enjoyed by the member is the species of the property





              namely the right to occupy a flat of this type, which assumes
              significant importance and acquires under the law a stamp of
              transferability in furtherance of interest of commerce. It went
              on to observe that there is no fetter in any of the legal
              provisions against such a conclusion and for which reason the





              attachment and sale of the property of the member in execution
              of the decree are valid under the law. The legal position
              expounded by the Apex Court in
the said decision
will be of no
              avail to the case on hand. The crucial question is whether the
              members can be heard to say that their rights in the flats
              occupied by them were dehors the rights of the Society therein
              and that they were not claiming under the Society at all. In our
              considered opinion such stand of the members(Appellants
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
5/31
ARBP515.13


          herein) cannot be countenanced.
16. In the present case, it is not in dispute that the General
          Body of the Society which is supreme, has taken a conscious




                                                      
          decision to redevelop the suit building. The General Body of
          the Society has also resolved to appoint the Respondent No. 1
          as the Developer. Those decisions have not been challenged at
          all. The Appellants who were members of the Society at the




                                                     
          relevant time, are bound by the said decisions. The Appellants
          in the dispute filed before the Cooperative Court have only
          challenged the Resolution dated 27/4/2008, which challenge
          would merely revolve around the terms and conditions of the




                                          
          Development Agreement.
As a matter of fact, the General
          Body of the Society has approved the terms and conditions of
                           
          the Development Agreement by overwhelming majority.
          Merely because the terms and conditions of the Development
          Agreement are not acceptable to the Appellants, who are in
                          
          minuscule minority (only two out of twelve members), cannot
          be the basis not to abide by the decision of the overwhelming
          majority of the General Body of the Society. By now it is well
          established position that once a person becomes a member of
          the Cooperative Society, he looses his individuality with the
            


          Society and he has no independent rights except those given to
         



          him by the statute and Bye-laws. The member has to speak
          through the Society or rather the Society alone can act and
          speaks for him qua the rights and duties of the Society as a
          body (see
Daman Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab
reported in





          MANU/SC/0392/1985 : AIR 1985 SC 973).
This view has
          been followed in the subsequent decision of the Apex Court in
          the case of
State of U.P. v. Chheoki Employees Cooperative
          Society Ltd.
reported in MANU/SC/0332/1997 : AIR 1997 SC
          1413. In this decision the Apex Court further observed that the





          member of Society has no independent right qua the Society
          and it is the Society that is entitled to represent as the
          corporate aggregate. The Court also observed that the stream
          cannot rise higher than the source. Suffice it to observe that so
          long as the Resolutions passed by the General Body of the
          Respondent No. 2 Society are in force and not overturned by a
          forum of competent jurisdiction, the said decisions would bind
          the Appellants. They cannot take a stand alone position but are
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
6/31
ARBP515.13


              bound by the majority decision of the General Body. Notably,
              the Appellants have not challenged the Resolutions passed by




                                                                                   
              the General Body of the Society to redevelop the property and
              more so, to appoint the Respondent No. 1 as the Developer to




                                                           
              give him all the redevelopment rights. The propriety rights of
              the Appellants herein in the portion (in respective flats) of the
              property of the Society cannot defeat the rights accrued to the
              Developer and/or absolve the Society of its obligations in




                                                          
              relation to the subject matter of the Arbitration Agreement. The
              fact that the relief prayed by the Respondent No. 1 in
Section 9
Petition and as granted by the Learned Single Judge would
              affect the propriety rights of the Appellants does not take the




                                              
              matter any further. For, the propriety rights of the Appellants in
              the flats in their possession would be subservient to the
                               
              authority of the General Body of the Society. Moreso, such
              rights cannot be invoked against the Developer (Respondent
              No. 1) and in any case, cannot extricate the Society of its
                              
              obligations under the Development Agreement. Since the relief
              prayed by the Respondent No. 1 would affect the Appellants,
              they were impleaded as party to the proceedings under
Section
              9
of the Act, which was also necessitated by virtue of Rule
              803E of the Bombay High Court (Original Side) Rules. The
            


              said Rule reads thus:
" R803E. Notice of Filling Application to persons likely to
               be affected.-
Upon any application by petition under the Act, the
               Judge in chambers shall, if he accepts the petition, direct
               notice thereof to be given to all persons mentioned in the
               petition and to such other persons as may seem to him to be
               likely to be affected by the proceedings, requiring all or any





               of such persons to show cause, within the time specified in
               the notice, why the relief sought in the petition should not
               be granted."
6.    Mr. Samdani learned senior counsel submits that since the petition filed by
    the petitioners itself is not maintainable this court cannot enter into the merits of
    the matter and any adjudication on merits in these circumstances would be without
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
7/31
ARBP515.13


    jurisdiction.
In support of this submission, learned senior counsel placed reliance




                                                                                   
    on the judgment of Supreme Court in case of
T.K.Lathika Vs. Seth Karsandas
    Jamnadas
(1999) 6 SCC 632 and in particular paragraph 9. It is submitted that the




                                                           
    said M/s. Apsara Coop. Hsg. Soc. Ltd. who were the parties to the arbitration
    proceedings have not been even impleaded as party respondent to this proceedings.
7.    Mr. Thacker learned senior counsel for petitioners in reply to the preliminary
    objection raised by Mr. Samdani, learned senior counsel submits that the




                                               
    petitioners are admittedly the members of the said society. It is submitted that the
    petitioners being allottees of flats have right and interest to occupy their respective
                                
    flats which rights can be even sold/transferred and can be attached in execution of
    the decree.   It is submitted that since the society has in collusion with the
                               
    respondent no. 1 has not impugned the arbitral award which was rendered against
    the society and in favour of the respondent no. 1 developer which affected the
    rights of the petitioners, petitioners being parties affected by the impugned award,
            


    are entitled to exercise their rights under
section 34
of the said Act to impugn such
         



    arbitral award.
8.    Learned senior counsel submits that even minority members of the society
    can challenge an arbitral award if the majority members have decided not to
    challenge the arbitral award for any reasons. It is submitted by the learned senior
    counsel that though petitioners were not parties to the arbitration proceedings,





    since the liability of the society as well as members are now crystalized under the
    said award and the rights of the petitioners having been affected and prejudiced,
    petitioners are entitled to challenge the impugned award. It is submitted by the
    learned senior counsel that this court has wide powers to grant leave to the
    petitioners   to challenge the impugned award. Learned senior counsel submits
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
8/31
ARBP515.13


    that the petitioners have very good chances of succeeding in this petition on merits




                                                                                   
    and this court therefore, shall grant such leave in favour of the petitioners to
    impugn the arbitral award.
9.    Learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
    Court in case of Ramesh Himmatlal Shah Vs. Harsukh Jadhavji Joshi AIR 1975




                                                          
    SC 1470 and in particular paragraphs 17 and 18 in support of the submission that
    the flat in a tenant co-partnership housing society under the Maharashtra Co-
operative
Societies Act
is liable to attachment and sale in execution of the decree
    against the member who has been allotted flat by the society and is accordingly
                                 
    party aggrieved., Paragraphs 17 and 18 of
the said judgment
read thus:
17. From a review of the foregoing provisions the position
              with reference to the particular Society is as follows:
There is no absolute prohibition in the Act or in the Rules or in
              the Bye-laws prohibiting transfer of interest of a member in the
            

              property belonging to the Society. The only transfer which is
              void under the Act is one made in contravention of Sub-section
         



              (2) of
Section 47
[see
Section 47(3)
]. We have not been able to
              find any other provision anywhere to the same effect. In the
              scheme of the provisions a dichotomy is seen between share or
              interest in the capital and interest in property of the Society.
While
Section 29(2)
refers to transfer of a member's share or
              his interest in the capital or property of any society,
Section 31
in contrast speaks of "the share or interest of a member in the
              capital of a society".
The Act
, therefore, makes a clear
              distinction between the share or interest in the capital and





              share or interest in property of the Society. We have also
              noticed that the Act does recognise interest in the immovable
              property of the Society as well [see
Section 47(1)(b)
]. We have
              seen the qualifications for membership. There is no reason to
              suppose that if the qualifications under the Bye-laws are
              fulfilled an application" for membership may be rejected. It is
              admitted that the flat is owned by the Society and the
              judgment-debtor has a right or interest to occupy the same.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
9/31
ARBP515.13
18. This right or interest to occupy is a species of property. We
          have to consider whether this right to the particular property is




                                                                              
          attachable and saleable in execution of the decree against the
          judgment-debtor. It is contended by Mr. Chatterjee, amicus




                                                      
          curiae, that
Section 31
of the Act completely bars attachment
          and sale of the said property in execution of the decree. We
          have already pointed out the difference in language between
Section 29
and
Section 31
and also made reference to
Section




                                                     
          47(1)(b)
in that connection. There is nothing in the language of
Section 31
to indicate that the right to occupation which is the
          right to be sold in auction is not attachable in execution of the
          decree. There is nothing in
Section 31
to even remotely




                                          
          include a prohibition against attachment or sale of the
          aforesaid right to occupation of the flat. Once
Section 31
is out
                           
          of the way, we are left with
Section 29
wherein we do not find
          even a provision of prior consent for transfer of share or
          interest in such property. The only restrictions under
Section
                          
          29(2)
are that the member may not transfer his interest in the
          property prior to one year and the transfer is made to an
          existing member of the Society or to a person whose
          application for membership has been accepted by the Society.
          It is true that bye-law 71D says that a member to whom a
            


          tenement is allotted shall not assign or underlet, vacate or part
         



          with the possession of the tenement or any part thereof without
          the previous consent in writing of the Managing Committee,
          but there is nothing to show that contravention of this bye-law
          makes the assignment void under the Act unlike in the case of





          a transfer being void under
Section 47(3)
. There is no
          impediment to ratification of the assignment by the Committee
          particularly in view of the legal position arising out of the
          conjoint effect of
Section 29
, Rule 24 and bye-law 9.
Section
          29
read with Rule 24 shows that there is no prohibition as such





          against transfer of a share to a member or even to a non-
          member if he consents to be a member and makes an
          application for membership by purchasing aye shares as
          provided under bye-law 9. Reading the aforesaid provisions
          there is no reason to think that there is any question of refusal
          of membership of the Society to a non-member if he is
          qualified otherwise and makes an appropriate application in
          which case the transfer of shares will be operative and thus the
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
10/31
ARBP515.13


                assignment of the right to occupation will hold good. Further it
                is significant that under
Section 146(a)
of the Act,




                                                                                     
                contravention of Sub-section (2) of
Section 47
is punishable
                under
Section 147
of the Act. Contravention of any bye-law is,




                                                             
                however, no offence. We, therefore, unhesitatingly come to the
                conclusion that this species of property, namely the right to
                occupy a flat of this type, assumes significant importance and
                acquires under the law a stamp of transferability in furtherance




                                                            
                of the interest of commerce. We have seen no fetter under any
                of the legal provisions against such a conclusion. The
                attachment and the sale of the property in this case in
                execution of the decree are valid under the law.
10.      Mr. Thacker learned senior counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of
                                 
    Delhi High Court in case of Sohan Nayyar And Ors. Vs., Lf. Governor of Delhi
    and another AIR 1983 Delhi 301 and in particular paragraph 17 to 21, 25 to 27 in
                                
    support of the submission that even minority members of the society can challenge
    an arbitral award. Paragraphs 17 to 21 and 25 to 27 of the said judgment read
    thus :
17. In the case of Co-operative Society, the liability of a
         



                member may be limited or it may be unlimited. If there is a
                limited liability, then the Society will use the words 'limited' or
                its equivalent as part of its name. It so happens that in the
                instant case, the liability of the members is limited' as it uses





                the word 'limited' as part of its name. All this is provided in
                various sections of the
Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972
,
                Even when the liability is limited, any claim against the
                Society can be recovered from the property of the Society as
                well as from the members of the Society to the extent of their





                liability. This is so provided in
S. 75
of the Act Even if no
                personal liability is involved, it is obvious that each member of
                the Society has an interest in the Society and as each member
                can have only one share, all the members share the interest
                equally. If the interests of the Society are adversely affected,
                the value of the share of each member to that extent is
                diminished. So, it cannot be denied that each member has an
                interest in the Society. One of the items in the award is that a
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
11/31
ARBP515.13


          sum of Rupees 22,45,742/- has to be paid to the
          Administration. There is also another item to the effect that the




                                                                               
          Society shall not contest the smooth acquisitions of its land
          and shall not appeal for enhancement of its compensation.
These two items are sufficient to show that the interest of the
          members is adversely affected to some extent, though it is
          difficult to see the exact implications of the award.
18. It appears that on this ground the members of the
          Society can maintain objections if the Society itself does not
          file the same.
19. There is yet another reason to come to the conclusion that
          the objection could be maintained. From an analysis of the
                           
          facts set out earlier in the judgment, it plainly appears that the
          Managing Committee was superseded on 9th July, 1971. The
          application moved in this Court under S. 14 of the Arbitration
                          
          Act was moved by Shri Bal Mokand Vig who was the ex-
Secretary of the Society.
S. 14 (2)
of the Act provides that the
          arbitrators or umpire may file the award at the request of the
          parties or under directions by the Court. Obviously, for the
            

          purpose of that application, a member of the Society was
          treated as being competent to obtain an order from the Court to
         



          direct the filing of the award. If we come to the conclusion that
          no objections could be filed, then it would also have to be held
          that the award has been wrongly filed in the Court because it
          was at the instance of a party not entitled to maintain the





          application. We do not think that this is the correct view. The
          exact language used in
S. 14 (2)
is as follows:
" The arbitrators or umpire shall, at the request of any party
           to the arbitration agreement or any person claiming under
           such Party or if so directed by the Court cause the award or





           a signed copy to be filed in the Court."
This shows that a person claiming under a party to the
          arbitration agreement has also a right. If this right exists under
S. 14 (2)
, it would appear that that party can also move the
          Court and consequently can also file the objections. All the
          members of the Society can be deemed to be persons claiming
          under the Society and, therefore, they are entitled to get the
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
12/31
ARBP515.13


          award filed in the Court and must also have the right to
          maintain the objections, otherwise, there was no point in




                                                                               
          giving the right to a person claiming under a party to move the
          arbitrator or the Court, as seems to be implicit in the language




                                                       
          of
S. 14 (2)
. For this reason also it seems the objections could
          be maintained by the members.
20. It is now necessary to turn to perhaps the most important




                                                      
          aspect of this case, which is regarding the rights of individual
          members of a Corporation to maintain a suit in the name of the
          Corporation or in the interest of the Corporation, since it is the
          analogy of a Corporation that has been applied here to a Co-
operative Society as well. This matter was considered by the
          Federal Court in Dr. Satya Charan Lal v. Rameshwar Prosad
                           
          Bajoria, . It was stated in that judgment that it was well-settled
          that in order to redress a wrong done to a company or to
          recover monies or damages alleged to be due to the company,
                          
          the action should be brought by the company itself. This was
          the rule in Foss v. Harbottle, . It is unnecessary to refer to the
          other cases cited by the Federal Court. The law was
          summarised in the following terms:-
" The correct position seems to us to be that ordinarily the
           directors of a company are the only persons who can
         



           conduct litigation in the name of the company, but when
           they are themselves the wrong-doers against the company
           and have acted mala fide or beyond their powers, and their
           personal interest is in conflict with their duty in such a way





           that they cannot or will not take steps to seek redress for the
           wrong done to the company, the majority of the
           shareholders must in such a case be entitled to take steps to
           redress the wrong."
This view upheld the right to the majority of share-holders to
          maintain an action in the name of the company. The law has
          been summarised in this behalf in Para No. 767 of Halsbury's
          Laws of England, Fourth Edition Vol. 7 as follows:
" In an action to redress a wrong done to a company or to
           recover money or damages alleged to be due to it, the
           company is the only proper plaintiff, but its name should be
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
13/31
ARBP515.13


           used as plaintiff by direction of the company or its
           directors. Where the members complaining represent the




                                                                              
           majority of the company, the action may be brought in the
           company's name, ever though the directors object. The




                                                      
           court may allow the matter to stand so that a company
           meeting can be held to decide whether the action should
           proceed in the company's name. At such a meeting the votes
           of the persons complained of cannot be excluded.
Nevertheless, proceedings may be brought by any member
           or members in his or their own name or names where such
           authority cannot be obtained and the act complained of is of
           a fraudulent character or oppressive or is ultra vires the




                                          
           company, or criminal or where the wrongdoers control the
           majority of votes; or where the result would otherwise be
                           
           that the company was carrying out by an ordinary
           resolution something which could only be properly carried
           out by a special resolution, or by any other resolution
                          
           requiring a prescribed majority."
Thus, the position as far as the latest Edition of Halsbury's
          Laws of England is concerned is that the action may be
          brought without the directors consent by a majority of
            


          shareholders in the name of the company and in some cases
         



          where the majority does not support the litigation by the
          shareholders in their representatives capacity. In such a case,
          the suit may be either by all the complaining members
          altogether or representatively by some of them. There is no





          case in which the minority of shareholders cannot protect their
          interest.
21. Keeping this in view, it does not seem right to hold that the
          members of the Society who have filed objections cannot





          maintain the objections. These objections have been filed in
          the individual names of the members and now, they are
          supported by the present management of the Society. No
          meeting was called by the Court because it was not a case of
          objections being filed in the name of the CO-operative Society.
25. Applying the above principle to the case of the present
          objector, on the footing that they are a minority set of
          shareholders in the Co-operative Society, it would appear that
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
14/31
ARBP515.13


          some remedy should be open to them in respect of the
          Society's failure to object to the award. For the purpose of this




                                                                                
          analysis, it must be assumed that there is something wrong
          with the award, if this is so, it would be for the Society to




                                                        
          challenge the same in normal circumstances. If the persons in
          charge of the management refuse to challenge the award, then
          it should be open to the minority shareholders to maintain a
          suit in respect of the award. However.
S. 32
of the Arbitration




                                                       
          Act states that no suit can lie on any ground whatsoever for a
          decision upon the existence, effect or validity to arbitration
          agreement or award. So, these 143 members could not
          maintain a suit, on the principles laid down by the Supreme




                                           
          Court in Jawahar Lal Barman v. Union of India,
          MANU/SC/0005/1961 : AIR 1962 SC 378. This means that
                            
          they can only approach The Court under the
Arbitration Act
.
          This is, therefore, an additional ground on which the
          objections could be heard by the Court.
26. To summarise the conclusions, it may be useful to state the
          following propositions:-
(1) In the case of Corporations, where there are members, a
            


          suit may be maintained by the Corporation acting through its
          directors. If the directors refuse to act or the action complained
         



          of is that of the directors themselves, then such a suit can be
          maintained by the majority shareholders in the name of the
          Corporation.
(2) If the action is challenged by the minority shareholders
          when the directors refuse to act, then the action or suit has to
          be brought by the minority shareholders in their own name.
This may be done by them acting jointly or there may be a
          representative suit by a class of shareholders or members.
(3) In the case of an arbitration award which is filed in Court,
          the objections may be filed by the parties thereto or if the
          parties refuse to file objections or fail to file objections, then a
          person claiming under them can also file objections provided
          they can show some interest in the subject-matter of the award
          or reference, as the case may be.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
15/31
ARBP515.13


          (4) The principle which applies to appeals, namely, that third
          parties can also file objections, even though not parties to the




                                                                             
          suit, applies also to objections against an award being made a
          rule of the Court subject to the same limitations, i.e., the




                                                     
          objectors must show that they have an interest in the subject-
          matter of award or reference and they obtain leave of the Court
          which should normally not be refused.
(5) In the case of arbitration awards against a Corporation
          which have been filed in the Court, members of the
          Corporation can maintain objections as they are debarred from
          filing a suit because of
S. 32
of the Arbitration Act, to




                                         
          challenge the award or the arbitration agreement, as the case
          may be. These objections can be filed on the same basis as a
                           
          suit can be filed by majority or minority shareholders of a
          company, which means that if the majority shareholders object
          to the award they can do so in the name of the company and if
                          
          the minority shareholders challenge the same, they can do so
          in their own names,

          (6) In order to determine whether it is the majority or minority
          shareholders who are maintaining the objections, the Court can
            


          even call a meeting of the company.
27. Applying these propositions to the circumstances of this
          case, it clearly appears that the nominated management of the
          Society was not willing to file objections to the award. The
          award was filed at the instance of one of the members of the





          Co-operative Society and not at the instance of the parties to
          the reference. Against this award, objections could be filed by
          the majority of the members in the name of the Co-operative
          Society or by a minority in their own names. If the objectors





          could establish an interest in the subject-matter of the award,
          they were entitled to get the leave of the Court to maintain the
          objections or they could be treated as persons claiming under a
          party and, therefore, entitled to maintain objections.
          Alternatively, they could maintain these subjections on the
          principles on which minority shareholders could challenge the
          decision of the majority. For all these reasons, we think the
          objections in this case were maintainable and we could allow
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
16/31
ARBP515.13


              the present appeal.
11.   Mr. Samdani learned senior counsel in rejoinder invited my attention to the




                                                          
    judgment of Madras High Court in case of Chennai Container Terminal Pvt.
    Ltd.etc. Vs. Union of India and Ors. reported in AIR 2007 Madras 225 (DB) and
    submits that Division Bench of Madras High Court has considered the judgment of




                                                         
    Delhi High Court in case of Sohan Nayyar and Ors. (supra) relied upon by
    Mr.Thacker learned senior counsel and has also considered the provisions of
Section 34
read with
section 2(1)(h)
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and
    has distinguished the judgment of learned Delhi Court on the ground that the
                               
    provisions for impugning award under
section 30
read with 33 of the
Arbitration
    Act, 1940
which were considered by the Delhi High Court and
section 34
of the
                              
    Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 are totally different. It is submitted that the
    principles laid down by Madras High Court in which the court had considered the
    provisions under
section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 read
            


    with
section 2(1)(h)
which are squarely applicable to the facts of this case and
         



    shall be considered by this court and not the judgment of Delhi High Court.
    Paragraph 9 to 11 of the said judgment of Madras High Court read thus :-
9.    However, in the case on hand the learned single Judge
              has held that though
Section 34
of the Act contemplates
              challenge of the award made by the party to the arbitration
              agreement, in view of
Section 2(1)(h)
of the Act, the import of
              the word 'party' can be judiciously expanded, if the context so





              warrants. Hence, the word 'party' may include not only the
              signatory to the arbitration agreement, but also a party non-
signatory to the agreement. According to the learned single
              Judge, the contextual facts and circumstances warrant
              expansion of the definition found under
Section 2(1)(h)
of the
              Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 to include the
              Government of India, which is a party non-signatory for the
              purpose of challenging the award under
Section 34
of the Act.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
17/31
ARBP515.13


          We fail to appreciate the stand taken by UOI that it is a non-
          signatory party to the agreement. Learned ASG was unable to




                                                                               
          show as to how UOI can be said to be a party to the agreement
          in the face of express provision contained in the agreement,




                                                       
          which defined party to include only "ChPT & CCTPL". The
          word 'Party' is defined in
Section 2(1)(h)
of the Act to mean a
          "party to an arbitration agreement" and therefore, ordinarily,
          the expression 'Party' as used in
Section 34
of the Act must




                                                      
          carry the same meaning, namely, a party to the arbitration
          agreement or award. But, as the opening part of
Section 2(1)
(h) of the Act shows, the definitional meaning is subject to
          anything repugnant in the subject or context. We must,




                                          
          therefore, see whether there is anything in
Section 34
or in the
          context in which it occurs which should compel us to place a
                           
          broader meaning different from the one given to it in
Section
          2(1)(h)
. In our opinion, there is nothing in the subject or
          context of
Section 34
which would suggest us to depart from
                          
          the definitional meaning of the expression 'party'. The
          expression 'party' is used in
Section 34(2)
in its definitional
          sense to mean a party to the arbitration proceedings and does
          not include a third person, who is not a party to the agreement.
          To our mind the interpretation suggested by the learned ASG
            


          would make the Act totally unworkable. It is well settled that
         



          an award is final and binding only on the parties and can be
          enforced only against the party to the award. A third party
          would therefore be in a position to challenge the award, but
          not be bound by it, if the challenge fails. Equally, a third party





          can render the limitation period envisaged under the Act otiose
          by merely claiming knowledge of the award long after the
          period of limitation has expired.
10.   Learned ASG, however, submitted that UOI is an





          aggrieved party inasmuch as the arbitrator has totally
          misconstrued the guidelines of UOI and therefore, the UOI can
          challenge the award of the arbitrator. In support of his
          submission, learned ASG placed reliance on the Division
          Bench judgment of the Delhi High Court in Sohan Nayyar v.
          Lt. Governor, Delhi MANU/DE/0483/1982 : AIR 1983 Delhi
301. The said decision is under the old
Arbitration Act
of 1940
          and the Bench clearly found that the provisions of the Act of
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
18/31
ARBP515.13


              1940 do not specify as to which can make an application, and
              therefore held that as the Act does not prohibit filing of an




                                                                                  
              objection by a third parties, there is no bar to some one else
              filing objections provided they have some interest in the




                                                          
              subject matter of the litigation. As observed by the Supreme
              Court in
Sundaram Finance Limited v. NEPC Limited
, the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
is based on
              UNCITRAL Model. It is entirely different from the
Arbitration




                                                         
              Act, 1940
. The provisions of this Act must, therefore, be
              interpreted and construed independently and in fact reference
              to 1940 Act may actually lead to misconstruction. In order to
              get help in construing these provisions it is more relevant to




                                              
              refer to the UNCITRAL Model Law rather than the 1940 Act.
11. Learned ASG, relying upon the decision of the Supreme
              Court in ITI Ltd v. Siemens Public Communications Network
              Ltd. MANU/SC/0502/2002 : [2002]3SCR1122 submitted that
                              
              the provisions
of CPC
would apply to the proceedings under
Section 34
of the Act and an aggrieved party for the purpose of
              challenging the award can invoke
Section 34
of the Act. The
              contention is required to be stated only for rejection. In ITI
            


              Ltd. Case the Court held that merely because second appeal is
              barred under Sub-section (3) of
Section 37
, remedy of revision
         



              would not cease to be available. Although revision is not
              specifically provided for by the Act but in the absence of any
              express exclusion
of CPC
, no inference can be drawn that





              provisions
of CPC
would not apply to proceedings arising
              under the Act and revision is not maintainable. This decision
              has no application to the case on hand.
Section 34
of the Act
              read with the definition of 'party' in
Section 2(1)(h)
of the Act
              makes it amply clear that only a party to the arbitration





              agreement can invoke the provisions of
Section 34
of the Act.
              A third party has no locus standi to challenge the award under
Section 34
of the Act.
REASONS AND CONCLUSION
12.
Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides for an
    application for setting aside arbitral award.
Section 34(2)
provides for the grounds
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
19/31
ARBP515.13


    of challenge of an arbitral award on which such award may be set aside by the




                                                                                   
    court. The said provision also provides that an arbitral award may be set aside if
    the party making application furnishes any of the proof that is specifically setout in
section 34(2) (a) (i)
to (v). Under
section 2(1) (h)
party is defined as 'party' means
    a party to an arbitration agreement.
13.   A perusal of the record clearly indicates that none of the members of the
    society were parties to the development agreement entered into between the




                                              
    respondent no.1 and the society. It is however the case of the petitioners that since
    the society did not challenge the impugned award and the said award has affected
                               
    the rights of the petitioners in respect of their respective flats in the society,
    petitioners who are claiming through the society are also thus parties to the
                              
    arbitration agreement and being parties aggrieved are entitled to challenge the
    impugned award though the society has not impugned the said arbitral award.
14.   A perusal of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
in toto shows that the
         



    term party has been used in almost every section of the said Act. Under
section 7
of the said Act the parties by an agreement can submit to arbitration all or certain





    disputes which have arisen or may arise between them in respect of a defined legal
    relationship whether contractual or not. It is provided that an arbitration agreement
    shall be in writing.
Section 7(4)
of the Act provides as to when an arbitration
    agreement can be construed as in writing if it is contained in various documents





    and pleadings.
15.
Section 8
provides that a party to an arbitration agreement can file an
    application before a judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter
    which is the subject of an arbitration agreement, to refer parties to arbitration.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
20/31
ARBP515.13
Section 9
of the Act provides for interim measures which can be applied by a party.
Section 10
provides for composition of arbitral tribunal which can be determined
    by the parties to the arbitration agreement.
Section 11
of the Act provides for




                                                           
    appointment of arbitrators in the mode and manner prescribed therein and
    prescribes for an application to be made by a party to the arbitration agreement for
    appointment of arbitrators before the Chief Justice or any person or institution




                                                          
    designated by him.
16.
Sections 12
and
13
of the Act provides for grounds for challenge which
    challenge can be made only by the parties to the arbitration agreement. Under
section 14
of the Act, the parties to the arbitration agreement can apply to the court
    to decide on the termination of the mandate if a controversy remains concerning
                               
    any of the grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section 1
of
section 14
.
Section
    15
of the Act provides for termination of mandate and for making an application by
    the parties to the arbitration for substitution of arbitrator.
Section 17
of the Act
            


    permits parties to the arbitration agreement to apply for interim measures before
         



    the arbitral tribunal.
Section 18
of the Act provides that the parties shall be treated
    with equality and each party shall be given a full opportunity to present his case.
17.
Section 19
provides for determination of rules of procedure and further
    provides that subject to the said part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure
    to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting its proceedings.
Section 20
provides for an agreement between the parties to the arbitration agreement to agree
    on the place of arbitration.
Section 21
provides as to when the arbitral proceedings
    commences unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
Section 22
to
26
of the Act
    provides for the mode and manner of conducting arbitration proceedings by the
    parties before the arbitral tribunal and consequence of a default of a party.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
21/31
ARBP515.13
18.
Section 28
of the Act provides that what rules shall be applicable to




                                                                                   
    substance of dispute. The arbitral tribunal has to decide in accordance with the
    terms of the contract entered into between the parties. Under
section 31
, the




                                                           
    arbitral tribunal has to render reasons in the arbitral award unless the parties have
    agreed that no reasons are to be given. It provides that a signed copy of the arbitral
    award has to be delivered or shall be delivered to each party. The arbitral tribunal




                                                          
    is empowered to grant interest unless the parties have otherwise agreed that interest
    not to be awarded by the arbitral tribunal. Under
section 32
of the Act the arbitral




                                              
    proceedings are terminated if the parties agree on the termination of the
    proceedings. Under
section 33
, a party may apply for correction, interpretation and
                               
    for additional award. Under
section 34
of the Act, a party can challenge an arbitral
    award on the grounds setout therein.
19.   A perusal of the aforesaid provisions of the Act and the scheme makes it
    clear that only the parties to the arbitration agreement can exercise various rights
            


    and invoke the mechanism of adjudication of disputes by arbitration by referring
         



    their disputes to arbitration for adjudication and not by an outsider. The only
    exception carved out under the Act is under
sections 40
and
41
i.e. in case of the





    death of a party to the arbitration agreement which can be enforceable by or
    against the legal representative of the deceased and in case of insolvency, if such
    insolvant was party to arbitration agreement and if official assignee or receiver
    adopts such contract.
20.   In my view the arbitral tribunal is a private forum and gets jurisdiction to
    adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties to the arbitration agreement and
    not the persons who are not parties to the arbitration agreement. Proceedings under
section 34
of the Act are not by way of an appeal. There is no other provision
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
22/31
ARBP515.13


    under the Act for challenge of an arbitral award except what is provided under
section 34
of the Act. In my view only a party to the arbitration agreement which
    is defined under
section 2(1) (h)
of the Act can challenge an arbitral award under
section 34
of the Act and not by a person who is not a party to the arbitration
    agreement unless covered by
sections 40
and
41
of the Act. However if a person
    is wrongly impleaded as party to the arbitration proceedings and is aggrieved by




                                                          
    arbitral award, he can invoke
section 34
of the Act.
21.   Division Bench of this court in case of
Girish Mulchand Mehta and
    another
(supra) has held that a member of the society speaks through the society
                               
    and has no independent right qua the society. Society is entitled to represent as the
    corporate aggregate.
Division bench of this court has considered the judgment of
                              
    Supreme Court in case of
Ramesh Himmatlal Shah
(supra) which is relied upon
    by Mr.Thacker, learned senior counsel for the petitioners and held that the
    members of the society not having challenged the resolution passed by the society
            


    and such resolution not having been set side by the appropriate forum are binding
         



    on all the members.
22.   Supreme court in case of
Firm Ashok Traders vs. Gurmukhdas Saluja and
    others
AIR 2004 SC 1433 while construing
section 9
of the Act held that a person
    not a party to an arbitration agreement cannot enter the court for protection under
section 9
of the Act. A party to an arbitration agreement can invoke the said





    jurisdiction for securing relief which the court has power to grant before, during or
    after arbitral proceeding by virtue of
section 9
. The court is competent to grant
    such relief to a party under clauses (i) and (ii) of
section 9
. In my view the
    principles
laid down by
the Supreme Court while interpreting
section 9
of the Act
    which provides for a remedy of interim measures available only to a party to
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
23/31
ARBP515.13


    arbitration agreement are applicable also to the proceedings under
section 34
of the




                                                                                   
    Act for setting aside an award only by a party to an arbitration agreement subject to
sections 40
and
41
of the Act and by a person wrongly impleaded as party to




                                                           
    arbitration proceedings and is aggrieved by such arbitral award.
23.   Supreme court in case of The state of
Maharashtra & Ors. vs. Ark Builders




                                                          
    Pvt. Ltd.
AIR 2011 SC 1374 while interpreting
section 31 (5)
of the Act has held
    that copy of an arbitral award has to be delivered to the party by the arbitral




                                              
    tribunal and the limitation for making an application for correction or interpretation
    of award under
section 33(1)
and for making an application for setting aside an
                               
    award under
section 34(3)
commences from the date of delivery of such arbitral
    award by the arbitral tribunal to a party to the arbitration agreement. Paragraph 12
                              
    of
the said judgment
reads thus:-
12. We are supported in our view by the decision of this Court
            

              in
Union of India v. Tecco Trichy Engineers & Contractors
              MANU/SC/0214/2005
: (2005) 4 SCC 239; in paragraph 8 of
         



              the decision it was held and observed as follows:
8. The delivery of an arbitral award under Sub-section (5)
               of
Section 31
is not a matter of mere formality. It is a matter
               of substance. It is only after the stage under
Section 31
has





               passed that the stage of termination of arbitral proceedings
               within the meaning of
Section 32
of the Act arises. The
               delivery of arbitral award to the party, to be effective, has to
               be "received" by the party. This delivery by the Arbitral
               Tribunal and receipt by the party of the award sets in





               motion several periods of limitation such as an
               application for correction and interpretation of an award
               within 30 days under
Section 33(1)
, an application for
               making an additional award under
Section 33(4)
and an
               application for setting aside an award under
Section
               34(3)
and so on. As this delivery of the copy of award has
               the effect of conferring certain rights on the party as also
               bringing to an end the right to exercise those rights on
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
24/31
ARBP515.13


               expiry of the prescribed period of limitation which would
               be calculated from that date, the delivery of the copy of




                                                                                  
               award by the Tribunal and the receipt thereof by each party
               constitutes an important stage in the arbitral proceedings.
(Emphasis added)
24.   Supreme Court in case of
Benarsi Krishna Committee & Ors. vs. Karmyogi




                                                         
    Shelters Pvt. Ltd.
(2012) 9 SCC 496 has held that copy of the award has to be
    delivered to the party as defined in
section 2(1) (h)
of the Act which clearly
    indicates that such a person shall be a party to the arbitration agreement. A copy of




                                              
    the award can be served only on the party himself and not his or her agent or
                               
    advocate. Paragraph 15 of
the said judgment
of the Supreme Court read thus :-
15. Having taken note of the submissions advanced on behalf
                              
              of the respective parties and having particular regard to the
              expression "party" as defined in
Section 2(h)
of the 1996 Act
              read with the provisions of
Sections 31(5)
and
34(3)
of the
              1996 Act, we are not inclined to interfere with the decision of
            


              the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court impugned in these
              proceedings. The expression "party" has been amply dealt with
         



              in
Tecco Trechy Engineer
's case (supra) and also in
ARK
              Builders Pvt. Ltd.
's case (supra), referred to hereinabove. It is
              one thing for an Advocate to act and plead on behalf of a party
              in a proceeding and it is another for an Advocate to act as the





              party himself. The expression "party", as defined in
Section
              2(h)
of the 1996 Act, clearly indicates a person who is a party
              to an arbitration agreement. The said definition is not qualified
              in any way so as to include the agent of the party to such





              agreement. Any reference, therefore, made in
Section 31(5)
and
Section 34(2)
of the 1996 Act can only mean the party
              himself and not his or her agent, or Advocate empowered to
              act on the basis of a Vakalatnama. In such circumstances,
              proper compliance with
Section 31(5)
would mean delivery of
              a signed copy of the Arbitral Award on the party himself and
              not on his Advocate, which gives the party concerned the right
              to proceed Under
Section 34(3)
of the aforesaid Act.
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
25/31
ARBP515.13
25.   Supreme Court in case of
S.N.Prasad vs. Monnet Finance Ltd. and others
AIR 2011 SC 442 after considering the definition of arbitration agreement under
section 2(1) (b)
definition of 'Party' under
section 2(1) (h)
and
section 7
of the




                                                          
    Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has held that there can be reference to
    arbitration only if there is an arbitration agreement between the parties. An
    arbitrator can be appointed under the said Act at the instance of a party to an




                                                         
    arbitration agreement only in respect of the disputes with another party to the
    arbitration agreement. If there is a dispute between a party to an arbitration




                                              
    agreement with other parties to the arbitration agreement as also non-parties to the
    arbitration agreement, reference to arbitration or appointment of arbitrator can be
                               
    only with respect to the parties to the arbitration agreement and not the non-parties.
    It is held that since there was no arbitration agreement between the parties, the
                              
    impleadment of the person not party to arbitration agreement as a respondent in the
    arbitration proceedings and the award against such person in such arbitration can
    not be sustained. Paragraphs 5, 7 and 19 of
the said judgment
read thus :-
5.     The High Court of Delhi by two orders dated 23.5.2000
              appointed a retired Judge of the High Court as the sole
              arbitrator. The arbitrations ended in two awards dated
              1.5.2002. The first award directed respondents 2 and 3 and





              appellant to pay Rs. 93,23,288/- (that is Rs. 50 lakhs with
              interest at 20; up to the date of the appointment of arbitrator)
              with interest at 18% per annum from 24.5.2000. Similarly the
              second award directed respondents 2 and 3 and appellant to
              pay Rs. 46,49,315/- (that is Rs. 25 lakhs with interest at 20%





              upto the date of appointment of arbitrator) with interest at 18%
              per annum from 24.5.2000. The two arbitration awards were
              challenged by the appellant by filing applications under
Section 34
of the Act (OMP No. 319/2002 and 322/2002). The
              second and third respondents also challenged the awards in
              OMP No. 320/2002 and 321/2002. A learned single Judge of
              the Delhi High Court by a common order dated 22.5.2006
              dismissed the said applications. The said common order dated
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
26/31
ARBP515.13


          22.5.2006, insofar as it dismisses OMP 319/2002 and
          322/2002, is challenged by the appellant in this appeals by




                                                                               
          special leave.
7.
Section 2(b)
defines "arbitration agreement' as an agreement
          referred to in
Section 7
of the Act.
Section 2(h)
defines "party"
as party to an arbitration agreement.
Section 7
of the Act
          defines an 'arbitration agreement'. Sub-section (1) of
Section 7
defines an arbitration agreement as an agreement by the parties
          to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
          arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined
          legal relationship, whether contractual or not. Sub-section (2)




                                          
          provides that an arbitration agreement may be in the form of
          an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a separate
                           
          agreement. Sub-section (3) requires an arbitration agreement to
          be in writing. Sub-section (4) explains as to when an
          arbitration agreement could be said to be in writing, that is: (a)
                          
          a document signed by the parties; (b) an exchange of letters,
          telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication which
          provide a record of the arbitration agreement; or (c) an
          exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the
            

          existence of the arbitration agreement is alleged by one party
          and not denied by the other. Sub-section (5) provides that the
         



          reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration
          clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in
          writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration
          clause a part of the contract. Thus there can be reference to





          arbitration only if there is an arbitration agreement between the
          parties.
The Act
makes it clear that an Arbitrator can be
          appointed under the Act at the instance of a party to an
          arbitration agreement only in respect of disputes with another
          party to the arbitration agreement. If there is a dispute between





          a party to an arbitration agreement, with other parties to the
          arbitration agreement as also non-parties to the arbitration
          agreement, reference to arbitration or appointment of arbitrator
          can be only with respect to the parties to the arbitration
          agreement and not the non-parties.
19. As there was no arbitration agreement between the parties
          (the first respondent and appellant), the impleading of
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
27/31
ARBP515.13


                 appellant as a respondent in the arbitration proceedings and the
                 award against the appellant in such arbitration cannot be




                                                                                    
                 sustained. As a consequence, both the arbitration awards, as
                 against the appellant are liable to be set aside. If the first




                                                            
                 respondent wants to enforce the alleged guarantee of the
                 appellant, it is open to the first respondent to do so in
                 accordance with law.
26.       In my view since the petitioners herein could not have been impleaded as
    parties to the arbitration proceedings before the learned arbitrator for want of
    arbitration agreement between the petitioners and the respondent no.1, nor the




                                                
    petitioners were parties to the arbitration proceedings, petitioners have no locus to
                                  
    file petition under
section 34
of the Act for setting aside such an arbitral award.
27.       This court in case of Supreme Megha Constructions LLP Vs.Symphony
                                 
    Co-operative Housing Society Limited and Mr.Ajay Wadhwa applicant in Notice
    of Motion (L) No.2410 of 2014 in Suit (L) No. 867 of 2014, delivered on 29 th
    October 2014 has held that since the applicant in the notice of motion who was
            


    member of the society was not party to the arbitration agreement cannot file an
         



    application under
section 8
of the said Act for referring the parties to the suit to
    arbitration. This court has considered
section 8
read with the definition of party





    under
section 2(1) (h)
of the said Act and has held that society was party to the
    arbitration agreement and not the applicant member and thus application under
section 8
would not be maintainable at the instance of such member who was not
    party to the arbitration agreement. Paragraphs 23 and 24 of
the said judgment
read





    thus :-
23. Perusal of the record indicates that except the plaintiff
                 and the defendant no.1 society, none of the parties to this
                 proceedings are party to development agreement. In my view
                 since applicant and other defendants except the society are not
                 parties to the arbitration agreement, even if application under
section 8
would have been filed by the applicant to this Notice
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
28/31
ARBP515.13


              of Motion or other defendants except the society, same would
              not have been maintainable. Application under
section 8
can




                                                                                    
              be filed only by a party to the arbitration agreement.
Section 8
has to be read with
section 2(1) (h)
of the Arbitration and




                                                            
              Conciliation Act, 1996.
24. This court in case of
Vardhaman Developers Ltd. vs.
              Andheri Krupa Prasad Co-op.Hsg.Soc.Ltd
. & Ors. in Notice




                                                           
              of Motion (L) No. 248 of 2014 in Suit No.94 of 2014 in a
              judgment rendered on 20th February, 2014 has taken a view
              that the member of the society who was not party to the
              arbitration agreement cannot mention an application under
section 8
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. I am
              therefore of the view that even such application under
section
                                
              8
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act if would have been
              filed by a member claiming through the society which society
              is party to the arbitration agreement, such application would
                               
              not be maintainable.
28.   In my view the principles
laid down by
this court in
the said judgment
in the
    case of Supreme Megha Constructions LLP (supra) would be applicable to the
            


    application made by the petitioners under
section 34
of the said Act. I am therefore
         



    of the view that this petition is not maintainable at the instance of the petitioners.
29.   In so far as judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Sohan Nayyar and





    others (supra) relied upon by Mr.Thacker, learned senior counsel is concerned, a
    perusal of the said judgment clearly indicates that the said judgment was delivered
    in the proceedings governed by the provisions of
Arbitration Act
1940.
In case of
Chennai Container Terminal Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) Division Bench of Madras High
    court has dealt with the proceedings under the provisions of the
Arbitration and
    Conciliation Act, 1996
. Question of law considered by the Madras High Court was
    whether the applicant who was neither a party to the arbitration agreement nor to
    the arbitration proceedings could file an application under
section 34
of the
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
29/31
ARBP515.13


    Arbitration and Conciliation Act for setting aside the arbitral award. The Madras




                                                                                   
    High Court has held that there is nothing in the subject or context of
section 34
which would suggest the court to depart from the definitional meaning of the




                                                           
    expression 'party' . It is held that the expression party is used in
section 34 (2)
in
    its definitional sense to mean a party to the arbitration proceedings and does not
    include a third person who is not party to the agreement.
30.   It is held that a third party can render the limitation period envisaged under




                                              
    the Act otiose by merely claiming knowledge of the award long after the period of
    limitation as expired.     The Madras High Court in
the said judgment
has
                               
    distinguished the judgment of Delhi High Court in case of Sohan Nayyar (supra)
    by holding that the Delhi high Court had found that the provisions of the
Arbitration Act
1940 did not specify as to who can make an application and
    therefore held that as the said
Arbitration Act
1940 did not prohibit filing of an
    objection by a third party, there was no bar to someone else filing objections
            


    provided they had some interest in the subject matter of the litigation. The Madras
         



    High Court adverted to the judgment of Supreme Court in case of M/s.Sundaram
    Finance Limited vs. M/s.NEPC Limited 1999(2) SCC 499 holding that the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 is based on UNCITRAL Model and is
    entirely different from the
Arbitration Act
1940. The Supreme Court has held in
    the said judgment that the provisions of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996
    must therefore be interpreted and construed independently and in fact reference to





    1940 Act may actually lead to misconstruction.
31.   A perusal of
section 30
read with
section 33
of the Arbitration Act, 1940
    makes it clear that an application to challenge the existence or validity of an
    arbitration agreement or an award or to have the effect of either determined could
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
30/31
ARBP515.13


    be applied to the court by any party to the arbitration agreement or any person




                                                                                   
    claiming under him. A perusal of the said Act makes it clear that the expression
    'party to an arbitration agreement' has not been defined under the said
Arbitration




                                                           
    Act
1940. A perusal of the provisions of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
and in particular
section 34(2)
makes it clear that an application for setting aside an
    award can be made only by the party which is defined under
section 2(1) (h)
of the




                                                          
    said Act or by the party to the arbitration proceedings.
32.   A perusal of
section 34
of the Act makes it clear that the said application has




                                               
    to be filed within the time prescribed under
section 34(3)
of the said Act. The time
                                
    to file such application commences from the date of such party receiving copy of
    the arbitral award from the learned arbitrator. Under
section 31(5)
of the Act the
                               
    arbitral tribunal has to deliver a copy of the award to each party. It is thus clear
    that a party to the arbitration agreement who may be a party to the arbitration
    proceedings and/or all the parties to the arbitration proceedings only would be
            


    entitled to be furnished with a copy of the arbitral award by the learned arbitrator
         



    under
section 31(5)
of the Act and upon delivery of copy of award from the
    arbitrator it which would commence the period of limitation for the purpose of
    filing an application under
section 34
and can be filed within the time prescribed





    therein. If the arguments of the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners
    are accepted that the petitioners though were not parties to the arbitration
    agreement nor were parties to the arbitration proceedings can file an application for





    setting aside an award, there would be no limitation for filing an application for
    setting aside an arbitral award at the instance of such an outsider.
33.   In my view the grounds of challenge which are available under
section 34
of
    the Act and various other provisions which are applicable to the parties who are
    defined under
section 2(1) (h)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 cannot
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
Kvm
31/31
ARBP515.13


    be exercised by an outsider or by a person who is not a party to the arbitration




                                                                                      
    agreement or the arbitration proceedings. In my view the petitioners who are
    members of the society which society was party to the arbitration agreement not




                                                              
    having filed application for setting aside the impugned award cannot step into the
    shoes of the society and cannot be granted any leave to challenge the arbitral
    award. In my view there is no provision under the
Arbitration and Conciliation




                                                             
    Act, 1996
for granting any such leave as prayed by the petitioners to file an
    application under
section 34
for setting aside the arbitral award.
34.    In my view the petition filed by the petitioners who are neither parties to the
                                   
    arbitration agreement nor parties to the arbitration proceedings can not maintain
    this petition.
35.    I therefore pass the following order :-
(a)   Arbitration Petition is dismissed as not maintainable.
(b)   No order as to costs.
[R.D. DHANUKA, J.]
::: Downloaded on - 08/12/2014 23:47:26 :::
