Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 35 of 2021
Citation: SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/45616941/

[Cites
21
, Cited by
13
]
Himachal Pradesh High Court
Bhim Singh vs State Of Himachal Pradesh And Others on 4 February, 2021
Author:
Anoop Chitkara
Bench:
Anoop Chitkara
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH,
                     SHIMLA




                                                                           .
Cr.MMO No.35 of 2021





                                Reserved on : January 22, 2021
                                Decided on : 4.2. 2021





Bhim Singh
                                                                ...Petitioner.
Versus

State of Himachal Pradesh and others
                                                                ...Respondents.
Coram:
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge.
Whether approved for reporting?1 No.

For the petitioner    :        Mr. Vinod Chauhan, Advocate.
For the respondent   :         Mr. Vikas Rathour, Mr. Narinder Guleria, Additional Advocate
                               Generals, Mr. Bhupinder Thakur Deputy Advocate General and


                               Mr. Rajat Chauhan, Law Officer, for Respondent No.1/State.
Mr. Anil Kumar, Advocate, for Respondents No.4, 5 and 6.
Anoop Chitkara, Judge





             For quashing of FIR and consequential proceedings, the accused (petitioner)
and complainant, who are respondents No.4 to 7, have come up before this Court under
Section 482
CrPC on the grounds that they have resolved their dispute through
compromise.
2.           Based on the complaint of one Shiv Kumar, which disclosed cognizable and
non-bailable offences, an FIR No.1 of 2021 dated 1.1.2021, was registered at Police
Station, Paonta Sahib, District Sirmour, H.P. The investigation revealed that on
31.12.2020 in the night near Vijay Medical Store at Devinagar, Paonta Sahib, an
accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of the accused and the vehicle
driven by the accused hit 2-3 other vehicles. In the said accident, complainant Shiv
Kumar received injuries, who was shifted to CHC, Paonta Sahib and after his medical
1
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
2
check up, MLC was received. After completion of the investigation, the police filed
report under Section 173 Cr.P.C.
3.          The present petition has been filed jointly by accused, Bhim Singh,




                                                                        .
complainant-injured Shiv Sharma and other occupants of the vehicles. The contents of





the petition reveals that the accused and complainant have entered into an out of Court
settlement as per compromise dated 4.1.2021. Photocopy of the same is placed on





record as Annexure P-2.
4.          On 20.1.2021, notices were issued to the respondents. Today, this matter
was taken up in Physical Court as all the parties were present, except Shri Rajat





Chaudhary (respondent No.7). Complainant, Shri Shiv Sharma, Shri Rajesh Kumar and
Shri Dayal Singh Negi, are present and their statements were recorded separately, on
oath. Shri Rajesh Kumar and Shri Dayal Singh Negi, submitted on oath that only Shiv
Kumar had received injury and neither Rajesh Kumar, nor Dawal Singh or Rajat had

received any injury in that accident.
5.          Given the fact that no injuries were received by Shri Rajat Chaudhary
(respondent No.7), no difference would be made if his statement is not recorded.
6.         Learned Additional Advocate General has also handed over the reply-status



report in the Court, which is taken on record.
7.          Although, the withdrawal of FIR would be through District Magistrate as a




normal procedure. However, there is inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to intervene in such kind of matter and it





is not the requirement of law that the cancellation has to be approved only through the
District Magistrate. Inherent Jurisdiction of High Court under
section 482
CrPC can





always be exercised, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each and every
case.
8.         Even if this case is put to trial, the parties are likely to maintain the stand
which they have taken in this compromise which is likely to result in the acquittal of
the accused. The parties are likely to live peacefully and intervention at this stage
would create cordial environment for peaceful relation between them.
9.         If the inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC is not invoked, then it
may lead to bitterness in relations. Every time the accused will be summoned in the
Court, he would blame complainant for the money spent on case and travel.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
3
STAGE OF QUASHING FIR:
.
10.
In
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitul H. Chanchani and another
,
1998(7) SCC 698, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds that the determination of the question
as regards the propriety of the order of the Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing





process need not necessarily wait till the stage of framing the charge. The Court
observed thus :-
.... .... ....This argument, however, does not appeal to us inasmuch





                   as merely because an accused has a right to plead at the time of
                   framing of charges that there is no sufficient material for such framing
                   of charges as provided in
Section 245
of the Criminal Procedure Code,
                   he is debarred from approaching the court even at an earliest (sic
                   earlier) point of time when the Magistrate takes cognizance of the

                   offence and summons the accused to appear to contend that the very
                   issuance of the order of taking cognizance is invalid on the ground

                   that no offence can be said to have been made out on the allegations
                   made in the complaint petition. It has been held in a number of cases
                   that power under
Section 482
has to be exercised sparingly and in the
                   interest of justice. But allowing the criminal proceeding to continue
                   even where the allegations in the complaint petition do not make out


                   any offence would be tantamount to an abuse of the process of court,
                   and therefore, there cannot be any dispute that in such case power
                   under
section 482
of the Code can be exercised.
11.
In
Kunstocom Electronics (I) Pvt. Ltd. v. Gilt Pack Ltd. and another
,
(2002) 2 SCC 383, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:-
8. .... .... ....There is no hard and fast rule that the objection as to
                   cognizability of offence and maintainability of the complaint should be
                   allowed to be raised only at the time of framing the charge.
12.
In
Girish Sarwate v. State of A.P.
, 2005(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 758, the Full
       Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court holds as under:-
30.
In the light of these judgments of the Supreme Court, we have no
                   doubt in our mind that under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
                   Procedure, the High Court has the power to quash an FIR or even a
                   complaint subject to limitations and conditions
laid down by
the
                   Hon'ble Supreme Court in various judgments. It need not wait for
                   completion of investigation and taking cognizance by the Magistrate.
There is no dispute that this power has to be exercised by the High
                   Courts very sparingly with circumspection and also in rarest of rare
                   cases. Though there are limitations on exercise of power by the High
                   Court, yet that would not in any way suggest that High Court lacks the
                   power.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
4
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON JURISPRUDENCE OF QUASHING:
13.
In
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR 1960 SC 866, a three Judges Bench




                                                                        .
of Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
6. .... ... ...It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of the
              High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case





              either to prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise
              to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings
              instituted against an accused person must be tried under the
              provisions of the Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to
              interfere with the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not
              possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule





              which would govern the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction.
However, we may indicate some categories of cases where the
              inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for quashing the
              proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possible for the
              High Court to take the view that the institution or continuance of

              criminal proceedings against an accused person may amount to the
              abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the

              impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the
              criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to
              have been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears
              that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the
              said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in quashing the


              proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may,
              for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise
              where the allegations in the First Information Report or the
              complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in




              their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no
              question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a matter merely of
              looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to decide





              whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would
              be legitimate for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly
              unjust to allow the process of the criminal Court to be issued against





              the accused person. A third category of cases in which the inherent
              jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may also
              arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations made
              against the accused person do constitute an offence alleged but there
              is either no legal evidence adduced in support of the case or evidence
              adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing
              with this class of cases, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
              between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is
              evidence which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the
              accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence which on its
              appreciation may or may not support the accusation in question. In
              exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High Court would not
              embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is
              reliable or not. That is the function of the trial magistrate, and
              ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the High
              Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
5
appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the accused
                  would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of
                  the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the
                  matter of quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of the




                                                                            .
judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re: Shripad G.
                  Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v.
Queen Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of
                  Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 : (
AIR 1954 Punj 193), Nripendra Bhusan
                  Roy v. Gobina Bandhu Majumdar
, AIR 1924 Cal 1018 and
                  Ramanathan Chettiyar v. Sivarama Subramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 :
(AIR 1925 Mad 39).
14.
In
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
,
1988 (1) SCC 692, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under:-
7. The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at the
                 initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court
                 is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie
                 establish the offence. It is also for the court to take into consideration
                 any special features which appear in a particular case to consider

                 whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a
                 prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be

                 utilised for any oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the court
                 chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful
                 purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to
                 continue, the court may while taking into consideration the special
                 facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at a


                 preliminary stage.
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS ON QUASHING ON COMPROMISE:
15.
In
Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and Ors. vs.





State of Gujarat
& anr., Criminal Appeal No. 1723 of 2017, decided on 4.10.2017, a
Three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for
quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as follows:
15. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
              subject, may be summarised in the following propositions :
(i)
Section 482
preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to
                 prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of
                 justice. The provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises
                 and preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a
                 First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a
                 settlement has been arrived at between the offender and the victim is
                 not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of
                 compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the power
                 of the court is governed by the provisions of
section 320
of the Code
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
6
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under
Section 482
is
     attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or complaint




                                                                .
should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482
, the
     High Court must evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the





     exercise of the inherent power;
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and
     plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii)





     to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information Report
     should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have
     settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances





     of each case and no exhaustive elaboration of principles can be
     formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under
Section 482
and while dealing
     with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High Court must have

     due regard to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and
     serious offences involving mental depravity or offences such as

     murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed though the
     victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such
     offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a serious
     impact upon society. The decision to continue with the trial in such
     cases is founded on the overriding element of public interest in


     punishing persons for serious offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal
     cases which have an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil




     dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the
     inherent power to quash is concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial,
     financial, mercantile, partnership or similar transactions with an
     essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall for quashing
     where parties have settled the dispute;
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding
     if in view of the compromise between the disputants, the possibility of
     a conviction is remote and the continuation of a criminal proceeding
     would cause oppression and prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions
(viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving the financial and
     economic well-being of the state have implications which lie beyond
     the domain of a mere dispute between private disputants. The High
     Court would be justified in declining to quash where the offender is
     involved in an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
     misdemeanour. The consequences of the act complained of upon the
     financial or economic system will weigh in the balance.
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
7
16.       A three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Gian Singh v. State of
Punjab
, 2012(10) SCC 303, has settled the law on quashing on account of
compromise/compounding, in the following terms:
.
53.
Section 482
of the Code, as its very language suggests, saves the
                inherent power of the High Court which it has by virtue of it being a
                superior court to prevent abuse of the process of any court or
                otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It begins with the words,





                'nothing in this Code' which means that the provision is an overriding
                provision. These words leave no manner of doubt that none of the
                provisions of the Code limits or restricts the inherent power. The
                guideline for exercise of such power is provided in
Section 482
itself
                i.e., to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure





                the ends of justice. As has been repeatedly stated that
Section 482
confers no new powers on High Court; it merely safeguards existing
                inherent powers possessed by High Court necessary to prevent abuse
                of the process of any Court or to secure the ends of justice. It is
                equally well settled that the power is not to be resorted to if there is

                specific provision in the Code for the redress of the grievance of an
                aggrieved party. It should be exercised very sparingly and it should

                not be exercised as against the express bar of law engrafted in any
                other provision of the Code.
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of
                settlement between an offender and victim is not the same thing as


                compounding of offence. They are different and not interchangeable.
Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of offences given to a
                court under
Section 320
is materially different from the quashing of
                criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its inherent




                jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a criminal court is
                circumscribed by the provisions contained in
Section 320
and the
                court is guided solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand,





                the formation of opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal
                offence or criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the
                material on record as to whether the ends of justice would justify such





                exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may be acquittal
                or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to
                the fact that dispute between the offender and victim has been settled
                although offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion,
                continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and
                justice in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is put
                to an end and peace is restored; securing the ends of justice being the
                ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful
                effect on the public and consist in wrong doing that seriously
                endangers and threatens well-being of society and it is not safe to
                leave the crime- doer only because he and the victim have settled the
                dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet
                certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with or without
                permission of the Court. In respect of serious offences like murder,
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
8
rape, dacoity, etc; or other offences of mental depravity under
Indian
                Penal Code
or offences of moral turpitude under special statutes, like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public
                servants while working in that capacity, the settlement between




                                                                           .
offender and victim can have no legal sanction at all. However, certain
                offences which overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour





                having arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial,
                partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
                matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute,
                where the wrong is basically to victim and the offender and victim





                have settled all disputes between them amicably, irrespective of the
                fact that such offences have not been made compoundable, the High
                Court may within the framework of its inherent power, quash the
                criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or F.I.R if it is satisfied that
                on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of





                offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal
                proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be
                defeated. The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case
                will depend on its own facts and no hard and fast category can be
                prescribed.
17.
In Criminal Appeal No. 349 of 2019, titled as
State of Madhya Pradesh vs.

Laxmi Narayan
, decided on 5th of March, 2019, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as
under:
13. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of this
                Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed and held as
                under:
i) that the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash
                    the criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable offences





                    under Section 320 of the Code can be exercised having
                    overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character, particularly
                    those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
                    matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties





                    have resolved the entire dispute amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which
                    involved heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
                    offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
                    private in nature and have a serious impact on society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences
                    under the special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the
                    offences committed by public servants while working in that
                    capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of compromise
                    between the victim and the offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act etc. would
                    fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and therefore
                    are to be treated as crime against the society and not against the
                    individual alone, and therefore, the criminal proceedings for the
                    offence under
Section 307
IPC and/or the
Arms Act
etc. which
                    have a serious impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
9
of powers under Section 482 of the Code, on the ground that the
                     parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst themselves.
However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely
                     because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the




                                                                           .
charge is framed under this provision. It would be open to the High
                     Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is





                     there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
                     evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge
                     under
Section 307
IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the
                     High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such





                     injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
                     weapons used etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court
                     would be permissible only after the evidence is collected after
                     investigation and the charge sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or
                     during the trial. Such exercise is not permissible when the matter is





                     still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate conclusion in
                     paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in the case
                     of Narinder Singh (supra) should be read harmoniously and to be
                     read as a whole and in the circumstances stated hereinabove;
v) while exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code to

                     quash the criminal proceedings in respect of non-compoundable
                     offences, which are private in nature and do not have a serious

                     impact on society, on the ground that there is a
                     settlement/compromise between the victim and the offender, the
                     High Court is required to consider the antecedents of the accused;
                     the conduct of the accused, namely, whether the accused was
                     absconding and why he was absconding, how he had managed with


                     the complainant to enter into a compromise etc.
14. Insofar as the present case is concerned, the High Court has
                 quashed the criminal proceedings for the offences under
Sections




                 307
and
34
IPC mechanically and even when the investigation was
                 under progress. Somehow, the accused managed to enter into a
                 compromise with the complainant and sought quashing of the FIR on





                 the basis of a settlement. The allegations are serious in nature. He used
                 the fire arm also in commission of the offence. Therefore, the gravity of
                 the offence and the conduct of the accused is not at all considered by





                 the High Court and solely on the basis of a settlement between the
                 accused and the complainant, the High Court has mechanically quashed
                 the FIR, in exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code, which is
                 not sustainable in the eyes of law. The High Court has also failed to
                 note the antecedents of the accused.
RELIEF:
18.         In view of the entirety of the facts of the case, as well as judicial precedents,
a few of which have been mentioned hereinabove, I am of the considered opinion that
continuation of these proceedings will only cause unnecessary burden on the trial Court
but in all likelihood is going to cause distressing hardship on both the accused as well as
the accused, without resulting into any fruitful purpose whatsoever. Moreover, our trial
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
10
Courts are already burdened with so many cases and it will be a total wastage of the
valuable time of the Courts. If these types of proceedings are permitted to be continued
and the accused are prosecuted, it will serve no purpose whatsoever. Therefore, I am of




                                                                            .
the considered opinion that this is a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High





Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the
above mentioned FIR and consequent proceedings.
19.
In
Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v. State of Himachal Pradesh
(SC
); 2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon'ble Supreme Court holds as under:-
47. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the
                  appellants came to this Court challenging the order of cognizance only





                  because of the reason that matter was already pending as the appellants
                  had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the order of the High Court
                  rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet. Having
                  regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In
                  any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of

                  cognizance would automatically stands vitiated.
CONSEQUENCES:
20.
In
Shakuntala Sawhney v. Kaushalya Sawhney
, (1979) 3 SCR 639, at p
642, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
The finest hour of Justice arise propitiously when parties, despite falling
                  apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship or reunion.
21.          Consequently, this petition is allowed and FIR No.1 of 2021, dated




1.1.2021, registered at Police Station, Paonta Sahib, district Sirmour, (H.P.) for the





commission of offences punishable under
Sections 279
,
337
of the Indian Penal Code, is
quashed. Since FIR has been quashed, all the consequential proceedings, if any, are also
quashed and set aside. The bail bonds are accordingly cancelled and discharged.
Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
(Anoop Chitkara),
                                                                  Vacation Judge.
4.2. 2021 (KS)
::: Downloaded on - 04/02/2021 20:16:35 :::HCHP
