Title: Search
Court: High Courts.
Date: 81 of 2017
Citation: SCC online SC 1025 and as quoted below :
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/47211894/

[Cites
37
, Cited by
15
]
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
M/S. Unigreen Global Private Limited vs Punjab National Bank on 1 December, 2017
IN THE NATIONAL COMPANY LAW APPELLATE TRIBUNAL

            Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81 of 2017
[arising out of Order dated 8th May, 2017 by NCLT, Principal Bench,
New Delhi in C.P. No. (IB)-39(PB)/2017]


IN THE MATTER OF :

M/s. Unigreen Global Private Limited
467-468, Katra Ishwar Bhawan,
Khari Baoli, Delhi - 110 006                           ...Appellant

Vs.

1.    Punjab National Bank,
      Large Corporate Branch,
      Tolstoy House, Tolstoy Marg,
      Connaught Place,
      New Delhi - 110 001.

2.    Corporation Bank,
      M-3-4, Shopping Centre,
      Greater Kailash -II,
      New Delhi - 110 048.

3.    Vijaya Bank,
      N-17, Ground Floor,
      Vijaya Building,
      Barakhamba road,
      New Delhi - 110 001.

4.    Oriental Bank of Commerce,
      M - 1/2/3, Connaught Circus,
      Connaught Place,
      New Delhi - 110 001.                      ...Respondents

Present:

For Appellant :        Shri Dhruv Gupta and Shri P. Nagesh, Advocates

For 1st Respondent :   Shri Sartaj Singh, Advocate

For 4th Respondent :   Shri Kailash Sharma, Advocate




                                   Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   1
                               JUDGMENT
SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA, J.
This appeal has been preferred by the appellant - Unigreen Global

Private Limited (Corporate Debtor) against order dated 8th May, 2017 passed

by the Adjudicating Authority (National Company Law Tribunal), Principal

Bench, New Delhi whereby and whereunder the application preferred by the

appellant - Corporate Debtor under Section 10 of the Insolvency &

Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the 'I & B Code') in Form 6

of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority)

Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Adjudicating Authority Rules') has

been rejected. The Adjudicating Authority has also imposed penalty of Rs.

Ten Lakhs on the appellant - Corporate Debtor under Section 65 of the I & B

Code.
2.      The questions involved in this appeal are :
i)    Whether     non-disclosure   of   facts   beyond     the    statutory

              requirement under the I & B Code read with relevant form,

              prescribed under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to

              Adjudicating Authority), Rules, 2016 can be a ground to dismiss

              an application for initiation of Corporate Insolvency Resolution

              Process ?
and
ii)   Whether the penalty imposed by the Adjudicating Authority

              under Section 65 of the I & B Code is legal or not?
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   2
3.    The brief facts of the case are that the appellant - Corporate Debtor /

Corporate Appellant filed an application under Section 10 in Form 6 for

initiation of Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process against it on the ground

that it has failed to pay the debt due to financial creditors and other creditors.

On notice, Punjab National Bank (Financial Creditor) appeared and alleging

the suppression of facts on the ground that the appellant has not disclosed

the full facts and has not furnished full particulars in relation to the assets

mortgaged or the securities furnished to the financial creditors. It was also

alleged that the legal proceeding in respect of certain properties includes

Khari Baoli property has been entangled by the owners themselves. In view

of such submission the application preferred by the appellant has been

rejected.
4.    Before discussing the stand taken by appellant (Corporate Debtor), it is

desirable to notice the stand taken by Respondent - Punjab National Bank.
5.     According to the respondent Punjab National Bank - (Financial

Creditor) civil suits were deliberately engineered and instigated with a view to

remove the mortgaged properties from the accountability of the creditors. The

appellant kept pending the Civil Suits, such as "Mayank Maheshwari v.

Anurag Garg" - csdj/0094/2017 before the learned Additional District and

Sessions Judge, Tis Hazari District Courts, Delhi. The said suit has been filed

seeking a declaration and mandatory and permanent injunction against one

of the Directors of the Company namely Mr. Anurag Garg. It was further

alleged that subsequent to the above suit, in collusion with the plaintiff a S.A.

has been filed   before DRT III alleging that two sale deeds dated 21.10.2016

with respect to basement and mezzanine floor of the said property as well as
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   3
two un-registered agreements to sell dated 1st September, 2011 had been

executed by the said Director in the capacity as owner of the property in a

petition under
Section 17
of the Securitization and Reconstruction of

Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
(SARFAESI

Act
) in diary No. 146/2017/DRT-III, thereby sought for recall of order dated

21st January, 2017 wherein the learned CMM, Tis Hazari Court was pleased

to pass an order dated 21st January, 2017 in favour of Punjab National Bank

in 'Punjab National Bank vs. M/s. Unigreen Global Private Limited' appointing

a Court receiver to take possession of the property. Pursuance of the said

order, the Financial Creditor - Punjab National Bank has already taken over

the possession of the said property. In the circumstances, it was submitted

that prayer for initiation of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process

amounts to abuse of process of law.
6.    The aforesaid submission made on behalf of the 'Financial Creditor' has

been noticed by the Adjudicating Authority in the impugned order dated 8th

May, 2017, relevant of which are quoted below:
"12.   In addition to the above details which have not been fully
                   disclosed in the petition, Learned Counsel also contends
                   that in relation to the Defence Enclave property of its
                   objection statement, which property is also in the
                   personal name of the Directors of the company, is also
                   caught in the web of legal entanglement deliberately
                   created by the directors of the petitioner in relation to the
                   said property, as a civil suit again for permanent and
                   mandatory injunction being No.9398/2016, titled as Sh.
                   Jagat Nath Mahto vs. Vedika Overseas Tradex (P) Ltd. &
                   Ors. is pending consideration before the Learned ASCJ,
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017    4
Karkardooma Court, Delhi and that the next date of
      hearing is fixed for 12.05.2017 and incidentally, it is
      pointed by the Financial Creditor that the plaintiff in the
      above said suit allegedly also happens to be someone
      close to the directors/ promoters of the petitioner
      company, namely, a driver working in one of the sister
      concerns in which both Ms. Ritu Garg and Mr. Anurag
      Garg, being the Directors of the petitioner company are
      also involved. The claim of the said person who happens
      to be a driver as stated above is that he is occupying the
      said Defence Enclave property on tenancy and that he
      has also been paying rent in relation to the same and in
      the circumstances, his possession should not be
      disturbed except under due process of law.          Learned
      Counsel for the Bank also points out that the above said
      suit came to be filed in collusion with the Directors of the
      applicant company on 10.05.2016 after the issue of
      notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002 by
      the bank to the corporate debtor and its Directors and
      guarantors.
13.   A similar strategy in relation to the above Defence
      Enclave property too as was done as described in the
      earlier portion of the property at Khari Baoli in which the
      Bankers/ Financial creditors had obtained the physical
      possession also seems to have been adopted, in the
      sense that the plaintiff in the above suit has also
      approached the D.R.T. in SA No.48 of 2017 under
Section
      17
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002 and it is submitted that
      the same is also pending consideration and posted for
      hearing on 01.05.2017. The Bank being the financial
      creditor also narrates a similar set of facts in relation to
      property, as detailed in 3 (c) of the objection statement,
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   5
namely, House No.D-3A, Dayanand Block, Delhi-110092
wherein it is alleged that the corporate debtor managed
by its Director have not come with clean hands in the
legal proceedings in which the property is entangled
deliberately by the actions or at the instigation of the said
Directors of the corporate debtor in order to have the
properties removed from the clutches of law. The further
submission of Punjab National bank, being the Lead
Banker, in relation to the consortium of Banks and all of
whom have made availably finances details in the
paragraphs above is that the directors of the Corporate
debtor have manipulated the business of the company by
dealing directly with the buyers, thereby, by-passing the
objection of Bank and engaging in the trading of raw-
material instead of regular process, which action is a
deliberate fraud and which made the accounts of
Corporate debtor an NPA despite sanction by the Joint
Leader Forum in relation to the approval and re-
structuring of credit facilities vide another letter dated
31.3.2015.    All the actions of the financial creditors,
namely,    Punjab   National    Bank,    according    to   its
submission, has been made only in line with the RBI
guidelines and the Corporate debtor has come to this
sorry state of affairs only due to the deliberate actions of
the Directors of the corporate debtor and the way in
which the Directors have managed the company. This
situation has not arisen out of the business cycle as
contended by the Corporate Debtor. It is also averred by
the objector Bank that the Corporate Debtor is under
enquiry by Department of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)."
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017     6
7.    Having noticed the aforesaid facts, the Adjudicating Authority observed

as follows :
"14.   From the above facts, it is averred by the Banks that it is
                      clear that the Corporate debtor and directors also being
                      guarantors are trying to avoid making lawful payments
                      of the dues owed to the Bank and also thwarting the
                      Bankers from realizing the securities by initiating several
                      legal proceedings in different courts and Forums with the
                      sole motive of removing their personal properties from the
                      clutches of law and that the instant action before this
                      Tribunal is yet another attempt in the same direction."
8.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that

the application under
section 10
in Form 6 was filed with the following

documents :
i)       List of financial creditors and operational creditors as per the

               balance sheet for the year 2015-16.
ii)      Details of the security created by the Directors of the Corporate

               Applicant for the loan obtained by the bank.
iii)     the company master data

      iv)      books of accounts/balance sheets evidencing the default to the

               creditors.

      v)       details of identifiable assets in the name of Directors of the
company who stood as guarantors to the loans obtained from the

               bank
vi)      details of guarantee given by the guarantors in relation to the

               debts of corporate debtor.
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   7
vii)    details of all proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal

              between the banks and the corporate debtor and the status of the

              proceedings including the status of possession of the immoveable

              properties of the guarantors with the banks.
9.    It was also submitted that the appellant dispatched the copy of the

application   under
Section    10
by Registered     Post   to   the   Financial

Creditors/banks whereinafter notice was issued in terms of Rule 7 of the

Adjudicating Authority Rules, 2016. According to learned counsel for the

appellant the objections of the respondent - financial creditor/banks relating

to non-mentioning of the allied and collateral proceedings cannot be taken

into consideration by the Adjudicating Authority as the Corporate Debtor is

not involved in those proceeding/suit. It was submitted that such grounds

are beyond the scope and scrutiny of initiation of Corporate Insolvency

Resolution Process.
10.   Further according to learned counsel for the Corporate Debtor as the

aforesaid informations are not contemplated under the I & B Code or the

Adjudicating Authority Rules, 2016, it is not open to the Financial Creditor/

Banks (Respondents) to raise such issue nor the Adjudicating Authority can

dismiss the application on the ground of non-disclosure of facts unrelated to

the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process.
11.   It was further submitted that Corporate Insolvency Resolution having

not been initiated the question of imposition of penalty under Section 65 of

the I & B Code does not arise.
12.   Learned counsel for the Punjab National Bank has taken the similar

plea as was taken before the Adjudicating Authority and referred to above. It
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   8
was submitted that the following details of the mortgaged property were

supressed by the appellant :
PROPERTY

Shop No. 467-        Civil Suit titled "Mayank Maheshwari v. Anurag Garg"
468, Ground &        registered as CS DJ/000094/2017 before Ld. Tis Hazari
First Floor, Katra   Courts seeking declaration, mandatory and permanent
Ishwar Bhavan,       injunction. An S.A. under
Sec.17
of SARFAESI Act,
Khari Baoli, New     2002 also filed by Mr. Mayank Maheshwari in collusion
Delhi.               with Mr. Anurag is pending adjudication before Lf. DRT.
The contention of the Appellant that the suit is with
                     respect to the basement and mezzanine floor, which are
                     not mortgaged with the Answering Respondent proves
                     to be false in wake of the prayer made in the afore-
                     mentioned Civil Suit, which includes the ground floor
                     (@ pg.377 of the Appeal)

Single     storied
                Civil Suit for permanent and mandatory injunction
house    at    83,
                bearing No. 9398/2016 titled as "Sh. Jagar Nath Mehto
Defence Enclave,v. Vedika Overseas Tradex Ltd." before Ld. ASCJ,
Vivek Marg, Delhi
                Karkardooma Court, Delhi filed by Shri Mehto alleging
- 110 092       that he was induced as tenant in the property after
                appointment as a driver in the company of which Sh.
                Anurag and Ms. Ritu Garg are directors. An S.A. under
                Section 17 of SARFAESI Act is also pending before Ld.
                DRT-II.
House No. D-3A, A Securitization Application filed under
Section 17
of
Dayanand Block, the SARFAESI Act, 2002 by Sh. Anurag Gar titled as
Delhi - 110 092 "Anurag Garg v. Punjab National
bank & Ors." Bearing
                S.A. No. 120/2016 pending adjudication.
13.   It was further submitted that the appellant is not precluded in law to

initiate proceedings under the provisions of
SARFAESI Act, 2002
as has been

initiated and the appellant is duty bound to bring the aforesaid facts to the

notice of the Adjudicating Authority.
14.   We have heard the parties, noticed the rival contentions and perused

the record.
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017   9
15.   Before deliberating on the question involved, it is desirable to refer

'Statement of Objects and Reasons' of I & B Code, 2016, as noticed by the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in "
Innoventive Industries Ltd. Vs. ICICI Bank and

Ors.
" - 2017 SCC online SC 1025 and as quoted below :
12.      The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 has been
                  passed after great deliberation and pursuant to various
                  committee reports, the most important of which is the
                  report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee of
                  November, 2015. The Statement of Objects and Reasons
                  of the Code reads as under:
"STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
                  There is no single law in India that deals with insolvency
                  and bankruptcy. Provisions relating to insolvency and
                  bankruptcy for companies can be found in the
Sick
                  Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
, the
Recovery of Debt Due to Banks and Financial Institutions
                  Act, 1993
, the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of
                  Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
                  Act, 2002
and the
Companies Act, 2013
. These statutes
                  provide for creation of multiple fora such as Board of
                  Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), Debt
                  Recovery Tribunal (DRT) and National Company Law
                  Tribunal (NCLT) and their respective Appellate Tribunals.
                  Liquidation of companies is handled by the High Courts.
                  Individual bankruptcy and insolvency is dealt with under
                  the
Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909
, and the
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920
and is dealt with by the
                  Courts. The existing framework for insolvency and
                  bankruptcy is inadequate, ineffective and results in
                  undue delays in resolution, therefore, the proposed
                  legislation.
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
0
2.   The objective of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
     2015 is to consolidate and amend the laws relating to
     reorganization and insolvency resolution of corporate
     persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time
     bound manner for maximization of value of assets of
     such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, availability
     of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders
     including alteration in the priority of payment of
     government dues and to establish an Insolvency and
     Bankruptcy Fund, and matters connected therewith or
     incidental thereto. An effective legal framework for timely
     resolution of insolvency and bankruptcy would support
     development     of    credit   markets     and     encourage
     entrepreneurship. It would also improve Ease of Doing
     Business, and facilitate more investments leading to
     higher economic growth and development.
3.   The Code seeks to provide for designating the NCLT and
     DRT as the Adjudicating Authorities for corporate
     persons and firms and individuals, respectively, for
     resolution of insolvency, liquidation and bankruptcy. The
     Code separates commercial aspects of insolvency and
     bankruptcy proceedings from judicial aspects. The Code
     also seeks to provide for establishment of the Insolvency
     and Bankruptcy Board of India (Board) for regulation of
     insolvency    professionals,     insolvency      professional
     agencies and information utilities. Till the Board is
     established, the Central Government shall exercise all
     powers of the Board or designate any financial sector
     regulator to exercise the powers and functions of the
     Board. Insolvency professionals will assist in completion
     of insolvency resolution, liquidation and bankruptcy
     proceedings envisaged in the Code. Information Utilities
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
1
would collect, collate, authenticate and disseminate
                   financial information to facilitate such proceedings. The
                   Code also proposes to establish a fund to be called the
                   Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund of India for the
                   purposes specified in the Code.
4.   The Code seeks to provide for amendments in the
Indian
                   Partnership Act, 1932
, the
Central Excise Act, 1944
,
Customs Act, 1962
,
Income-Tax Act, 1961
, the
Recovery
                   of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act,
                   1993
, the
Finance Act, 1994
, the
Securitisation and
                   Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
                   Security   Interest    Act,   2002
,    the
Sick   Industrial
                   Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003
, the
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007
, the
Limited
                   Liability Partnership Act, 2008
, and the
Companies Act,
                   2013
.
5.   The Code seeks to achieve the above objectives.
(Emphasis Supplied)"
16.   Hon'ble Supreme Court also noticed the Committee Reports and objects

as speed is the essence, as quoted below :
"Principles driving the design
                   "The Committee chose the following principles to
                   design the new insolvency and bankruptcy resolution
                   framework:
I.        The Code will facilitate the assessment of viability of
                   the enterprise at a very early stage.
1.        The law must explicitly state that the viability of the
                   enterprise is a matter of business, and that matters of
                   business can only be negotiated between creditors and
                   debtor. While viability is assessed as a negotiation
                   between creditors and debtor, the final decision has to
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
2
be an agreement among creditors who are the
      financiers willing to bear the loss in the insolvency.
2.    The legislature and the courts must control the process
      of resolution, but not be burdened to make business
      decisions.
3.    The law must set up a calm period for insolvency
      resolution where the debtor can negotiate in the
      assessment of viability without fear of debt recovery
      enforcement by creditors.
4.    The law must appoint a resolution professional as the
      manager of the resolution period, so that the creditors
      can negotiate the assessment of viability with the
      confidence that the debtors will not take any action to
      erode the value of the enterprise. The professional will
      have the power and responsibility to monitor and
      manage the operations and assets of the enterprise.
The professional will manage the resolution process of
      negotiation to ensure balance of power between the
      creditors and debtor, and protect the rights of all
      creditors. The professional will ensure the reduction of
      asymmetry of information between creditors and
      debtor in the resolution process.
II.   The Code will enable symmetry of information between
      creditors and debtors.
5.    The law must ensure that information that is essential
      for the insolvency and the bankruptcy resolution
      process is created and available when it is required.
6.    The law must ensure that access to this information is
      made available to all creditors to the enterprise, either
      directly or through the regulated professional.
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
3
7.     The law must enable access to this information to third
       parties who can participate in the resolution process,
       through the regulated professional.
III.   The Code will ensure a time-bound process to better
       preserve economic value.
8.     The law must ensure that time value of money is
       preserved,     and     that   delaying    tactics     in   these
       negotiations    will    not   extend     the   time    set   for
       negotiations at the start.
IV.    The Code will ensure a collective process.
9.     The law must ensure that all key stakeholders will
       participate to collectively assess viability. The law
       must ensure that all creditors who have the capability
       and the willingness to restructure their liabilities must
       be part of the negotiation process. The liabilities of all
       creditors who are not part of the negotiation process
       must also be met in any negotiated solution.
V.     The Code will respect the rights of all creditors equally.
10.    The law must be impartial to the type of creditor in
       counting their weight in the vote on the final solution in
       resolving insolvency.
VI.    The Code must ensure that, when the negotiations fail
       to establish viability, the outcome of bankruptcy must
       be binding.
11.    The law must order the liquidation of an enterprise
       which has been found unviable. This outcome of the
       negotiations should be protected against all appeals
       other than for very exceptional cases.
VII.   The Code must ensure clarity of priority, and that the
       rights of all stakeholders are upheld in resolving
       bankruptcy.
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
4
12.      The law must clearly lay out the              priority of
                  distributions in bankruptcy to all stakeholders. The
                  priority must be designed so as to incentivise all
                  stakeholders to participate in the cycle of building
                  enterprises with confidence.
13.      While the law must incentivise collective action in
                  resolving bankruptcy, there must be a greater
                  flexibility to allow individual action in resolution and
                  recovery during bankruptcy compared with the phase
                  of insolvency resolution."
17.   In the said case, Hon'ble Supreme Court while it noticed the scheme of

the Code also noticed
Section 7
, which stands in contrast with the scheme

under
section 9
and observed as follows:
"27. The scheme of the Code is to ensure that when a default
                  takes place, in the sense that a debt becomes due and
                  is not paid, the insolvency resolution process begins.
                  Default is defined in
Section 3(12)
in very wide terms as
                  meaning non-payment of a debt once it becomes due
                  and payable, which includes non-payment of even part
                  thereof or an instalment amount. For the meaning of
                  "debt", we have to go to
Section 3(11)
, which in turn tells
                  us that a debt means a liability of obligation in respect
                  of a "claim" and for the meaning of "claim", we have to
                  go back to
Section 3(6)
which defines "claim" to mean a
                  right to payment even if it is disputed. The Code gets
                  triggered the moment default is of rupees one lakh or
                  more (
Section 4
). The corporate insolvency resolution
                  process may be triggered by the corporate debtor itself
                  or a financial creditor or operational creditor. A
                  distinction is made by the Code between debts owed to
                  financial creditors and operational creditors. A financial
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
5
creditor has been defined under
Section 5(7)
as a person
      to whom a financial debt is owed and a financial debt is
      defined in
Section 5(8)
to mean a debt which is
      disbursed against consideration for the time value of
      money. As opposed to this, an operational creditor
      means a person to whom an operational debt is owed
      and an operational debt under
Section 5(21)
means a
      claim in respect of provision of goods or services.
28.   When it comes to a financial creditor triggering the
      process,
Section 7
becomes relevant. Under the
      explanation to
Section 7(1)
, a default is in respect of a
      financial debt owed to any financial creditor of the
      corporate debtor - it need not be a debt owed to the
      applicant financial creditor. Under
Section 7(2)
, an
      application is to be made under sub-section (1) in such
      form and manner as is prescribed, which takes us to the
      Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating
      Authority) Rules, 2016. Under Rule 4, the application is
      made by a financial creditor in Form 1 accompanied by
      documents and records required therein. Form 1 is a
      detailed form in 5 parts, which requires particulars of
      the applicant in Part I, particulars of the corporate debtor
      in Part II, particulars of the proposed interim resolution
      professional in part III, particulars of the financial debt
      in part IV and documents, records and evidence of
      default in part V. Under Rule 4(3), the applicant is to
      dispatch a copy of the application filed with the
      adjudicating authority by registered post or speed post
      to the registered office of the corporate debtor. The
      speed, within which the adjudicating authority is to
      ascertain the existence of a default from the records of
      the information utility or on the basis of evidence
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
6
furnished by the financial creditor, is important. This it
                   must do within 14 days of the receipt of the application.
                   It is at the stage of
Section 7(5)
, where the adjudicating
                   authority is to be satisfied that a default has occurred,
                   that the corporate debtor is entitled to point out that a
                   default has not occurred in the sense that the "debt",
                   which may also include a disputed claim, is not due. A
                   debt may not be due if it is not payable in law or in fact.
                   The moment the adjudicating authority is satisfied that
                   a default has occurred, the application must be admitted
                   unless it is incomplete, in which case it may give notice
                   to the applicant to rectify the defect within 7 days of
                   receipt of a notice from the adjudicating authority. Under
                   sub-section (7), the adjudicating authority shall then
                   communicate the order passed to the financial creditor
                   and corporate debtor within 7 days of admission or
                   rejection of such application, as the case may be."
18.   At this stage, it is desirable to compare the provisions of
Section 7
with
Section 10
of the I & B Code.
Section 7
is as follow:
"7.    (1)   A financial creditor either by itself or jointly with

                   other financial creditors may file an application

                   for initiating corporate insolvency resolution

                   process against a corporate debtor before the

                   Adjudicating Authority when a default has

                   occurred. Explanation.--For the purposes of this

                   sub-section, a default includes a default in

                   respect of a financial debt owed not only to the
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
7
applicant financial creditor but to any other

      financial creditor of the corporate debtor.
(2)   The financial creditor shall make an application

      under sub-section (1) in such form and manner

      and accompanied with such fee as may be

      prescribed.
(3)   The financial creditor shall, along with the

      application furnish--
(a) record of the default recorded with the

      information utility or such other record or evidence

      of default as may be specified;
(b) the name of the resolution professional

      proposed      to   act    as    an   interim   resolution

      professional; and
(c) any other information as may be specified by

      the Board.
(4)   The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen

      days of the receipt of the application under sub-
section (2), ascertain the existence of a default

      from the records of an information utility or on the

      basis of other evidence furnished by the financial

      creditor under sub-section (3).
(5)   Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied

      that--
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
8
(a)   a default has occurred and the application

      under sub-section (2) is complete, and there is no

      disciplinary proceedings pending against the

      proposed resolution professional, it may, by

      order, admit such application; or
(b)   default has not occurred or the application

      under sub-section (2) is incomplete or any

      disciplinary proceeding is pending against the

      proposed resolution professional, it may, by

      order, reject such application:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority

      shall, before rejecting the application under

      clause (b) of sub-section (5), give a notice to the

      applicant to rectify the defect in his application

      within seven days of receipt of such notice from

      the Adjudicating Authority.
(6)   The corporate insolvency resolution process shall

      commence from the date of admission of the

      application under sub-section (5).
(7)   The Adjudicating Authority shall communicate--
(a)   the order under clause (a) of sub-section (5)

      to the financial creditor and the corporate debtor;
(b)   the order under clause (b) of sub-section (5)

      to the financial creditor, within seven days of
1
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
9
admission or rejection of such application, as the

                  case may be."
19.   Similar is the provision of
Section 10
, which reads a follows:
"10.      (1)    Where a corporate debtor has committed a

                          default, a corporate applicant thereof may

                          file an application for initiating corporate

                          insolvency resolution process         with   the

                          Adjudicating Authority.
(2)     The application under sub-section (1) shall

                          be filed in such form, containing such

                          particulars     and   in   such   manner     and

                          accompanied with such fee as may be

                          prescribed.

                  (3)     The corporate applicant shall, along with the
application furnish the information relating

                          to--
(a)   its books of account and such other

                          documents relating to such period as may be

                          specified; and
(b)   the resolution professional proposed to be

                          appointed       as    an   interim   resolution

                          professional.
(4)     The Adjudicating Authority shall, within a

                          period of fourteen days of the receipt of the
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
0
application, by an order-- (a) admit the

                          application, if it is complete; or (b) reject the

                          application, if it is incomplete: Provided that

                          Adjudicating          Authority   shall,   before

                          rejecting an application, give a notice to the

                          applicant to rectify the defects in his

                          application within seven days from the date

                          of   receipt     of    such   notice   from   the

                          Adjudicating Authority.
(5)      The corporate insolvency resolution process

                          shall commence from the date of admission

                          of the application under sub-section (4) of

                          this section."
20.    Under both
Section 7
and
Section 10
, the two factors are common i.e.

the debt is due and there is a default. Sub-section (4) of
Section 7
is similar

to that of sub-section (4) of
Section 10
. Therefore we, hold that the law
laid

down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "
Innoventive Industries Ltd.
(Supra) is

applicable for
Section 10
also, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed

as    "The moment the adjudicating authority is satisfied that a default has

occurred, the application must be admitted unless it is incomplete, in which

case it may give notice to the applicant to rectify the defect within 7 days of

receipt of a notice from the adjudicating authority" .
21.    In an application under
Section 10
, the 'financial creditor' or

'operational creditor', may dispute that there is no default or that debt is not
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
1
due and is not payable in law or in fact. They may also oppose admission on

the ground that the Corporate Applicant is not eligible to make application in

view of ineligibility under
Section 11
of the I & B Code.      The Adjudicating

Authority on hearing the parties and on perusal of record, if satisfied that

there is a debt and default has occurred and the Corporate Applicant is not

ineligible under
Section 11
, the Adjudicating Authority has no option but to

admit the application, unless it is incomplete, in which case the Corporate

Applicant is to be granted time to rectify the defects.
22.
Section 10
does not empower the Adjudicating Authority to go beyond

the records as prescribed under
Section 10
and the informations as required

to be submitted in Form 6 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to

the Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016 subject to ineligibility prescribed

under
Section 11
. If all informations are provided by an applicant as required

under
Section 10
and Form 6 and if the Corporate Applicant is otherwise not

ineligible under
Section 11
, the Adjudicating Authority is bound to admit the

application and cannot reject the application on any other ground.
23.   Any fact unrelated or beyond the requirement under I & B Code or

Forms prescribed under Adjudicating Authority Rules (Form 6 in the present

case) are not required to be stated or pleaded. Non-disclosure of any fact,

unrelated to
Section 10
and Form 6 cannot be termed to be suppression of

facts or to hold that the Corporate Applicant has not come with clean hand

except the application where the 'Corporate Applicant' has not disclosed

disqualification, if any, under
Section 11
. Non-disclosure of facts, such as

that the 'Corporate Debtor' is undergoing a corporate insolvency resolution
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
2
process; or that the 'Corporate Debtor' has completed corporate insolvency

resolution process twelve months preceding the date of making of the

application; or that the corporate debtor has violated any of the terms of

resolution plan which was approved twelve months before the date of making

of an application under the said Chapter; or that the corporate debtor is one

in respect of whom a liquidation order has already been made can be a ground

to reject the application under
Section 10
on the ground of suppression of

fact/not come with clean hand.
24.   1st Respondent -financial creditor has referred to pendency of a Civil

Suit between 'Mayank Maheshwari v. Anurag Garg' and another suit between

'Sh. Jagar Nath Mehto v. Vedika Overseas Tradex Ltd.' . Pendency of such

suits cannot be a ground to deny admission of an application under
Section

10
, if all the information in terms of
Section 10
of the I & B Code and Form 6

has been supplied by a Corporate Applicant/Corporate Debtor and the

application is otherwise complete. Non-mentioning of suit(s) pending between

the parties cannot termed to be suppression of facts nor can be a ground to

reject the application.   In fact, once the application under
Section 10
is

admitted, all such related proceedings, including suits for recovery of

moveable or immovable property of the Corporate Debtor and other

proceeding cannot proceed further in any Court or Tribunal or Authority in

view of order of 'moratorium' as may be declared under
Section 13
and

prohibition that may be imposed under
Section 14
of I & B Code.
25.   Similarly, if any action has been taken by a 'Financial Creditor' under
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002 against the Corporate Debtor or a
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
3
suit is pending against Corporate Debtor under
Section 19
of DRT Act, 1993

before a Debt Recovery Tribunal or appeal pending before the Debt Recovery

Appellate Tribunal cannot be a ground to reject an application under
Section

10
, if the application is complete.
26.   Any proceeding under
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002 or suit

under
Section 19
of the DRT Act, 1993 pending before Debt Recovery Tribunal

or appeal pending before Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal cannot proceed in

view of the order of moratorium as may be passed.
27.   It is also desirable to refer to Section 238 of the I & B Code, as quoted

below :
"238.        Provisions of this Code to override other laws
- The provisions of this Code shall have effect,

                         notwithstanding      anything        inconsistent

                         therewith contained in any other law for the

                         time being in force or any instrument having

                         effect by virtue of any such law."
In view of the aforesaid provision also, I & B Code shall have the effect

notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law

for the time being in force including
DRT Act, 1993
;
SARFAESI Act, 2002
;

money suit etc.
28.   In a case where a winding up proceedings has already been initiated

against a Corporate Debtor by the Hon'ble High Court or Tribunal or

liquidation order has been passed in respect of Corporate Debtor, no
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
4
application under
Section 10
can be filed by the Corporate Applicant in view

of ineligibility under
Section 11(d)
of I & B Code, as quoted below:
"11.   Persons not entitled to make application - The

                   following persons shall not be entitled to make an

                   application to initiate corporate insolvency resolution

                   process under this Chapter, namely:--
(a)    a corporate debtor undergoing a corporate insolvency

                   resolution process; or
(b)    a corporate debtor having completed corporate

                   insolvency   resolution    process    twelve     months

                   preceding the date of making of the application; or
(c)    a corporate debtor or a financial creditor who has

                   violated any of the terms of resolution plan which was

                   approved twelve months before the date of making of

                   an application under this Chapter; or
(d)    a corporate debtor in respect of whom a liquidation

                   order has been made.
Explanation.--      For the purposes of this section, a

                                corporate debtor includes a corporate

                                applicant in respect of such corporate

                                debtor."
29.   In view of the aforesaid provision where a winding up proceeding has

already been initiated under the
Companies Act, 1956
/ 2013 by the Hon'ble

High Court such cases have not been transferred to National Company Law
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
5
Tribunal, pursuant to "Companies (Transfer of Pending Proceedings) Rules,

2016", framed by the Central Government.
30.   Clause (d) of
Section 11
refers to "liquidation order", against a

Corporate Debtor. The word 'winding up' has not been mentioned therein.

For the said reason by Section 255 read with Schedule 11 of the I & B Code,

in
Section 2
of the Companies Act, 2013 for clause (23), the following clause

has been substituted :
"1. In
section 2
,--
(a)      for clause (23), the following clause shall be
                             substituted, namely:--
xxx                 xxx                  xxx



               "(23) "Company Liquidator" means a person appointed by the

                          Tribunal as the Company Liquidator in accordance with

                          the provisions of section 275 for the winding up of a

                          company under this Act";
(b)         after clause (94) , the following clause shall be inserted,

                          namely:--
"(94A)         "winding up" means winding up under this Act or

                             liquidation under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
                            Code, 2016, as applicable."
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
6
31.   By aforesaid amendment, the legislatures have made it clear that the

word "winding up" mentioned in the
Companies Act, 2013
is synonymous to

the word "liquidation" as mentioned in the I & B Code.
32.   In view of the provisions aforesaid, we hold that, if any winding up

proceeding has been initiated against the Corporate Debtor by the Hon'ble

High Court or Tribunal or liquidation order has been passed, in such case

the application under
Section 10
is not maintainable.           However, mere

pendency of a petition for winding up, where no order of winding up or order

of liquidation has been passed, cannot be ground to reject the application

under
Section 10
.
33.   In this case, it is not the case of the Financial Creditor/Respondent

that a winding up proceeding under the
Companies Act
or liquidation

proceeding under the I & B Code has been initiated against the Corporate

Debtor.   Therefore, the Corporate Applicant is eligible to file application

under
Section 10
, if there is a debt and default.
34.   Further, as we find that the Adjudicating Authority has noticed the

extraneous factors unrelated to the Resolution process not required to be

disclosed in terms of
Section 10
or Form 6 and as the suits referred to relate

to dispute between third parties, and not the Corporate Debtor, we hold that

the Adjudicating Authority erred in rejecting the application on the ground of

suppression of facts.
35.   To decide the question, whether impugned order of penalty imposed by

the Adjudicating Authority under Section 65 of the I & B Code is in accordance

with law or not it is desirable to notice the provision, as quoted below:
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
7
"65. (1)    If, any person initiates the insolvency resolution

                   process or liquidation proceedings fraudulently or with

                   malicious intent for any purpose other than for the

                   resolution of insolvency, or liquidation, as the case may

                   be, the Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such

                   person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh

                   rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees.
(2)    If,   any   person     initiates   voluntary     liquidation

                   proceedings with the intent to defraud any person, the

                   Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such person a

                   penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees

                   but may extend to one crore rupees."
36.   Sub-section (11) of
Section 5
defines "initiation date" i.e. the date of

initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process and reads as follows:
"(11) "initiation date" means the date on which a financial

            creditor, corporate applicant or operational creditor, as the

            case may be, makes an application to the Adjudicating

            Authority for initiating corporate insolvency resolution

            process;"
If sub-section (11) of
Section 5
is read with Section 65 it is clear that if

a 'Financial Creditor', or 'Corporate Applicant' or 'Operational Creditor' makes

an application to the Adjudicating authority for initiating Corporate

Resolution Process or liquidation proceedings fraudulently or with malicious
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
8
intent for any purpose other than for the resolution of insolvency, or

liquidation, the Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such person a

penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one

crore rupees in terms of sub-section (1) of Section 65. Similarly, if any person

such as Corporate Applicant initiates voluntary liquidation proceedings with

the intent to defraud any person, the Adjudicating Authority may impose

upon such person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but

may extend to one crore rupees in terms of sub-section (2) of Section 65.
37.   From the aforesaid provision, it is clear that for imposition of penalty

under Section 65, the Adjudicating Authority on the basis of record is required

to form prima facie opinion that the person (Financial Creditor / Corporate

Applicant / Operational Applicant) has filed the petition for initiation of

proceeding "fraudulently" or "with malicious intent" for the purpose other

than the resolution of the insolvency or liquidation or that voluntary

liquidation proceedings has been filed with the intent to defraud any person.
38.   No such penalty under sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 65 can be

imposed by the Adjudicating Authority without recording opinion for coming

to the conclusion that a prima facie case is made out to suggest that the

person "fraudulently" or "with malicious intent" for the purpose, other than

the resolution insolvency or liquidation or with the intent to defraud any

person has filed the application.
39.
Section 424
of the Companies Act, 2013 is applicable to the

proceedings under I & B Code, as held by this Appellate Tribunal in M/s.
Innoventive Industries Ltd. Vs. ICICI Bank & Anr.
in Company Appeal (AT)
2
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
9
(Insolvency) No. 1 & 2 of 2017.      In view of the aforesaid provision if the

Adjudicating Authority prima facie comes to a conclusion that a case is made

out to impose penalty under sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 65, after

recording its prima facie reasons the Adjudicating Authority is required to give

reasonable opportunity of hearing to the person concerned, so as to enable

the person to explain his case.
40.   There is nothing on record to suggest that the Corporate Applicant has

suppressed any fact or has not come with the clean hands. The Adjudicating

Authority has also not held that the application has been filed by the

Corporate Applicant "fraudulently" or "with malicious intent" for any purpose

other than for the resolution process or liquidation or that the voluntary

liquidation proceedings have been initiated with the intent to defraud any

person.   In absence of any such reasons recorded by the Adjudicating

Authority the impugned order cannot be upheld.
41.   Further, as the Adjudicating Authority before imposing penalty under

Section 65 has not given nor served any notice to the Corporate Applicant

recording its prima facie view and intent to punish the Corporate Applicant,

the impugned order dated 8th May, 2017 cannot be upheld having been

passed in violation of rules of natural justice.
42.   For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned order dated 8th May, 2017

passed in C.P. No. IB-39(PB)/2017 is set aside. The case is remitted back to

the Adjudicating Authority for admission of the application under
Section 10
,
3
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
0
if the application is otherwise complete.       In case it is incomplete, the

Adjudicating Authority will grant time to the appellant to remove the defects.
43.   At this stage, it is desirable to state that the Central Government in

Form 1 or 5 or 6 of the 'Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to

Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016', has not provision for the parties to state

whether any winding up proceeding has been initiated or liquidation order

has been passed against the Corporate Debtor or not. No provision has been

made there in for the parties to state whether any of clause of
Section 11
is

attracted or not.
44.   Non-disclosure of such relevant facts in the relevant Form 6, may be a

ground to reject the application but a person can plead that the Form does

not stipulate to disclose any ineligibility under
Section 11
. Therefore, we are

of the view that the Central Government should make necessary amendment

in the relevant Form 6 appended to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

(Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016, which will enable the

Adjudicating Authority to decide at the time of admission whether any fact

has been suppressed or the person has come with the clean hand or not. We

hope and trust that appropriate modification of the relevant Rules and Forms

shall be made by the Central Government.
45.   In the meantime, the Adjudicating Authority may direct the Financial

Creditors / Corporate Applicant to file an affidavit giving declaration in terms

of
Section 11
of the I & B Code and to state whether any winding up

proceeding has been initiated or liquidation order has been passed by any

High Court or Tribunal or Adjudicating Authority or not.             The appeal
3
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
1
is allowed with the aforesaid observations. However, there shall be no order

as to costs.
[Justice S.J. Mukhopadhaya]
                                Chairperson




[ Justice A.I.S. Cheema ]                               [ Balvinder Singh ]
Member (Judicial)                                       Member (Technical)



New Delhi

01 December, 2017




/ns/
3
Comp. App. (AT) (Insolvency) No. 81/2017
2
