Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC
741. That was a case where the Supreme Court had constituted the arbitral
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/5118963/

[Cites
30
, Cited by
2
]
Delhi High Court
Mr. Vijay Gupta vs Ms. Renu Malhotra on 19 December, 2008
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
A.K.Sikri
,
Manmohan Singh
Reportable
                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

                             + E.F.A. (OS) No.12/2008

                                                      Date of Hearing: 05.11.2008
                                                     Date of Decision: 19.12.2008

#Mr. Vijay Gupta                            .....Appellant
!                                           Through: Mr. Chandan Kumar

                    Versus

$Ms. Renu Malhotra                          .....Respondents
                                            Through Mr. Deependra Hooda

CORAM :-
*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SINGH

      1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
        see the Judgment?
      2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
      3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1. A brief narration of factual matrix would suffice to decide an interesting

      and important issue pertaining to the pecuniary jurisdiction of this Court to

      entertain the execution petition.     The appellant herein had filed an

      execution petition seeking enforcement of award dated 31.8.2005 whereby

      awarding a sum of Rs.9,56,760/- with interest @ 10% from 1.9.2005 till

      payment. Learned Single Judge held that this Court does not have the

      pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the said execution petition and

      therefore, Registry is directed to return the said execution petition to the

      decree holder for being filed before the appropriate court. It is on the

      premise that the High Court has original civil jurisdiction in respect of

      matters where the amount involved is more than Rs.20 lakhs.
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                       Page 1 of 16
2. The facts, in brief, are as follows:-
3. The appellant (hereinafter referred to as the 'decree holder') had certain

      disputes with the respondent (hereinafter referred as the 'judgment

      debtor') and therefore, the appellant filed application under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the

      'Act') in this Court seeking appointment of arbitrator. This application was

      filed in December 1998 when pecuniary jurisdiction of this Court was in

      respect of those matters where value of the suit/proceedings is Rs.5 lakhs

      and above.     Vide orders dated 27.2.2002 this Court appointed a Sole

      Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes. When the proceedings were pending

      before the Arbitrator, the judgment debtor wanted to summon some

      additional witnesses. For this purpose, the judgment debtor filed OMP

      No.297/2003 in this Court seeking summoning of those four additional

      witnesses, which application was entertained by this Court and allowed

      vide orders dated 13.1.2005.
4. The learned Arbitrator had also passed some interim directions in exercise

      of his powers under
Section 17
of the Act. The judgment debtor again

      approached this Court by filing application under
Section 37(2)(b)
of the Act

      (OMP NO.382/2004). This petition was also contested on merits. Initially,

      vide orders dated 29.10.2004 the impugned order was stayed subject to

      judgment debtor furnishing an undertaking that she would not dispose of

      the network/cable connection in question and will not create any third

      party interest therein.      The judgment debtor had furnished such an

      undertaking. Ultimately, that OMP was also disposed of by orders dated
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                       Page 1 of 16
27.3.2006. In the meantime, as pointed above, the Arbitrator went ahead

      with the adjudication on the main disputes and rendered his award dated

      31.8.2005 awarding a sum of Rs.9,56,760/- with interest @ 10% per annum

      from 1.9.2005 till payment in favour of the appellant. Since the judgment

      debtor did not make payment, the decree holder filed Execution Petition

      No.4/2006, which has met the fate as mentioned above, namely, the

      learned Single Judge of this Court has refused to entertain the same for lack

      of pecuniary jurisdiction.
5. The pivotal fact which needs to be noted herein is that with effect from

      25.5.2003 the pecuniary jurisdiction of this Court was raised from Rs.5 lakhs

      to Rs.20 lakhs and above. Howsoever, all pending applications filed under

      the Act were allowed to be heard by this Court. The judgment debtor filed

      petition under
Section 34
of the Act in the District Court on 28.11.2005

      challenging the award. However, before the learned Additional District

      Judge the judgment debtor made a request for withdrawing the petition on

      the ground that as the matter had earlier been proceeded with by the High

      Court under
Section 11
of the Act, the District Court did not have the

      jurisdiction to try the petition. The petition was allowed to be returned to

      the judgment debtor for filing the same before the appropriate court.
Thereafter, the judgment debtor sought review of order dated 18.4.2006

      permitting withdrawal which was also dismissed vide orders dated

      22.3.2007.    Against that order, FAO No.155/2007 is preferred by the

      judgment debtor, which is still pending in this Court.
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                       Page 1 of 16
6. The first relevant provision for examining the issue would be
Section 2(e)
of

      the Act which defines "Court" as the entire issue is as to which is the

      competent "Court" to entertain the execution petition. We will have to

      initiate our discussion on this issue by taking note of this definition, which is

      as under:-
"court" means the principal Civil Court of original
                          jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High
                          Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
                          jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the
                          questions forming the subject-matter of the
                          arbitration if the same had been the subject
                          matter of a suit, but does not include any Civil
                          Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil
                          Court, or any Court of Small Causes;"
7. What clearly follows is that principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a

      district, which has the jurisdiction to decide the question forming the

      subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been subject-matter of a

      suit, would be the "Court" for the purpose of this Act. It specifically

      includes the High Court which has ordinary original civil jurisdiction, like

      Delhi High Court. The application under
Section 11
was filed, in the instant

      case, in the year 1998 when Delhi High Court had the necessary original

      civil jurisdiction to entertain the said application as the claim stated therein

      was more than Rs.5 lakhs. At that time, the applicants were supposed to

      approach the District Court. The legal position in this behalf was settled by

      the Supreme Court in the case of M/s. S.B.P. & Co. v. M/s. Patel Engineering

      Ltd. and Anr., JT 2005 (9) SC 219 wherein the Supreme Court, inter alia,

      held that application under
Section 11
could be filed only in the High Court

      or the Supreme Court inasmuch as per the provisions of
Section 11
, the
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                           Page 1 of 16
power is with the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Supreme Court, as

      the case may be, to entertain such petitions or any person authorized by

      him and such a person could not be the District Judge.             Therefore,

      application under
Section 11
is to be addressed to the Chief Justice of the

      High Court which can be entertained by the Chief Justice or any other

      designated Judge of the High Court.
8.
Section 42
of the Act stipulates that where, with respect to an arbitration

      agreement, any application has been made in a Court that Court alone shall

      have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent

      applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall

      be made in that Court and in no other Court. Precise language of that

      Section is as under:-
"
Section 42-
Jurisdiction- Notwithstanding
                         anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in
                         any other law for the time being in force, where
                         with respect to an arbitration agreement any
                         application under this Part has been made in a
                         Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over
                         the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent
                         applications arising out of that agreement and the
                         arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court
                         and in no other Court."
9. The question which arose for consideration, on an earlier occasion, was as

      to whether by virtue of provisions of
Section 42
of the Act it would only be

      the High Court which would entertain the execution petition, if the High

      Court had appointed the Arbitrator under
Section 11
of the Act. By catena

      of decisions the answer given to this question is in the negative. Some

      judgments noted by the learned Single Judge in this behalf are:-
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                        Page 1 of 16
i.    NDMC Versus D.K. Construction Company, OMP
                           No.55/2005.
ii.    National Thermal Power Corporation Versus R.S. Avtar
                           Singh and Anr., 2002 (3) ALR 8 (Delhi).
iii.   Kinetic Capital Finance Ld. Versus Anil Kumar Misra, 87
                           (2000) DLT 405
                    iv.    Apparel Export Promotion Council Versus Prabhati Patni,
                           Proprietor Comfort Furnishers and Anr., 125 (2005) DLT
511.
10.The rationale given in the aforesaid judgments is that the expression "Chief

      Justice" as contained in
Section 11
of the Act, is not synonymous with the

      term the "Court" as defined in
Section 2(e)
of the Act, and therefore merely

      because an Arbitrator has been appointed by the High Court, the same in

      itself would not be sufficient to vest jurisdiction with the High Court to

      entertain any other/subsequent applications relating to the said arbitral

      proceedings in which the Arbitrator was appointed, irrespective of the

      pecuniary limits on its jurisdiction.
11.There was no quarrel about this proposition of law. We may only note that

      even the Supreme Court has now affirmed the aforesaid view in the case of

      Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Krishna Travel Agency, (2008) 6 SCC
741. That was a case where the Supreme Court had constituted the arbitral

      tribunal in an application filed under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. After the

      award was made by the arbitral tribunal, petition under
Section 34
of the

      Act was filed before the Supreme Court challenging that award.              The

      Supreme Court held that if the plea of the respondent is accepted that

      matter should be decided by the Supreme Court that would mean that in

      every case where the Supreme Court passes an order, be it on appeal from
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                          Page 1 of 16
the order passed by the High Court under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration

      and Conciliation Act, 1996, the Supreme Court will become a Principal Civil

      Court of Original Jurisdiction. If the argument is further taken to its logical

      conclusion that would mean that the parties will have to approach the

      Supreme Court by making an application under
Section 34
, i.e., for setting

      aside the award. The expression "Court" used in
Section 34
of the Act will

      also have to be understood ignoring the definition of "court" in the Act.

      Similarly, if High Court exercises jurisdiction under
Section 11(6)
, the High

      Court would become Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction. In such a

      situation, right to appeal under
Section 37(1)(b)
will also be circumvented.

      Such a plea cannot therefore be accepted. The position in law was, thus,

      summed up in the following manner:-
"10. We further reiterate that the view taken by
                         this Court in
Natinal Aluminium Co. Ltd. v.
                         Pressteel & Fabrications (P) Ltd.
and
State of Goa
                         v. Western Builders
is the correct approach and
                         we reaffirm the view that in case any appointment
                         of arbitrator is made by the High Court under
Section 11(6)
, the Principal Civil Court of Original
                         Jurisdiction remains the District Court and not the
                         High Court. And likewise, if an appointment of the
                         arbitrator is made by this Court
,
in that case
also,
                         the objection can only be filed before the Principal
                         Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction as defined in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the 1996 Act. Thus, in this view
                         of the matter, we hold that the plea raised by the
                         learned counsel for the petitioner that this Court
                         should entertain the award given by the arbitrator
                         appointed by this Court and all objections to it
                         should be disposed of by this Court is
                         unacceptable and consequently, the prayer made
                         in the application is rejected."
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                         Page 1 of 16
12.Learned counsel for the decree holder, however, wants to rely upon two

      circumstances on the basis of which he seeks benefit of
Section 42
of the

      Act. These are:
a) when the application was filed by the decree holder

                           under
Section 11
of the Act, the High Court had the

                           pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain that application.
Therefore, notwithstanding the judgment in Patel

                           Engineering, which clarified the issue later, even

                           otherwise the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act

                           in the year 1998 was maintainable only in the High Court

                           and not before the District Court as the claim was more

                           than Rs.5 lakhs. It is for this reason that application was

                           preferred in the High Court, as otherwise because of the

                           position in law prevailing as on that date, the District

                           Court was competent to entertain the application under
Section 11
of the Act in those cases where the claim was

                           less than Rs.5 lakhs;
b) the judgment debtor had herself filed applications under
Sections 27
and
37(2)(b)
of the Act in this Court which

                           were entertained by this Court and decided on merits.

                           Thus, when earlier proceedings were filed in this Court

                           with respect to an arbitration proceeding, this Court

                           only had the jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                          Page 1 of 16
and all subsequent application in view of
Section 42
of

                         the Act.
13.Before we proceed to consider these submissions, it would be necessary to

      take note of certain judgments on which reliance was placed by the counsel

      for the parties. Learned counsel for the appellant referred to and relied

      upon the following judgments to buttress his aforesaid submission:-
(
i)    Sasken Communication Technologies Limited v. Prime Telesystems
             Limited & Ors.
, 99 (2002) DLT 640
                         In this case the competency of Delhi High Court to

             entertain the petition under
Section 11(4)
of the Act was challenged

             on the ground that earlier application under
Section 9
of the Act

             seeking interim measure was filed in the Bombay High Court and

             therefore, in view of the position of law contained in
Section 42
, it

             was only Bombay High Court which had necessary jurisdiction to

             entertain subsequent proceedings.      Accepting this contention, a

             learned Single Judge of this Court explained the legal position and

             answered the issue as under:-
"12.
Section 42
of the Arbitration Act relating to
                         the jurisdiction of the Courts puts a positive
                         embargo against the invoking of the jurisdiction of
                         different Courts by laying down that
                         notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
                         the said part of the Act or in any other law for the
                         time being in force, where with respect to an
                         Arbitration Agreement any application under the
                         said part has been made in a Court, that Court
                         alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral
                         proceedings and all subsequent applications
                         arising out of an agreement and the arbitral
                         proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no
                         other Court. This section provides the Forum for
                         entertaining the application under the Act and is
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                        Page 1 of 16
intended to ensure that all the proceedings
                    relating to an Arbitration Agreement take place in
                    the same Court so as to avoid conflict of decisions.
                    It is also intended to prevent undue harassment of
                    the parties by putting them before the same Court
                    in spite of competence of different Courts within
                    the jurisdiction of which different parts of cause
                    of action might have arisen. The contention of
                    learned Counsel for the petitioner that
Section 42
of the Act creates a bar only when the earlier
                    application is before a Court of competent
                    jurisdiction is absolutely correct but the question
                    as to whether the Court before whom an earlier
                    application has been filed is a Court of competent
                    jurisdiction or not has to be adjudicated by that
                    Court itself. Other Courts cannot come into
                    picture and entertain subsequent applications till
                    the earlier Court holds that it has no jurisdiction.
                    Therefore, so long Bombay High Court does not
                    hold that it has no territorial jurisdiction in the
                    matter and the Agreement between the parties
                    conferring jurisdiction upon the Courts at Mumbai
                    is not enforceable all applications under the Act
                    have to be made before Bombay High Court only
                    and in no other Court even if a part of cause of
                    action has arisen within the jurisdiction of some
                    other Court also.
13. In the case of M/s. D.L.F. Industries v.
Standard Chartered Bank and Another reported
                    in AIR 1999 Delhi 11, the terms of Arbitration
                    Agreement between the parties were quite
                    identical to the terms between the parties in the
                    present case. In the said case the parties had
                    agreed that the venue of arbitration shall be at
                    Bangalore and in the jurisdiction clause they had
                    stipulated that the contract shall be governed by
                    the Laws and Regulations of India and will be
                    subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts
                    at Bangalore. The only difference in the wordings
                    of the
Article 36.1
as well as 37.1 in the present
                    case and the Arbitration Clauses in the said case
                    was the use of word "Bangalore" instead of
                    "Mumbai". A learned Single Judge of this Court
                    came to the conclusion that the contract was
                    subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts
                    at Bangalore. In para 7 of the judgment it was
                    further held that
Section 9
and
Section 42
of the
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                   Page 1 of 16
Act being in part I an application moved under
Section 9
also attracts
Section 42
of the Act and
                          precludes the parties from moving any other
                          Court in regard to the applications under the Act."
(
ii)   S.K. Contractor & Engineers v. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation
             Limited
, 2008 (2) Arb. LR 263 (Delhi)
                          In this case also, an objection with regard to the

             territorial jurisdiction of Delhi High Court to entertain the petition

             filed under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act was

             raised. The agreement between the parties contained a clause by

             which exclusive jurisdiction of the courts situated at Mumbai was

             conferred. On this basis it was contended that even if part of cause

             of action had arisen in Delhi, since exclusive jurisdiction was rested in

             the court at Mumbai by agreement between the parties, petition

             under
Section 34
could not be filed in Delhi. This argument was

             countered by the petitioner submitting that on an earlier occasion

             application under applications under
Sections 12
and
13
of the Act

             was filed in Delhi High Court and the respondent had not raised any

             objection with regard to jurisdiction and contested the said OMP on

             merits. Therefore, the agreement by which exclusive jurisdiction was

             conferred upon the Bombay High Court has been waived and by

             virtue of
Section 42
of the Act, subsequent proceedings have to be

             filed in Delhi High Court. Learned Single Judge of this Court accepted

             this contention of the petitioner therein in the following manner:-
"5. .....The said clause 14.10, therefore, clearly
                          restricted the jurisdiction to the courts at Mumbai.
                          However, this was by agreement between the
                          parties. The case of the petitioner is that it is by
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                          Page 1 of 16
agreement between the parties that this clause has
                          been waived. This can be discerned from the fact
                          that when the petitioner filed the earlier OMP No.
                          388/2006 under
Section 12
and
13
of the said Act,
                          the respondents raised no objection with regard to
                          jurisdiction and, in fact, submitted arguments on
                          merits. It is another matter that the said OMP No.
                          388/2006 was dismissed by this Court but, it was
                          not dismissed on the question of jurisdiction. I am
                          in agreement with the learned counsel for the
                          petitioner that by virtue of the fact that the
                          respondent did not raise any objection with regard
                          to jurisdiction when the earlier petition under the
                          said Act had been filed before this Court, the
                          respondent would be deemed to have waived the
                          condition with regard to exclusivity of jurisdiction of
                          the Courts situated at Mumbai. As much as clause
14.10 is contractual, so is waiver (See:
Dawsons
                          Bank Ltd v. Nippon Menkwa Kabushiki Kaish
                          (Japan Cotton Trading Co. Ltd
: AIR 1935 Privy
                          Council 79;
Mademsetty Satyanarayana v. G.
                          Yelloji Rao and others
: AIR 1965 SC 1405; Supdt. Of
                          Taxes, Dhubri and Others v.M/s Onkarmal
                          Nathmal Trust: (1976) 1 SCC 766;
Krishna Bahadur
                          v. Purna Theatre and Others
: (2004) 8 SCC 229).
That being the case, the provisions of
Section 42
of
                          the said Act would come into play. Since the first
                          application had been filed before this Court, all
                          subsequent applications under the said Act falling
                          within the ambit of
Section 42
would also have to
                          be filed before this Court.
14.Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, referred to the

      following judgments in support of his plea:-
(i)    Pandey & Co. Builders (P) Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Another,
                    (2007) 1 SCC 467
                                In this case, order of the Arbitrator was

                    challenged by filing appeal under
Section 37
of the Act. This

                    appeal was filed in the Patna High Court. The question which

                    arose for determination was as to whether the appeal could be

                    entertained by the High Court or it was to be filed in the
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                          Page 1 of 16
District Court. In view of definition of 'court' appearing in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act, the Apex Court held that appeal

                    against such an order of the Arbitrator lies before the 'court'

                    and such a court has to be one which has the original

                    jurisdiction. Since Patna High Court did not have the original

                    jurisdiction, appeal was rightly returned by the Patna High

                    Court on that ground.
We are not directly concerned with such a

                    situation in the instant case as Delhi High Court has the original

                    jurisdiction as well. However, the only purpose for citing this

                    judgment by the learned counsel for the respondent was that

                    the expression "original jurisdiction" is to be read keeping in

                    view the pecuniary jurisdiction and since the amount in

                    question was less than Rs.20 lakhs, the High Court lacked the

                    pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the execution petition. He

                    also referred to para 34 of the judgment which provides a

                    distinction between an appeal and application in the following

                    terms:-
"34. There exists a distinction between an
                                 appeal and an application.           Whereas
Section 31(4)
of the 1940 Act or
Section 42
of the 1996 Act provides for an application,
                                 sub-section (2) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act
                                 provides for a statutory appeal. A forum of
                                 an appellate court must be determined with
                                 reference to the definition thereof
                                 contained in the 1996 Act."
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                          Page 1 of 16
(
ii)   S.K. Brothers v. Delhi Development Authority
, 152 (2008) DLT
239
The learned Single Judge of this Court in the case

                    judgment refused to entertain the execution petition for

                    executing the award/decree amount of which was less than

                    Rs.20 lakhs, i.e., less than the pecuniary jurisdiction of this

                    Court. However, in the process the learned Single Judge also

                    expressed his view that execution application is not "arbitral

                    proceedings" within the meaning of
Section 42
of the Act and

                    the counsel for the respondent has referred to this judgment

                    highlighting this aspect of the judgment dealt with by the

                    learned Single Judge.
15.We have considered the aforesaid submission in the light of various

      judgments cited by the counsel for the parties. We have already opined

      that in view of the law
laid down in
said judgments, particulars whereof are

      given hereinabove, merely because the High Court appointed the Arbitrator

      in the application filed under
Section 11(6)
of the Act would not mean that

      subsequent proceedings, including execution petition have to be filed in the

      High Court. If the amount of the award is less than Rs.20 lakhs the

      execution petition shall have to be filed before the District Court which has

      the necessary pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the same. For this reason,

      contention mentioned above needs to be rejected. Even if application

      under
Section 11
filed in the year 1998 was because of the reason that this

      Court had the pecuniary jurisdiction, would be of no avail. All said and

      done, order for appointment was passed under
Section 11
of the Act and it
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                        Page 1 of 16
is now a settled law that the expression 'Chief Justice' as contained in
Section 11
of the Act is not synonymous with the term 'Court' as defined in
Section 2(e)
of the Act. Therefore, benefit of
Section 42
cannot be taken on

      this basis. What remains to be answered is as to whether the execution

      petition is competent in this Court because on an earlier occasion

      applications under
Sections 27
and
37(2)(b)
of the Act were filed in this

      Court and therefore, all subsequent proceedings would be maintainable in

      this Court alone by virtue of
Section 42
of the Act. No doubt,
Section 42
of

      the Act confers exclusive jurisdiction on this Court over the "arbitral

      proceedings and all subsequent applications arising out of that agreement."

      However, execution application would be competent in this Court only if it

      is in the nature of "arbitral proceedings". It has to be relatable to the

      arbitral proceedings or be termed as 'application' arising out of the

      arbitration agreement.
Answer to this has to be in the negative in view of
S.K. Brothers v. Delhi Development Authority
(supra) holding that execution

      application is neither "arbitral proceedings" within the meaning of
Section

      42
of the Act or subsequent application arising out of the agreement. No

      doubt, it is the judgment by a learned Single Judge.
However, in arriving at

      this conclusion the learned Single Judge has relied upon the judgment of

      the Supreme Court in
Pandey & Co. Builders (P) Ltd. v. State of Bihar and


      Another
(supra) and stated the position in the following manner:-
"7. The Apex Court in
Pandey & Co. Builders (P)
                         Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Another
, VIII (2006)
                         SLT=IV (2006) CLT 313(SC)= (2007) 1 SCC 467, has
                         further held that
Section 42
only applies to
                         applications and not to appeals under
Section 37
of the Act. Applying the same reasoning, Section
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                         Page 1 of 16
42 would also not apply to execution applications.
                         The execution application is not "arbitral
                         proceedings" within the meaning of
Section 42
of
                         the Act and is not a subsequent application arising
                         out of the agreement and the arbitral
                         proceedings. In fact, the arbitral proceedings
                         come to an end when the time for making an
                         application to set aside the arbitral award expires
                         and the execution application is an enforcement
                         of the award which takes the colour of a decree
                         under
the CPC
, by virtue of the provisions of
Section 36
of the Act."
16.We are in agreement with the aforesaid view and the position in law

      explained by the learned Single Judge in that judgment. For the aforesaid

      reasons we hold that the impugned judgment returning the execution

      petition is perfectly in order and does not call for any interference. We,

      therefore, dismiss this appeal but leave the parties to bear their own costs.
(A.K. SIKRI)
                                                                  JUDGE



December 19, 2008                                           (MANMOHAN SINGH)
hp.                                                             JUDGE
EFA (OS) No.12/08                                                        Page 1 of 16
