Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 641, Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab reported in (2012)
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/53247596/

[Cites
35
, Cited by
82
]
Madhya Pradesh High Court
Arif Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2019
Author:
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
Bench:
Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
1

                     The High Court of Madhya Pradesh
                             MCRC 39588/2019
                      Arif Khan Vs. State of MP & Anr.

Gwalior, dtd. 20/09/2019
      Shri M. Khan, Counsel for the applicant.

      Shri Purushottam Rai, Panel Lawyer for the respondent No.1/State.
Shri SS Sikarwar, Counsel for the complainant/ respondent No.2.
This petition under
Section 482
of CrPC has been filed for quashment of

Crime No.656/2017 registered at Police Station Bahodapur, District Gwalior for

offence under
Section 376
of IPC and
Section 3
/
4
of Protection of Children from

Sexual Offences Act 2012 [in short '' the
POCSO Act
''] as well as Sessions Trial

No.221/2017 pending before the Court of Tenth Additional Sessions Judge,

Gwalior.
(2)    It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that during pendency of

Sessions Trial, the parties have resolved their dispute with the intervention of

elderly members of the society and the applicant has married the respondent No.2

and thus, now there is no dispute between them and they want to live their life

peacefully. As the applicant has married the respondent No.2, therefore, the

respondent No.2 does not want to proceed further with the case and accordingly,

both the parties have amicably compromised the matter. It is further submitted that

this Court has extra-ordinary jurisdiction to quash the proceedings on the basis of

compromise. The counsel for the applicant has relied upon the judgments passed

by the Supreme Court in the case of
Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of Gujarat
,

reported in (2017) 9 SCC 641, Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab reported in (2012)
2
10 SCC 303 and Narinder Singh & Ors. vs. State of Punjab & Anr. reported in

(2014) 6 SCC 466.
(3)   It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that the respondent No.2 had

lodged a report 05/10/2017 on the allegations that she is aged about 17 years and

about a year back, she had gone to her sister's house. The applicant, who is

nephew of her sister, used to visit the house. Thereafter, she came back to her

parents' home. The applicant continued to visit her parent's home and started

convincing her that he would marry her. About six months back, physical relations

were developed on the promise of marriage. Thereafter, the applicant continued to

have physical relations with her on the promise of marriage. For the last time, he

had done wrong work with her on 03/10/2017 and on the said day when she

insisted to marry, then he refused to do so. Thereafter, she informed this incident to

her sister Chandni and grand-mother Mustari Devi. Accordingly, the FIR was

lodged on 05/10/2017.
(4)   It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that the police, after

completion of investigation, filed the charge sheet and the applicant is facing trial

for offence under
Section 376
of IPC and under Section 3/4 of POSCO Act, 2012.
It is further submitted that during pendency of trial, due to intervention of elderly

members of society, both the parties have entered into compromise and

accordingly, the applicant has married the respondent No.2 on 13/04/2019.
Nikahanama has also been annexed with the petition. It is submitted that since

both the parties are residing together peacefully, therefore, the prosecution of the

applicant may be quashed on the ground of compromise.
3
(5)   Apart from the above judgments, the counsel for the applicant has also

relied upon the order dated 10/04/2019 passed by a Coordinate Bench of this Court

in the case of
Pankaj Parmar and Others vs. State of MP
in MCRC No.

6904/2019 (Gwalior Bench) and submitted that in the said case the offence under
Section 363
,
376
,
120-B
of IPC and under Section 5/6 of the POSCO Act was

registered, and the Coordinate Bench of this Court after considering the

compromise has quashed the proceedings.
(6)   Per contra, it is submitted by the Counsel for the State that the order passed

by the Coordinate Bench of this Court passed in the case of
Pankaj Parmar
(supra) is per incuriam and it has not taken note of the judgments passed by the

Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Madanlal
, reported in (
2015) 7

SCC 681 and State of M.P. v. Laxmi Narayan
, reported in (2019) 5 SCC 688.
(7)       Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.

(8)       The Supreme Court in the case of Narinder Singh (supra) has held as

under:-
''29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down
            the following principles by which the High Court would be guided
            in giving adequate treatment to the settlement between the parties
            and exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code while
            accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing
            to accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal
            proceedings:
29.1. Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
            distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to compound
            the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No doubt, under
            Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power to
            quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not
            compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter between
            themselves. However, this power is to be exercised sparingly and
            with caution.
4
29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and on that
basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the
guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on
either of the aforesaid two objectives.
29.3. Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which
involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or
offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for
offences alleged to have been committed under special statute like
the
Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be
quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the victim and
the offender.
29.4. On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of
commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have
resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
29.5. While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as
to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to
him by not quashing the criminal cases.
29.6. Offences under
Section 307
IPC would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and therefore is to be generally
treated as crime against the society and not against the individual
alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely
because there is a mention of
Section 307
IPC in the FIR or the
charge is framed under this provision. It would be open to the High
Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
Section 307
IPC is
there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving the charge under
Section 307
IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is
inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of weapons
used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim
can generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether there is a strong
possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote
and bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement
and quash the criminal proceedings whereas in the later case it
would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
5
compounding the offence based on complete settlement between
         the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be swayed by the fact
         that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony
         between them which may improve their future relationship.
          29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section
          482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role.
          Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
          alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under
          investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the
          settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
          because of the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on
          and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases
          where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
          evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court can show
          benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima
          facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above.
          On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost
          complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the
          stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from
          exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as in such
          cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case finally
          on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence under
Section 307
IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those cases
          where the conviction is already recorded by the trial court and the
          matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere
          compromise between the parties would not be a ground to accept
          the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has already been
          convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under
Section
          307
IPC and conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and,
          therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found guilty of
          such a crime.''

(9)    From the plain reading of paragraph 29.3, it is clear that the power under
Section 482
of CrPC should not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve

heinous and serious offences like murder, rape, dacoity etc. as such offences are

not private in nature and have a serious impact on the society. However, for the

offence alleged to have been committed under ''Special Statute'' like the
Prevention of Corruption Act
, the prosecution cannot be quashed merely on the

basis of compromise between the victim and the offender.
6
(10)   In the present case, the applicant is also facing trial for offence under
Section 3
/
4
of POCSO Act, 2012. The POSCO Act 2012 is, undisputedly, a

''Special Statute'' and any offence under the ''Special Statute'' cannot be quashed on

the basis of compromise.
(11) This Court in the case of
Monu @ Ranu Kushwah & Others vs. State of

M.P. & Another
by order dated 30.11.2016 passed in M.Cr.C.11891/2016 has

held as under:-
"20. In the light of the judgments passed by the Supreme
             Court in the cases of Gian Singh (supra) and Narinder Singh
             (supra) while deciding the application for quashing of FIR on
             the ground of compromise, the Court is under obligation to
             consider the nature and gravity of the offence. It was submitted
             by the counsel for the applicants that so far as the observation
             given by the Supreme Court in the cases of Gian Singh
             (Supra) and Narinder Singh (supra) in paragraph 29.3 is
             concerned the same cannot be applied to the offences
             punishable under the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
             (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
. In Narinder Singh
             (supra), the Supreme Court in paragraph 29.3 has observed as
             under:-
"(29.3). Such a power is not to be exercised in those
                  prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
                  offences of mental depravity or offences like murder,
                  rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in
                  nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly,
                  for the offences alleged to have been committed under
                  special statute like the
Prevention of Corruption Act
or
                  the offences committed by public servants while
                  working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely
                  on the basis of compromise between the victim and the
                  offender."
21. It was contended by the counsel for the applicants that
             since the Supreme Court has referred to
Prevention of
             Corruption Act
and for offences committed by public servants
             working in that capacity, therefore, word the "special statutes"
should be interpreted in the light of these two acts only. So far
             as the reference to
Prevention of Corruption Act
and offences
7
of public servant is concerned, the same is merely illustrative
             in nature and is not exhaustive. As it has already been
             observed that the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
             (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
has been enacted to check
             the tendency of untouchability in the society which is also
             prohibited under
Article 17
of the Constitution of India, it is
             held that the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
             (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
is a Special Statute and,
             therefore, the power to quash the proceedings on the basis of
             compromise cannot be exercised. Furthermore, the orders on
             which the counsel for the applicants has placed reliance, the
             co-ordinate Bench of this Court has nowhere decided that
             whether proceedings for offences under the
Scheduled Castes
             and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
can
             be quashed on the basis of compromise or not?.............."
(12)   Thus, where the applicant is facing Trial for an offence punishable under

the Special Statute, then the prosecution cannot be quashed on the basis of

compromise.
(13)   Section 375 Sixthly of
IPC
is relevant, which reads as under:-
''Sixthly --With or without her consent, when she is
               under eighteen years of age.''

(14)   Thus, it is clear that where the prosecutrix is a minor below 18 years of age,

then her consent would be immaterial. When an offence is made out against the

accused irrespective of the fact that whether the prosecutrix was a consenting party

or not, then certainly, the prosecution cannot be quashed merely on the ground that

at a later stage the prosecutrix has entered into a compromise. Once the consent of

the minor prosecutrix is immaterial for registration of offence, then such consent

shall still remain immaterial for all practical purposes at all the stages including

for compromise. Merely because, the minor prosecutrix has later on agreed to

enter into a compromise with the applicant, would not be sufficient to quash the
8
proceedings. Since the POCSO Act, 2012 is a
Special Act
, therefore, in view of the

provisions of Sections 375 Sixthly of
IPC
, the consent of the prosecutrix is

material. Thus, this Court is of the considered opinion that the prosecution of the

accused for offence under
Section 3
/
4
of POCSO Act, 2012 cannot be quashed

merely on the ground that the prosecutrix has compromised the matter with the

accused.
(15)   There is another aspect of the matter. When the consent of a minor girl is

immaterial, then unscrupulous persons after the registration of offence, can get the

investigation quashed on the basis of compromise. When the legislature has

specially provided that the consent of a minor girl is immaterial, then the Courts

cannot become an instrumentality in bypassing the specific provisions of law.
The

POCSO Act, 2012
is a Special Statute enacted with the object of protecting the

children from sexual offences. Thus, this Court is of the considered opinion that

''what cannot be done directly, cannot also be done indirectly.
Further, the POCSO

Act, 2012
was enacted to provide a robust legal framework for the protection of

children from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and pronography

while safeguarding the interest of the child at every stage of the judicial process.
Protection of children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2019 provides for

enhanced stringent punishment. Under these circumstances, this Court is of the

considered opinion that if an accused is facing trial under the provisions of
POCSO Act
2012, then his prosecution cannot be quashed in exercise of power

under
Section 482
of CrPC on the ground that the prosecutrix has entered into a

compromise with the accused, and application for compromise is not maintainable.
9
(16)    It is next contended by the Counsel for the applicant that the applicant is

also facing trial for an offence under
Section 376
of IPC and since the applicant

has married the respondent No.2/prosecutrix , therefore, now there is no

possibility of conviction of the applicant and thus, the trial of the applicant would

be nothing, but a sheer wastage of valuable time of Court. Thus, the prosecution of

the applicant for offence under
Section 376
of IPC be quashed.
(17)   Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
(18)    The moot question for consideration is that when the accused has married

the respondent No.2/prosecutrix, then whether the prosecution of the accused for

offence under
Section 376
of IPC can be quashed or not ?
(19)   The Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Madanlal
, reported in

(2015) 7 SCC 681, has held as under :
''18. The aforesaid view was expressed while dealing with the
         imposition of sentence. We would like to clearly state that in a
         case of rape or attempt to rape, the conception of compromise
         under no circumstances can really be thought of. These are
         crimes against the body of a woman which is her own temple.
         These are the offences which suffocate the breath of life and
         sully the reputation. And reputation, needless to emphasise, is the
         richest jewel one can conceive of in life. No one would allow it
         to be extinguished. When a human frame is defiled, the "purest
         treasure", is lost. Dignity of a woman is a part of her non-
         perishable and immortal self and no one should ever think of
         painting it in clay. There cannot be a compromise or settlement
         as it would be against her honour which matters the most. It is
         sacrosanct. Sometimes solace is given that the perpetrator of the
         crime has acceded to enter into wedlock with her which is
         nothing but putting pressure in an adroit manner; and we say
         with emphasis that the courts are to remain absolutely away from
         this subterfuge to adopt a soft approach to the case, for any kind
         of liberal approach has to be put in the compartment of
         spectacular error. Or to put it differently, it would be in the realm
         of a sanctuary of error.
10
19. We are compelled to say so as such an attitude reflects lack of
sensibility towards the dignity, the élan vital, of a woman. Any
kind of liberal approach or thought of mediation in this regard is
thoroughly and completely sans legal permissibility. It has to be
kept in mind, as has been held in
Shyam Narain v. State (NCT of
Delhi
) (2013) 7 SCC 77 that: (SCC pp. 88-89, para 27)
           "27. Respect for reputation of women in the society
       shows the basic civility of a civilised society. No member
       of society can afford to conceive the idea that he can create
       a hollow in the honour of a woman. Such thinking is not
       only lamentable but also deplorable. It would not be an
       exaggeration to say that the thought of sullying the
       physical frame of a woman is the demolition of the
       accepted civilised norm i.e. 'physical morality'. In such a
       sphere, impetuosity has no room. The youthful excitement
       has no place. It should be paramount in everyone's mind
       that, on the one hand, society as a whole cannot preach
       from the pulpit about social, economic and political
       equality of the sexes and, on the other, some perverted
       members of the same society dehumanise the woman by
       attacking her body and ruining her chastity. It is an assault
       on the individuality and inherent dignity of a woman with
       the mindset that she should be elegantly servile to men."
20. At this juncture, we are obliged to refer to two authorities,
 namely,
Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab
(
2011) 13 SCC 705 and
 Ravindra v. State of M.P.
(2015) 4 SCC 491 Baldev Singh was
 considered by the three-Judge Bench in Shimbhu (2014) 13 SCC
 318 and
in that case
it has been stated that: (Shimbhu case, SCC
 pp. 327-28, para 18)
        "18.1.
In
Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab
though the courts
    below awarded a sentence of ten years, taking note of the facts
    that the occurrence was 14 years old, the appellants therein
    had undergone about 3½ years of imprisonment, the
    prosecutrix and the appellants married (not to each other) and
    entered into a compromise, this Court, while considering
    peculiar circumstances, reduced the sentence to the period
    already undergone, but enhanced the fine from Rs 1000 to Rs
    50,000.
In the light of a series of decisions, taking contrary
    view, we hold that
the said decision
in
Baldev Singh v. State
    of Punjab
cannot be cited as a precedent and it should be
    confined to that case."
21. Recently, in Ravindra, a two-Judge Bench taking note of the
fact that there was a compromise has opined thus: (SCC p. 497,
paras 17-18)
11
"17. This Court has in
Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab
,
              invoked the proviso to
Section 376(2)
IPC on the
              consideration that the case was an old one. The facts of
the
              above case
also state that there was compromise entered into
              between the parties.
18. In light of the discussion in the foregoing paragraphs,
               we are of the opinion that the case of the appellant is a fit
               case for invoking the proviso to
Section 376(2)
IPC for
               awarding lesser sentence, as the incident is 20 years old and
               the fact that the parties are married and have entered into a
               compromise, are the adequate and special reasons. Therefore,
               although we uphold the conviction of the appellant but
               reduce the sentence to the period already undergone by the
               appellant. The appeal is disposed of accordingly."
22.    Placing reliance on Shimbhu, we also say that the
          judgments in Baldev Singh and Ravindra have to be confined to
          the facts of the said cases and are not to be regarded as binding
          precedents.''
                                                         (underline supplied)

(20)    The Supreme Court in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Laxmi Narayan
,

reported in (2019) 5 SCC 688 has held as under :-
''11. At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present
       appeals, the High Court in exercise of its powers under
Section 482
CrPC has quashed the FIR for the offences under
Sections 307
and
34
IPC solely on the basis of a compromise between the complainant and
       the accused. That in view of the compromise and the stand taken by
       the complainant, considering the decision of this Court in
Shiji vs.
       Radhika
(2011) 10 SCC 705, the High Court has observed that there
       is no chance of recording conviction against the accused persons and
       the entire exercise of a trial would be exercise in futility, the High
       Court has quashed the FIR.
11.1. However, the High Court has not at all considered the fact that
       the offences alleged were non-compoundable offences as per
Section
       320
CrPC. From the impugned judgment and order, it appears that
       the High Court has not at all considered the relevant facts and
       circumstances of the case, more particularly the seriousness of the
       offences and its social impact. From the impugned judgment and
       order passed by the High Court, it appears that the High Court has
       mechanically quashed the FIR, in exercise of its powers under
Section 482
CrPC. The High Court has not at all considered the
       distinction between a personal or private wrong and a social wrong
       and the social impact. As observed by this Court in
State of
12
Maharashtra v. Vikram Anantrai Doshi
(2014) 15 SCC 29, the
       Court's principal duty, while exercising the powers under
Section
       482
CrPC to quash the criminal proceedings, should be to scan the
       entire facts to find out the thrust of the allegations and the crux of the
       settlement. As observed, it is the experience of the Judge that comes
       to his aid and the said experience should be used with care, caution,
       circumspection and courageous prudence. In the case at hand, the
       High Court has not at all taken pains to scrutinise the entire
       conspectus of facts in proper perspective and has quashed the
       criminal proceedings mechanically. Even, the quashing of the FIR by
       the High Court in the present case for the offences under
Sections
       307
and
34
IPC, and that too in exercise of powers under
Section 482
CrPC is just contrary to the law
laid down by
this Court in a catena
       of decisions.''
(21)   The Supreme Court in the case of
Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of Gujarat
,

reported in (2017) 9 SCC 641 has held as under :-
''16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
          subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
16.1. Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High
                Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to
                secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer new
                powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere
                in the High Court.
16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
                quash a first information report or a criminal proceeding on the
                ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the
                offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of
                jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
                compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by
                the provisions of
Section 320
of the Code of Criminal
                Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is
                attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
                16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
                complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction
                under Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the
                ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power.
                16.4. While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
                ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised (i) to secure the ends
                of justice, or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any
                court.
16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or first
13
information report should be quashed on the ground that the
                offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves
                ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and no
                exhaustive elaboration of principles can be formulated.
                16.6. In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while
                dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High
                Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
                offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental
                depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
                appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the
                victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly
                speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon
                society. The decision to continue with the trial in such cases is
                founded on the overriding element of public interest in
                punishing persons for serious offences.
16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may be
                criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant
                element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing
                insofar as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is
                concerned.
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
                commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
                transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in
                appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties have
                settled the dispute.
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
                proceeding if in view of the compromise between the
                disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and the
                continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause oppression
                and prejudice; and
                16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
                propositions 16.8. and 16.9. above. Economic offences
                involving the financial and economic well-being of the State
                have implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere
                dispute between private disputants. The High Court would be
                justified in declining to quash where the offender is involved in
                an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
                misdemeanour. The consequences of the act complained of
                upon the financial or economic system will weigh in the
                balance.''
(22)   Thus, it is clear that where the accused is facing trial for the offence of rape,

then conception of compromise under no circumstances can really be thought of.
14
These are crimes against the body of a woman. When a woman is violated, then

''purest treasure'' is lost. The dignity of a woman is an essential part of her non-
perishable and immortal self and no one should ever think of painting it in clay.
The honour of a woman cannot be put to stake by compromise or settlement. The

Supreme Court in the case of
Madanlal
(supra) has further held that ''sometimes

solace is given that the perpetrator of the crime has acceded to enter into wedlock

with her which is nothing but putting pressure in an adroit manner; and we say

with emphasis that the Courts are to remain absolutely away from this subterfuge

to adopt a soft approach to the case, for any kind of liberal approach has to be put

in the compartment of spectacular error or to put it differently, it would be in the

realm of a sanctuary of error''. Thus, it is clear that even if the accused come

forward with the case that now since he has married the prosecutrix, therefore, the

prosecution should be quashed, then such prayer cannot be accepted under any

circumstances.
(23)   Further, Delhi High Court in the case of
Vikash Kumar @ Sonu Vs. The

State
by order dated 1-8-2017 passed in Crl.M.C. No. 2763 of 2017 has held as

under :-
''20. The two decisions relied upon by learned Senior
           Advocate for the petitioner in Mr.Manteshwar Hanumantrao
           Kattimani Vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr. (Supra) and Jaya
           D.Ovhal Vs. State of Maharashtra (Supra) are not binding
           precedents. Otherwise also, while considering prayer of the
           petitioner for quashing the FIR and consequential proceedings
           emanating therefrom, guiding principles are laid down in Gian
           Singh's case (Supra).
''21. The petitioner could not seek any assistance by
                 placing reliance on Deeapk Gulati vs. State of Haryana
                 (Supra) as it was an appeal against conviction for
15
committing the offence punishable under Section
365/366/376IPC wherein by giving benefit of doubt, the
appellant/accused was acquitted.
22. It would also be apposite to mention here that in a
decision dated 3rd August, 2015 by Co-ordinate Bench of
this Court in Crl.M.C. No.1824/2015, the petition under
Section 482
CrPC filed by the petitioner for quashing of
FIR registered under
Section 376
IPC on the ground that
complainant has got married to the petitioner, has been
dismissed by passing the following order:-
"This is a petition seeking quashing of the FIR
    No.163/2015 registered under
Section 376
of the IPC
    at the behest of respondent No.2. Respondent No.2 is
    present. She is an adult stated to be 27 years of age.
    Her presence has been identified by the Investigating
    Officer. She states that she in fact wishes to marry
    the petitioner and the FIR has been got registered
    under a misunderstanding. She does not wish that
    any action should be taken against the petitioner. The
    petitioner is stated to be a Government servant.
In view of this factual matrix, the petitioner be not
    arrested till the time when the statement of the
    prosecutrix is recorded before the Sessions Judge.
Learned Public Prosecutor for the State under
    instructions from the Investigating Officer states that
    challan is almost ready and shall be filed positively
    within two weeks. The trial Judge will endeavour to
    record the statement of the prosecutrix as early as
    possible.
This Court is otherwise not inclined to entertain a
    quashing petition under Section 376 of IPC in view
    of the judgment of the Apex Court reported as 10
    SCC 303 Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab and Anr.,
    With these directions, petition disposed of.
Order dasti under the signatures of the Court
    Master."
23.The above order passed in Crl.M.C. No.1824/2015
declining the prayer for quashing of the criminal
proceedings despite the fact that the parties got married,
was challenged by filing a Special Leave to Appeal
16
No...../2016 (Crl.M.P. No.1865/2016) before the Supreme
              Court. The SLP also stands dismissed vide order dated 8th
              February, 2016.''
                                                    (underline applied)

(24)   The Supreme Court in the case of
Shimbhu vs. State of Haryana
, reported

in (2014) 13 SCC 318 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 651, has held as under :-
''20. Further, a compromise entered into between the parties
          cannot be construed as a leading factor based on which lesser
          punishment can be awarded. Rape is a non-compoundable
          offence and it is an offence against the society and is not a
          matter to be left for the parties to compromise and settle. Since
          the court cannot always be assured that the consent given by
          the victim in compromising the case is a genuine consent,
          there is every chance that she might have been pressurized by
          the convicts or the trauma undergone by her all the years might
          have compelled her to opt for a compromise. In fact, accepting
          this proposition will put an additional burden on the victim.
          The accused may use all his influence to pressurize her for a
          compromise. So, in the interest of justice and to avoid
          unnecessary pressure/harassment to the victim, it would not be
          safe in considering the compromise arrived at between the
          parties in rape cases to be a ground for the court to exercise the
          discretionary power under the proviso of
Section 376(2)
IPC.
21. It is imperative to mention that the legislature through the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
has deleted this proviso
          in the wake of increasing crimes against women. Though, the
          said amendment will not come in the way of exercising
          discretion in this case, on perusal of the above legislative
          provision and catena of cases on the issue, we feel that the
          present case fails to fall within the ambit of exceptional case
          where the Court shall use its extraordinary discretion to reduce
          the period of sentence than the minimum prescribed.''

(25)   So far as the order passed by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case
Pankaj Parmar
(supra) is concerned,it has not taken note of the judgments passed

by the Supreme Court in the case of
Madanlal
(supra),
Laxmi Narayan
(supra),
Shimbhu
(supra) as well as the order passed by Supreme Court and the Delhi
17
High Court in the case of
Vikash Kumar @ Sonu
(supra).
The Coordinate Bench

of this Court has also not taken note of the fact that the
POCSO Act, 2012
is a

''
Special Act
'' and thus, in the light of the judgments passed by the Supreme Court

in the case of Gian Singh (supra) and Narinder Singh (supra), the compromise

cannot be accepted where the accused is facing trial for offence punishable under

the
Special Act
. The Coordinate Bench of this Court has also not taken note of the

provisions of Sections 375 Sixthly of
IPC
which provides that sexual intercourse

with or without consent of a girl below 18 years of age would be ''rape''. Thus,

when the consent of minor prosecutrix is immaterial at the time of commission of

offence, then under no circumstances, her consent would become relevant for the

purpose of compromise.
(26) Thus, with great respect, it is held that the order passed by the Coordinate

Bench of this Court in the case of Pankaj Parmar (supra) has rendered per

incuriam as the above-mentioned judgments and aspects have not been taken note

of.
(27)   It is further submitted by the counsel for the applicant that once the

prosecutrix has entered into a compromise, then there is no possibility of

conviction as she may not support the prosecution case in the trial.
(28)   The submission made by the counsel for the applicant is misconceived and

is hereby rejected.
(29) The Supreme Court in the case of
Hemudan Nanbha Gadhvi vs. State of

Gujarat
passed vide order dated 28th September, 2018 in Criminal Appeal
18
No.913 of 2016 has held as under:-
'' 10. It would indeed be a travesty of justice in the peculiar facts
         of the present case if the appellant were to be acquitted merely
         because the prosecutrix turned hostile and failed to identify the
         appellant in the dock, in view of the other overwhelming evidence
         available.
In
Iqbal vs. State of U.P.
, 2015 (6) SCC 623, it was
         observed as follows:
''15. Evidence of identification of the miscreants in the
                   test identification     parade    is    not     a substantive
                   evidence. Conviction cannot be based solely on the
                   identity of the dacoits by the witnesses in the test
                   identification parade. The prosecution has to adduce
                   substantive evidence by          establishing incriminating
                   evidence connecting the accused with the crime, like
                   recovery of articles which are the subject matter of dacoity
                   and the alleged weapons used in the commission of the
                   offence."
11. The corroboration of the identification in T.I.P is to be found
         in the medical report of the prosecutrix considered in conjunction
         with the semen found on the clothes of the prosecutrix and the
         appellant belonging to the Group B of the appellant. The vaginal
         smear and vaginal swab have also confirmed the presence
         of semen. A close analysis of the facts and circumstances of the
         case,       and     the     nature    of    the evidence       available
         unequivocally establishes the appellant as the perpetrator of sexual
         assault on the prosecutrix. The serologist report was an
         expert opinion under
Section 45
of the Evidence Act,1872
         and was therefore admissible in evidence without being marked
         an exhibit formally or having to be proved by oral evidence.
12. The contention on behalf of the appellant that the serological
         report was not put to him by the court under Section 313 Cr. P.C.
         and therefore, he has been prejudiced in his defence, has been
         raised for the first time before this court. The serological report
         being available, it was a failure on the part of the trial court to bring
         it to the attention of the appellant. The prosecution cannot be said
         to be guilty of not adducing or suppressing any evidence.
In view
         of the nature of the evidence available in the present case, as
         discussed hereinbefore, we are of the opinion that no prejudice can
         be said to have been caused to the appellant for that reason, as held
         in
Nar Singh vs. State of Haryana
, (2015) 1 SCC 496:
''32...........When there is omission to put material
                 evidence to the accused in the course of
                 examination under
Section 313
CrPC, the prosecution
19
is not guilty of not adducing or suppressing such
                 evidence; it is only the failure on the part of the learned trial
                 court. The victim of the offence or the accused should not
                 suffer for laches or omission of the court. Criminal
                 justice is not one-sided. It has many facets and we have to
                 draw a balance between conflicting rights and duties.
33.Coming to the facts of this case, the FSL report (Ext. P-
12) was relied upon both by the trial court as well as by the
                 High Court. The objection as to the defective
Section 313
CrPC statement has not been raised in the trial court or in the
                 High Court and the omission to put the question under
Section 313
CrPC, and prejudice caused to the accused is
                 raised before this Court for the first time. It was
                 brought to our notice that the appellant is in custody
                 for about eight years. While the right of the accused to
                 speedy trial is a valuable one, the Court has to subserve the
                 interest of justice keeping in view the right of the victim's
                 family and society at large.''

(30) Thus, it is clear that even if the prosecutrix turns hostile but still the accused

can be convicted on the basis of scientific and other circumstantial evidence. Thus,

it cannot be said that in case if the prosecutrix turns hostile, then there is no

possibility of conviction of the accused at all.
(31) The stage of trial is also crucial.
(32) The Supreme Court in the case of Narinder Singh(supra) in paragraph 29.7

has held as under:-
''29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section
       482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role.
Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
       alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under
       investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the
       settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
       because of the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and
       even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where
       the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is
       still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in
       exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie assessment of
20
the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand,
              where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the
              conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,
              normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power
              under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would
              be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to come a
              conclusion as to whether the offence under
Section 307
IPC is
              committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is
              already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
              stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties
              would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the
              offender who has already been convicted by the trial court. Here
              charge is proved under
Section 307
IPC and conviction is already
              recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of
              sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime.''

       (33)    Thus, it is clear that for exercising power under
Section 482
of CrPC for

       quashing the criminal prosecution on the basis of compromise, the stage of trial is

       also material. The applicant is facing trial from 2017. It has not been clarified that

       whether the prosecutrix has already been examined in the trial or not; and whether

       the prosecutrix has supported the prosecution case or not. It was necessary for the

       applicant to clearly plead about the stage of Trial. Since the petition as well as the

       submissions made by the parties are completely silent with regard to the stage of

       trial, therefore, this Court is of the considered opinion that on this ground also, the

       petition is liable to be rejected.
(34)   Accordingly, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
(G. S. Ahluwalia)
                                                                       Judge


MKB



      MAHENDR         Digitally signed by MAHENDRA KUMAR
                      BARIK
                      DN: c=IN, o=HIGH COURT OF M.P.
                      BENCH GWALIOR, ou=P.S.,

      A KUMAR         postalCode=474011, st=Madhya
                      Pradesh,
                      2.5.4.20=f592da990684fe30f8e1e29a4a


      BARIK
                      1a9e3451ee450d883083a8e4cc8020ee
                      e6f7cb, cn=MAHENDRA KUMAR BARIK
                      Date: 2019.09.23 18:01:55 +05'30'
