Title: Search
Court: Supreme Court of India
Date: 8 October 2007
Citation: AIR 1971 SC 2608).
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/58711832/

[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Law Commission Report
216Th Report On Non-Feasibility Of Introduction Of Hindi As Compulsary Language ...
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

                         LAW
                     COMMISSION
                          OF
                        INDIA




NON-FEASIBILITY OF INTRODUCTION OF HINDI AS
COMPULSORY LANGUAGE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF
INDIA



Report No. 216




December 2008




                         1
                    LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
                     (REPORT NO. 216)




NON-FEASIBILITY OF INTRODUCTION OF HINDI AS
COMPULSORY LANGUAGE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF
INDIA




Presented to Dr. H.R.Bhardwaj, Union Minister for Law & Justice,
Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of India, by
Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan, Chairman, Law Commission of India, on
the 17th day of December, 2008.




The 18th Law Commission was constituted for a period of
three years from 1st September, 2006 by Order No.
A.45012/1/2006-Admn.III (LA) dated the 16th October, 2006,

                              2
 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi.


The Law Commission consists of the Chairman, the
Member-Secretary, one full-time Member and seven part-
time Members.

Chairman

Hon'ble Dr Justice AR. Lakshmanan

Member-Secretary

Dr Brahm A. Agrawal

Full-time Member

Prof. Dr Tahir Mahmood

Part-time Members

Dr (Mrs) Devinder Kumari Raheja
Dr K. N. Chandrasekharan Pillai
Prof. (Mrs) Lakshmi Jambholkar
Smt. Kirti Singh
Shri Justice I. Venkatanarayana
Shri O.P. Sharma
Dr (Mrs) Shyamlha Pappu


The Law Commission is located in ILI Building,
2nd Floor, Bhagwan Das Road,


                           3
 New Delhi-110 001


Law Commission Staff


Member-Secretary

Dr Brahm A. Agrawal


Research Staff

Shri Sushil Kumar       : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Ms. Pawan Sharma             : Additional Law Officer
Shri J. T. Sulaxan Rao : Additional Law Officer
Shri A. K. Upadhyay          : Deputy Law Officer
Dr V. K. Singh               : Assistant Legal Adviser


Administrative Staff

Shri Sushil Kumar       : Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri D. Choudhury      : Under Secretary
Shri S. K. Basu              : Section Officer
Smt. Rajni Sharma      : Assistant Library &
                         Information Officer




                            4
 The text of this Report is available on the Internet at
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in




©   Government of India
    Law Commission of India




The text in this document (excluding the Government
Logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or
medium provided that it is reproduced accurately and not
used in a misleading context. The material must be
acknowledged as the Government of India copyright and
the title of the document specified.




Any enquiries relating to this Report should be addressed
to the Member-Secretary and sent either by post to the
Law Commission of India, 2nd Floor, ILI Building, Bhagwan
Das Road, New Delhi-110001, India or by email to lci-
[email protected]
5
 Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan                                 ILI Building (IInd
Floor),
(Former Judge, Supreme Court of India)              Bhagwandas Road,
Chairman, Law Commission of India                  New Delhi-110 001
                                                     Tel.: 91-11-23384475
                                                     Fax: 91-11-23383564



D.O.No. 6(3)127/2006-LC(LS)                               December 17,
2008


Dear Dr Bhardwaj ji,

     I have great pleasure in presenting the 216th Report of the Law
Commission of India on "NON-FEASIBILITY OF INTRODUCTION OF
HINDI AS COMPULSORY LANGUAGE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF
INDIA".

      The Law Commission received a reference from the Department
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice which has forwarded a copy
of the note dated 29.3.2006 from Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel,
Legislative Department along with a copy of the recommendations of
the Committee of Parliament on Official Language to obtain the views
of Law Commission of India on the recommendations of the said
Committee made in its Report at S.No.16.8(d) and 16.8(e) stated under
Resolution No. 11011/5/2003-OL (Research) dated 13.7.2005 of the
Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs.

       Paragraphs 16.8(d) & (e) of the report of the said Committee
envisage that
Article 348
of the Constitution may be amended to enable
the Legislative Department to undertake original drafting in Hindi. After
the amendment of
Article 348
of the Constitution, High Courts/Supreme
Court should be asked to start delivering their judgments and decrees
etc. in Hindi so that large number of Government Departments, who are
carrying out judicial/ quasi-judicial functions, could be able to deliver
orders in Hindi. At present, these departments are unable to pass
orders in Hindi, because the appeal against their orders in High
Courts/Supreme Court would have to be conducted in English.


                                         6
      The Law Commission addressed letters to some of the retired
Chief Justices and Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Senior
Advocates from different parts of India and also from the different Bar
Associations in different States regarding recommendations of the
Committee of Parliament on Official Language on the proposal to
amend
article 348
of the Constitution of India.

        In response to the letter, the Law Commission has received
written responses from former Chief Justices of the Supreme Court and
Judges of the High Courts, Senior Advocates, High Court Advocates'
Associations on the said proposal. These are extracted extensively
under Chapter III of the report.

     The Commission has deeply gone into the views so obtained and
has unanimously recommended that -

      i)    Language is a highly emotional issue for the citizens of any
nation. It has a great unifying force and is a powerful instrument for
national integration. No language should be thrust on any section of
the people against their will since it is likely to become counter-
productive.

      ii)   It is not merely a vehicle of thought and expression, but for
Judges at the higher level, it is an integral part of their decision-making
process. Judges have to hear and understand the submissions of both
the sides, apply the law to adjust equities. Arguments are generally
made in higher courts in English and the basic literature under the
Indian system is primarily based on English and American text books
and case laws. Thus, Judges at the higher level should be left free to
evolve their own pattern of delivering judgments.

       iii)  It is particularly important to note that in view of the national
transfer policy in respect of the High Court Judges, if any such Judge is
compelled to deliver judgments in a language with which he is not well-
versed, it might become extremely difficult for him to work judicially. On
transfer from one part of the country to another, a High Court Judge is
not expected to learn a new language at his age and to apply the same
in delivering judgments.


                                     7
        iv)   At any rate no language should be thrust upon the Judges
of the higher judiciary and they should be left free to deliver their
judgments in the language they prefer. It is important to remember that
every citizen, every Court has the right to understand the law laid down
finally by the Apex Court and at present one should appreciate that
such a language is only English.

      v)    The use of English language also facilitates the movement
of lawyers from High Courts to the Apex Court since they are not
confronted with any linguistic problems and English remains the
language at both the levels. Any survey of the society in general or its
cross-sections will clearly substantiate the above proposition which
does not admit of much debate, particularly in the present political,
social and economic scenario.

       vi)   It may, however, be admitted that in so far as legislative
drafting is concerned, every legislation although authoritatively enacted
in English may have a Hindi authoritative translation along with the
same at the central level. Same analogy may be applied even in
respect of executive actions at the central level, but the higher judiciary
should not be subjected to any kind of even persuasive change in the
present societal context.


                                                                    Yours
sincerely,


                                                        (Dr. Justice AR.
Lakshmanan)

Dr. H.R.Bhardwaj,
Hon'ble Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Ministry of Law& justice,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001.



                                   8
                               CONTENTS


Chapter                                                     Page No.

Chapter I: Introduction                                          10

Chapter II: Relevant provisions of the Constitution of India     12-13
Chapter III: Views of Judges, Senior Advocates, High
            Court Advocates' Associations on the proposal
             to amend
article 348
of the Constitution of India   14-71

Chapter IV: Conclusion and Recommendations                       71-76




                                   9
 REPORT ON "NON-FEASIBILITY OF INTRODUCTION OF HINDI AS
COMPULSORY LANGUAGE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA".



                               CHAPTER I
                               Introduction

This Report deals with the recommendations of the Committee of
Parliament on Official Language made in its Report at S.No.16.8(d) and
16.8(e) stated under Resolution No. 11011/5/2003-OL (Research)
dated 13.7.2005 of the Department of Official Language, Ministry of
Home Affairs.


It is expedient to state briefly the genesis of this Report.


      The Law Commission received a reference from the Department
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice which has forwarded a copy
of the note dated 29.3.2006 from Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel,
Legislative Department along with a copy of the recommendations of
the Committee of Parliament on Official Language to obtain the views
of Law Commission of India on the recommendations of the said
Committee made in its Report at S.No.16.8(d) and 16.8(e) stated under
Resolution No. 11011/5/2003-OL (Research) dated 13.7.2005 of the
Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee of Parliament on Official Language was constituted in 1976
under
section 4(1)
of the Official Languages Act, 1963. The said
Committee submitted seventh part of its Report, inter alia, relating to


                                    10
 propagation of Hindi for official purposes, the position of Hindi in the
field of Law, original use of Hindi in Government work, to the President.
After considering the views of expressed by various Union Ministries/
Departments and the States/Union Territories Governments, the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Official Language conveyed
under the said Resolution dated 13.7.2005, the Orders of the President
made under
section 4(4)
of the Official Languages Act, 1963 on the
recommendations made in the Report of the said Committee at
S.No.16.8(d) and 16.8(e) as under:-

     "16.8(d)
Article 348
of the Constitution may be amended to
     enable the Legislative Department to undertake original drafting in
     Hindi.

     16.8(e)      After the amendment of
Article 348
of the
     Constitution, High Courts/Supreme Court should be asked to start
     delivering their judgments and decrees etc. in Hindi so that large
     number of Government Departments, who are carrying out
     judicial/ quasi-judicial functions, could be able to deliver orders in
     Hindi. At present, these departments are unable to pass orders
     in Hindi, because the appeal against their orders in High
     Courts/Supreme Court would have to be conducted in English."

     On the above recommendations of the Committee, orders were
issued by the President under
Section 4(4)
of the Official Languages
Act, 1963, as under:-

     "These recommendations may be referred to the Legislative
     Department with the directions to obtain the views of Law
     Commission of India and thereafter intimate their considered
     opinion on these recommendations. Final decision will be taken
     accordingly."



                                   11
 In view of the above, the matter was placed before the Law
Commission of India for its opinion and appropriate recommendation.




                       CHAPTER II
           Relevant provisions of the Constitution of India
It is pertinent to extract the relevant provisions of the Constitution of
India below:

Chapter : 3 - LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC.
Article 348 -
Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the
High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
     (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
     Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides--

        (a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court an in every High
        Court,

        (b) the authoritative texts--

           (i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be
           moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or
           either House of the Legislature of a State,

           (ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a
           State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or
           the Governor of a State, and




                                   12
           (iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
          under this Constitution or under any law made by
          Parliament or the Legislature of a State,

        shall be in the English language.

     (2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the
     Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the
     President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other
     language used for any official purposes of the State, in
     proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in- that
     State:

        Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any
        judgment, decree or order passed or made by such High
        Court.

     (3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1),
     where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language
     other than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or
     Acts passed by, the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances
     promulgated by the Governor of the State or in any order, rule,
     regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-
     clause, a translation of the same in the English language
     published under the authority of the Governor of the State in the
     Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed to be the
     authoritative text thereof in the English language under this
     article.
Article 349 -
Special procedure for enactment of certain laws
relating to language
     During the period of fifteen years from the commencement of this
     Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the
     language to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause


                                  13
       (1) of
article 348
shall be introduced or moved in either House of
      Parliament without the previous sanction of the President, and the
      President shall not give his sanction to the introduction of any
      such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except after he
      has taken into consideration the recommendations of the
      Commission constitution under clause (1) of
article 344
and the
      report of the Committee constituted under clause (4) of that
      article.




                       Chapter III
            Views of Judges, Senior Advocates, High Court
            Advocates' Associations on the proposal to amend
article 348
of the Constitution of India


      The Chairman of the Law Commission addressed letters to some
of the retired Chief Justices and Judges of the Supreme Court of India,
Senior Advocates from different parts of India and also from the
different Bar Associations in different States. In response to the letter
regarding recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on Official
Language, the Law Commission has received written responses from
the following:-


                                  14
 Judges


  (1)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice Y.V. Chandrachud, Former Chief Justice of
         India.
  (2)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice S. Natarajan
  (3)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.T. Thomas
  (4)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer
  (5)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice B.N. Srikrishna
  (6)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah
  (7)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice K. Jagannatha Shetty
  (8)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy
  (9)    Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.M. Ahmadi
  (10) Hon'ble Mr. Justice N. Santosh Hegde
  (11) Hon'ble Mr. Justice SSM Quadri
  (12) Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.S. Paripoornan
  (13) Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath
Senior Advocates
  (1)    Mr. P.P. Rao
  (2)    Mr. T.L. Viswanatha Iyer
  (3)    Mr. Vijay Hansaria
  (4)    Mr. K.K. Venugopal
  (5)    Mr. Aravind Datar
  (6)    Mr. C. Lakshmi Narayanan
  (7)    Dr. R.G. Padia
  (8)    Mr. T.P. Kelu Nambiar

High Court Advocates' Associations

  (1)    A.P. High Court Advocates' Association


                                   15
    (2)   Kerala High Court Advocates' Association
   (3)   Bar Council of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry

President, Bar Association of India
Mr. Fali S. Nariman - The Bar Association of India

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Y.V. Chandrachud, Former Chief Justice of
India

      "I am in receipt of your letter dated 8th October, 2007 asking me to
offer my views on the recommendations made by the Committee of
Parliament on Official Language.

       I am very stoutly opposed to the proposed amendment 16.8(d)
and 16.8(e). I am of the firm opinion that the Constitution should not be
amended to enable the Legislative Department to undertake original
drafting in Hindi.      I am even more stoutly opposed to the
recommendation 16.8(e). neither the Supreme Court or the High
Courts should be asked to deliver their judgements in Hindi. The
judges of these courts are drawn from all over India and they are not all
conversant with Hindi.      The English language is now acquiring
importance as the language of the world. We should not deny the new
generation the benefit of English language."

Hon'ble Mr. Justice S. Natarajan

"I am in receipt of your letter dated October 8, 2007 regarding the
reference to the Law Commission of India for its view/opinion and
appropriate recommendation regarding the original drafting by the
Legislative Department in Hindi and the delivering of judgements and
decrees etc., by the Supreme Court and High Courts in Hindi for the
benefit of the authorities carrying out judicial/quasi-judicial functions to
deliver orders in Hindi.

     One can well understand the desire of the Hindi protagonists to
seek replacement of English by Hindi in full measure on the ground that
Hindi is being spoken by the majority of people in the Country.
However genuine and laudable their desire may be, I am personally of


                                    16
 the view and I am sure a large number of people of India particularly in
the Southern and Eastern parts will not be in favour of the original
drafting of acts in Hindi and likewise the Supreme Court and the High
Courts delivering judgments in Hindi. Many Judges of the High Courts
and the Supreme Court as well as many lawyers do not know Hindi
language and will have to depend on translations in English to know the
Acts and Judgements.

      English language has not only come to occupy an indispensable
and irreplaceable status in the country but has also become a world
language. Judgements of the Supreme Court and High Courts of India
are read and sometimes quoted before High Courts and Supreme
Courts of other countries in the world. Such being the case, if the
Supreme Court and High Courts are to deliver judgements in Hindi, the
people in the south and the eastern regions including the learned
members of the Bar and the Judiciary will not be able to know the
judgements delivered in Hindi by the Supreme Court and High Courts
except through translations in English of those judgements.

      Furthermore, the unity and integrity of the Country is bound to be
affected by reason of the linguistic chauvinists.

     Therefore in my considered view, the Law Commission should not
give acceptance to the recommendation of the Parliamentary
Committee for the proposed amendment of
Article 348
of the
Constitution as set out in recommendation 16.8(d) and 16.8(e)."




Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.T. Thomas

       "Thank you for the letter dated 8.10.07. The recommendations of
the Committee of Parliament on Official Language, as extracted in your
letter suggest for change over of the language in the Supreme Court
and the High Courts.
Article 348
of the Constitution mandates that all proceedings in
the Supreme Court and in very High Court shall be in English language


                                  17
 until Parliament otherwise provides by law. The question is whether
Parliament should provide a different language for the Supreme Court
and the High Courts when English is being followed for the last 57
years. It is a historical advantage gained by the Indian judicial system
to have the use of a language which is almost the language of the
Judicial world now. That apart, when computers have adopted English
as the medium of transmission, we should not divest ourselves of the
benefit of that language. English language has now ceased to be a
mere mother tongue of the small country of England.

      If Supreme Court and High Courts are to switch over to Hindi,
what advantage will such a change bring for Indian judiciary? I find
none. On the other hand, the multiple disadvantages which it might
bring forth would even paralyse the judicial system, because ninety
percent of the advocates belonging to the High Court of southern states
cannot transact any legal work in Hindi. Not even one stenographer is
available in many states of the High Courts in southern states who can
take down dictation in Hindi much less to transcribe them into
manuscripts.

      All the law books remaining in various High Courts including all
the law journals are in English language and translation of all those
books would involve crores of rupees. When we do not have sufficient
money to meet the urgent needs of the poor people, it would be a
waste of public money in spending whopping sum simply for satisfying
a few of the linguistic jingoists.

      That apart, a switch over from English to Hindi in the High Courts
and the Supreme Court of India will create political and legal unrest
throughout the country which is an avoidable exercise."


Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer

     The issue raised by the Central Law Commission is fraught with
grave implications which affect the linguistic, semantic and federal
dimensions of the freedom of expression and right to justice of the
people of India who use, in different states and regions, sixteen or more



                                  18
 different languages. Hindi is not spoken or understood in many States
nor for, that matter is English. If parliamentary bills and rulings of
higher courts are written in Hindi originally, a large section of Indians
will be denied the facility of getting directly to the original drawn up in
Hindi, if the proposed suggestion is accepted. Perhaps this was one
reason why the great patriot and first Indian Governor General Shri C.
Rajagopalachari protested against Hindi being forced on the people.
He gave an angry call: "Hindi never, English ever". Tamil Nadu will
never accept Hindi judgments either of the Supreme Court or the
Madras High Court. Hindi chauvinism has no national pragmatism.
English and Hindi, even together, may not help the Indian millions even
by legislative command.        Indeed, many judges in many courts,
including the Supreme Court, do not know Hindi and, therefore, cannot
read or understand judgments if produced in Hindi. I feel the nationalist
feeling behind the plea for Hindi, but I cannot ignore the realities on the
ground in our multilingual country. The present system has also
international import and our judges have to rely on judgments written in
English in Supreme Courts of other countries. I am all for Hindi as a
personal preference, but I am all against Hindi by compulsion,
especially of judgments of the Supreme Court of India. I have many
more reasons from a practical angle in support of the present system
which I cannot elaborate here. Indeed when the great Lenin came to
power in the Soviet Union he had warned against Russification in other
states of the USSR which would have the flavour of imperialism.
Wisdom is different from obscurantism. Let us give Hindi a high place
in national expression and full facility for instant translation of every
representation people wish to make to the higher courts as an integral
part of free legal aid. The three-language formula which has some
official status may well be considered for implementation, whatever be
the cost it may involve. Linguistic militancy will alienate and divide but
federal pluralism is democratic sensitivity."

Hon'ble Mr. Justice B.N. Srikrishna

     "I am very sorry your letter dated 8th October, 2007 remained
unanswered till now. This was on account of my constantly travelling
away from Mumbai. Please pardon me for this lapse.



                                   19
       I have considered the issue raised in your letter. It appears to me
that unless two generations of lawyers are trained to do legal
transactions in Hindi, it would be suicidal to change the language of the
High Courts and Supreme Court from English to Hindi. Further, the
Supreme Court being composed of judges from different states, who
may not be aware of Hindi at all, it would be next to impossible for them
to conduct proceedings or write judgements in Hindi.

      In my considered view, the proposal to require the Supreme Court
and the High Courts to deliver judgments in Hindi would definitely result
in chaos and adversely affect the administration of justice."

Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah

      "At the outset I must offer my apologies for not responding to your
earlier letter. During October I was in and out of hospitals and I missed
the letter. A word on telephone from you would have alerted me.
Kindly accept my apology for the remissness on my part.

      On the merits of the issue, one must acknowledge that Hindi as
our national language must assert its rightful place in all areas of our
national life and the higher judiciary should be no exception. The
Committee of Parliament on Official Language has rightly emphasized
the importance of this matter.

      In the practical implementation of this philosophy, there may be
some issues, arising out of circumstances that the legacy of the
Common Law which we have inherited, the system of Public law, the
International Human Rights regime, the International Intellectual
Property regime and the increasingly integrating economic laws and
trans-border transactions impose an integration with the legal systems
of other countries and jurisdictions. All this may influence the policy of
language in the superior courts.

     However we should respect the parliamentary views and a
beginning has to be made through circumspection requires that we
should hasten slowly.



                                   20
        These are only my first impression and not the result of a deeper
reflection. I shall be happy to convey to you any further or revised view
after due and further consideration."



Hon'ble Mr. Justice K. Jagannatha Shetty

    "I am in receipt of your letter dated 8 October 2007 and also 30
November 2007.

     Due to my travel outside, I could not respond immediately.

       I am glad that you are now the Chairman of the Law Commission
which has been devalued for sometime. I hope you will make it more
effective and demanding.

      I have perused the recommendations of the Committee of
Parliament on Official Language.

    I am wholly against the recommendations made by the said
Committee.

      The High Courts and the Supreme Court cannot be asked to start
delivering their judgments and decrees in Hindi. This is a very very
contentious issue which may have far reaching consequence.

      The views of the Southern States on imposition of Hindi is well
known. The State Administrations are generally passing the Orders in
their respective regional languages and the High Courts in particular
and the Subordinate Courts in general are delivering judgments in
English.

     Today, English cannot be regarded as a foreign language. It is
more important for National and International communication.




                                  21
       Since the Supreme Court consists of Judges drawn from different
parts of the country, it is impossible to impose Hindi on the Supreme
Court.

      It is, therefore, necessary that the language of the High Courts
and the Supreme Court should be uniform and it should be only in
English for all time to come."




Hon'ble Mr. Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy

     "Thank you for your letter dated October 8, 2007.]

     I have no opinion on the matter which has been referred to the
Law Commission by the Government of India. So far as I am
concerned, the matter be best left to the Executive."



Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.M. Ahmadi


      "Please find enclosed herewith a note containing my views on the
recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on Official Language
in paragraphs 16.8(d) and 16.8(e). I hope you find them useful.

     I am sorry for the delay in writing to you.


Note on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee
asking High Courts/Supreme Court to deliver Judgments/decrees
etc, in Hindi


     This has reference to the Law Commission's letter seeking my
views on the recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on


                                   22
 Official Language at, S.Nos.16.8(d) and 16.8(e). I assume that this
Committee must have been constituted under
Article 344(4)
of the
Constitution.
Article 343
of the Constitution mandates that the Official
Language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
Notwithstanding the same, Clauses (2) and (3) thereof permit the use
of the English language for the extended periods specified therein.
Article 343
of the Constitution reads as under:

     "Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
     (which means Part XVII), until Parliament by law otherwise
     provides -
     (a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High
     Court,
     (b) all authoritative texts-
           (i) ..........
           (ii) ..........
           (iii) ...........
     shall be in English language."

      It is therefore clear that
Article 348(1)
supersedes
Article 343.
Clause (a) of
Article 348(1)
posits that the language to be used in the
Supreme Court shall be English until Parliament by law otherwise
provides. Therefore, even pleadings and oral submissions shall be in
the English language (Madhu Limaye v. Ved Murti AIR 1971 SC 2608).

      Insofar as the High Courts are concerned the language shall be
English until Parliament by law provides otherwise. However,
Article
348(2)
which begins with a non-obstante clause, empowers the
Governor of the State, with the prior consent of the President, to
authorize the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for
any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court
having its principal seat in that State. The proviso, however, makes it
clear that nothing in the said clause shall apply to any judgment, decree
or order passed or made by such High Court. It is, therefore, obvious
that the power conferred by clause (2) of
Article 348
to authorize the



                                  23
 use of Hindi is limited to pleadings, documents and perhaps oral
arguments only.

         The recommendation at S.No.16(8(d) speaks of amending the
Constitution.
Article 348(1)
makes it clear that 'until Parliament by law
otherwise provides', in respect of all proceedings in the Supreme Court
and in every High Court as well as the authoritative texts enumerated at
(i), (ii) and (iii), the language shall be English. It is therefore obvious
that what is required is a Parliamentary legislation to alter the language
from English to Hindi and not an amendment of the Constitution. It is
therefore difficult to comprehend why the recommendation at No.16.8
(d) speaks of amendment of the Constitution unless the idea is to
amend the Proviso to clause (2) of
Article 348
with a view to remove
the limitation incorporated therein.

      The recommendation at S.No.16.8(e) states that 'High Courts/
Supreme Court should be asked to start delivering their judgments and
decrees, etc. in Hindi' so that large number of Government
Departments, who are carrying out judicial/quasi judicial functions,
could be able to deliver orders in Hindi. The rationale for asking the
High Courts/Supreme Court to deliver judgments in Hindi does not
seem to be convincing. To say that these departments are unable to
pass orders in Hindi because the appeal filed against their orders in
High Courts/Supreme Court would have to be conducted in English,
betrays want of complete information. In the first place appeals do not
ordinarily come directly from such executive orders to the Supreme
Court, except statutory appeals which are far and few. Such orders
are sometimes questioned, though rarely, under
Article 32
of the
Constitution. So far as High Courts are concerned, such orders may be
questioned before them, if the statute provides for an appeal, or else
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution. High Courts are already
hearing appeals from judgments from lower courts in criminal cases
where, under
section 272
of the Criminal Procedure Code, judgments
are permitted and written in regional languages as determined by the
respective State Governments. It is also common knowledge that
evidence is recorded in trial courts in regional languages. There would,
therefore, be no such apprehended problem if orders are written in
Hindi by officers in different departments of the Government.
Therefore, the rationale put forth for change in language for High


                                   24
 Courts/ Supreme Court is perhaps based on lack of information and is
far from convincing.

       Over the years, because of insistence by every State Government
to use the regional language as medium of instruction in schools/
colleges, with or without English, only those coming from the Hindi belt
are well-versed in Hindi and not others. The duty cast by
Article 351
has remained unfulfilled. The result is that a large body of legal
practitioners are belonging to the Hindi belt would not be able to write
their briefs or argue in Hindi nor would they be able to understand the
ratio of judgments written in Hindi, assuming judges are equipped to do
so. Besides, as a result of the transfer policy every High Court has
judges from other States and they cannot be assigned cases with the
record being in the regional language. Since the percentage of such
judges is presently low, Chief Justices are able to manage, albeit with
some difficulty, but when Hindi is applied across the board, the number
of such judges will be far too many (because even judges knowing the
regional language will not be conversant with Hindi) making it difficult
for the Chief Justices to assign cases to such judges; necessitating the
introduction of the expensive procedure of translating the records in
English. This will also call for qualified translators, not easy to find. That
apart, translations are far from satisfactory and do not bring out real
nuance/essence.

      To my mind, therefore, until Hindi spreads across the country and
education is imparted in that language, it may not be advisable to ask
High Courts/ Supreme Court to switch to Hindi. Replacing the regional
language may not be easy because practically every State has adopted
it under
Article 345
of the Constitution. In the Supreme Court judges
come from different States and quite a few of them would not be able to
speak, understand and write in Hindi. I am, therefore, of the view that
the base to take the hop is not available and it would, therefore, be
wise to leave the matter of introduction of Hindi in the State High Court
to the judgment of the Governor of the State under
Article 348(2)
of the
Constitution. He would be the best judge to decide if the time was ripe
to take the step in that direction."


Hon'ble Mr. Justice N. Santosh Hegde


                                     25
      "I am extremely sorry for not responding to your request earlier.
Please excuse me for the same.

      I have carefully considered the recommendations of the
Committee of Parliament on Official Language at Sl.No.16.8(d) and
16.8(e), in which they sought an amendment to
Article 348
of the
Constitution, in regard to language to be adopted by the Legislative
Department as welll as language to be used by the High Courts and
Supreme Court, while delivering their judgments.

       I have no comment to make in regard to the proposed
amendment in Sl.No.16.8(d) since it refers to original drafting being in
Hindi, which I presume will be officially translated in English. However,
I have very strong objections to the proposed amendment at Para 16.8
(e) to
Article 348
, which would compel the High Courts and Supreme
Court throughout the Country to deliver judgments and decrees in
Hindi. The reason given therein that large number of Government
Departments are carrying out judicial/ quasi judicial functions, can
deliver consequential orders in Hindi of judgments of the superior
courts are in Hindi, is fallacious. There may be some Departments in
some States, in which official language of the State is Hindi. But it is
necessary to be borne in mind that all the States in this Country do not
have Hindi as its official State language nor do they have Hindi as their
official language of communication. In this country where the States
are divided on linguistic basis and each State has its own State
Language, the recommendation made would only disturb peace in this
Country. Every one knows that as it is, there is no shortage of conflict
between the States not only with reference to Language, but also with
reference to boundaries and sharing of water. In this background I
have great apprehension that the recommendation made by the
Committee of Parliament on Official Language would certainly give
raise to ultimate disintegration of the Country. I am not a language
fanatic, but the above apprehension of mind is a genuine feeling having
noticed over the years how regional influences are playing vital role in
the politics and culture of respective States. Hence, this move is
neither politically wise nor constitutionally correct. The assurance given
by Constitutional framers to protect linguistic culture of various States



                                   26
 and sections of the Society will be deprived by this proposal. Hence, I
strongly oppose this move.

      At this juncture I may bring to your kind notice that various States
have started making demands that the judiciary should follow and adopt
regional language in their respective High Courts and subordinate
Courts. I am against such moves also, which would in my opinion
would isolate the State High Courts from other Courts and ultimately
the representation of the States in the Apex Court of the Country is
bound to be seriously affected."


Hon'ble Mr. Justice SSM Quadri


     "I thank you for your letter of November 30th, 2007 enclosing a
copy of an earlier letter and seeking my opinion on the
recommendations of the
 Committee of Parliament on Official Language, extracted therein.

       I have carefully gone through these recommendations and
thought over the same with great concern.                     Though the
recommendations are commendable and are long desired, I feel that
giving effect to them, would give rise to not only practical difficulties, but
will also make conditions in India more volatile.

      Insofar as the recommendation of the said Committee at serial
No.16.8(d) is concerned, there can of course be no problem in
amending
Article 348
of the Constitution of India to enable the
Legislative Department to undertake original drafting in Hindi.


      However, the recommendation contained in S.No.16.8(e), which
deals with requiring the High Courts/Supreme Court to start delivering
judgments and decrees etc., in Hindi, is beset with various difficulties -
practical as well as political having ramifications of uphill task not hard
to guess and not easy to get over.




                                     27
        First, it is of common knowledge, Legislative enactments and
Rules are not available in Hindi to all the Judges, members of the Bar
and litigant public in all parts of the country. Secondly, the authoritative
text books, commentaries and law journals are not being printed in
Hindi. Thirdly, the plethora of case law both before and after
independence is still in English and has not been translated into Hindi.
Fourthly, the required number of Hindi Stenographers are not available.
Fifthly, the southern States are not well equipped to accept delivery of
judgments, decrees and orders in Hindi. Sixthly, it is also common
knowledge that after reorganization of States on the basis of regional
languages, certain southern States have sharply reacted to
implementation of Hindi as national language on non Hindi speaking
States and it is apprehended that the requirement to deliver judgments,
orders and decrees etc., in Hindi will be treated in no better way.

      With the policy of transfer of Judges and Chief Justices from one
High Court to another, Judges of the southern States functioning in a
northern State will not be able to cope up with the work in the northern
States where as delivering judgments and order sin Hindi will present
no problem to the Judges of the northern States. Under the conditions
prevailing in some of the States in India, it will add to the unrest existing
in some parts of the country by giving scope to agitations against such
a requirement.

       In my view, the conditions in our country are not ripe to make
such amendment and to issue directions requiring the High
Courts/Supreme Court to start delivery of judgments and orders in Hindi
and therefore, for these and many other reasons switching over to
dictating judgments, orders, decrees etc., in Hindi will be entirely an
exercise in futility."


Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.S. Paripoornan

        "With reference to your communication dated 8.10.2007, in the
first instance, I have to apologize to you, for not sending a reply earlier.
The reason is that my wife was hospitalized for over two weeks and I




                                    28
 had no proper help to attend to many of my matters.      Please excuse
me for the delay.

2.     The crux of the recommendation of the Committee of Parliament
on Official Language is that
article 348
of the Constitution may be
amended, for a change over to "Hindi" as the language for legislative
drafting and that, later, the High Courts and the Supreme Court should
be directed to deliver their judgments etc. in Hindi.

3.    Let me at once state that this is impractical and unwise, at least
for a good many years to come. Even in 1949, when the said article
was discussed in the Constituent Assembly, there was sharp difference
of opinion and, notwithstanding the passage of time; things and events
have not changed to take a deviation. Briefly stated, English today is
an international language; even Russians, Germans, Americans,
French, Japanese, Chinese and other nations greatly and in a large
measure adopt and freely use the language, the reason being that the
scientific, technological, cultural and other global advancements have
compelled the people all over the world to accept English as the
medium of expression, thought and communication in all such fields. In
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh also the case is the same.           In the
circumstances, can 'India' alone stand apart and lose the benefit of
such great learning and expertise? That apart, innumerable persons
belonging to all nationalities and castes have pursued "education" in
foreign countries (in English) and a good number of Indians are
employed in many foreign countries which have adopted English
language in all aspects of life, academic, professional, scientific,
cultural etc. - and is it wise to ignore such realities in life at this
distance of time, except at peril?

4.    More at home, as an experienced Judge, you need not be told
that many laws in India have adopted and imbibed English common law
to a great extent and the decisions rendered on various such laws not
only by English courts, but also by American, Australian, Canadian, and
South African courts, have influenced our judicial decisions and
continue to do so, since it is only commonsense and natural to accept
pleasingly 'light and wisdom' from whatever quarter it comes.     Will it
be possible, feasible and in any manner conducive for a proper growth
of law, to forsake or abandon such approach without causing detriment


                                  29
 to the very roots of the Rule of Law, which India has adopted and
accepted from English? Is it not a suicidal policy which will cost the
nation heavily?

5.    Kindly have a look at the debates of the Constituent Assembly of
India which took place on 12th, 13th and 14th September 1949 - details
can be seen from pages 1265 to 1462 of the book (Official Report) "The
Constituent Assembly Debates - Volume 9". When the bill for
article
348
was moved, there were heated and learned discussions of the
Honourable Members on many aspects and Shri N. Golapaswamy
Iyengar finally persuaded the Assembly to adopt
article 348
retaining
English as the language for drafting bills and for use in High Courts and
Supreme Court. I am not dealing exhaustively about the same since it
is a matter which appears in the book officially published and in detail.

6.     I am candidly against the proposal to amend
article 348
of the
Constitution, regard being had to the world events since 1949 and the
totality of circumstances by which we have accepted, adopted and
been substantially benefited by the English language.

7.     Before concluding, I may bring to your attention the fact that the
well-informed and experienced members of the Bar are also against the
proposal for amendment as proposed at present. In this connection,
please refer to an erudite but short article in 2008(1) K.L.T. Journal
Section, pages 18-21 by Shri T.P. Kelu Nambiar, MA, ML, Senior
Advocate, High Court of Kerala, a lawyer of repute who has standing
for over 50 years or so."




Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath, Former Chief Justice of Karnataka &
Kerala; Chairman, Central Administrative Tribunal; Member,
National Human Rights Commission; Chairman, Committee on
Reforms of Criminal Justice System

     " Dear   Dr. Justice Lakshmanan,



                                        30
    Delighted to receive your letter dated 30-9-2008 inviting me to offer
my views/opinion on the recommendation made by the Committee of
Parliament on use of Hindi in original drafting of Bills, Acts, Rules, etc.,
by the Legislative Department and use of Hindi in delivering Judgments
and decrees by the Supreme Court and High Court. I am sorry for the
delay. I have formulated my views on both the recommendation as
follows:-


                                OPINION
Article 351
of the Constitution provides that it shall be the duty of
the Union to promote the spread of Hindi Language so that it may serve
as a medium of expression for all elements of composite culture of
India.
Article 343
declares Hindi to be the official language of the
Union.
Article 344
provides that switch over from English to Hindi may
not be achieved immediately on the commencement of the Constitution
and this should be a gradual process. Schedule VIII to the Constitution
contains the list of Eighteen languages including Hindi.
Article 344
contemplates Constitution of a Commission consisting of members
representing different languages specified in VIII Schedule to make
recommendations for the progressive use of the official language and
also for the purposes mentioned in
Article 348
namely, the language to
be used in the Supreme Court and the High Courts for drafting Bills,
Acts, Rules etc., by the legislative Department. The recommendations of
the Commission are then considered by the Joint Parliamentary
Committee constituted for the said purpose under
Article 344(4).
That


                                31
 Committee has to consider the recommendations of the Commission and
report to the President their opinion thereon. The President can after
considering the report issue directions in accordance with the whole or
any part of that report.


      The ultimate aim as provided in
Article 351
is the spread and
development of Hindi language and enrichment of the composite culture
of India.
Articles 343
and
344
deal with the process of transition to the
use of Hindi for all official purposes of the Union and to determine the
pace of progress to achieve the same. The overriding concern of the
founding fathers of the Constitution as can be discerned also from the
Constitution assembly debates is, not to impose the use of Hindi on the
peoples speaking other Languages against their wishes.


2. The same concern is discernable from
Article 348 (1)(a)
& (b) of the
Constitution which deals with switch over from English to Hindi as
regards the Language to be used in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts and the authoritative text of Bills, Acts, Orders, Rules,
Regulations and bye-laws. Until the Parliament otherwise provides by
law, the proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court and
the Authoritative text of all Bills, Acts, etc., shall be the English.
Article
349
provides special procedure for enacting laws contemplated by
Article 348(1).
No Bill for enacting a law contemplated by
Article 348
(1)
can be introduced without the sanction of the President which can be
accorded after the President considers the recommendation of the



                                 32
 Commission and the report of the Committee constituted under
Article
344(4).
The Committee constituted under
Article 344
has made two
recommendations 16.8(d) and 16.8(3) under
Article 348
and sought the
opinion of the Law Commission of India. They are as under:-


            "16.8(d)
Article 348
of the Constitution may be amended to
            enable Legislative Department to undertake original
            drafting in Hindi.


            16.8(e) After the amendment of
Article 348
of the
            Constitution High Courts/Supreme Court should be asked
            to start delivering their Judgments and decrees etc., in
            Hindi so that large number of Government Departments,
            who are carrying out judicial/quasi-judicial functions, could
            be able to deliver orders in Hindi. At present these
            Departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi because the
            appeal against their orders in High Courts/Supreme Court
            would have to be conducted in English."


3. The recommendation of the Committee 16.8(d) is that
Article 348
be
amended to undertake drafting in Hindi Bills, Acts, Rules, etc. I must
point out that the question of amending
Article 348
does not arise at all.




                                 33
 What
Article 348(1)(b)
contemplates is enactment of law by Parliament
in this behalf and not amendment of
Article 348
itself.


Drafting laws is a very difficult and complicated work. It needs a very
rich and specialised legal vocabulary to enact precise and unambiguous
laws. English language has a very rich vocabulary of legal terms. Until
Hindi Vocabulary of legal terms and maxims, improves it cannot be
made the Language of Legislation. I am therefore not in favour of
making a law to mandate that the authoritative text of Bills, Acts, Rules
etc., should be in Hindi.


4. Another reason against the recommendation is that this will
unnecessarily give rise to opposition and contraversy. There are as many
as 17 constitutionally recognised non-Hindi Languages. Imposition of
Hindi on non-Hindi speaking citizens against their wishes is likely to
affect the unity and integrity of the country. We have seen how in the
State of Maharashtra people very recently revolted against influence of
Hindi and went to the extent of boycotting Hindi films in which
Amitabh Bachan has acted. The non-Hindi people are not yet in the
mood for accepting Hindi as common medium for Legislation. There is
no great urgency or direct necessity to introduce Hindi in the field of
legislation. Large number of members of Parliament from non-Hindi
speaking States will not be able to read or understand the laws drafted in
Hindi. It will therefore become very difficult for such M.Ps to
effectively contribute to law machinery process.



                               34
 It serves the purpose if, along with the English text a text in Hindi is
also annexed. This will satisfy the needs of the Hindi speaking M.Ps
also.


In my opinion attempt must first be made to persuade the non-Hindi
speaking M.Ps and people to accept the switch over to Hindi. It would
be detrimental to National Unity and Harmony to introduce Hindi for
drafting of laws etc., without the concurrence of non-Hindi speaking
people of India. Hence, the recommendation deserves to be rejected.


5) Re:16.8(e): The recommendation of the Committee is that High
Courts and Supreme Court should be required to deliver Judgments and
decrees etc., in Hindi.


The reasons given for this recommendation in the words of the
Committee are as follows:-


"So that large number of Government departments, who are carrying out
judicial, quasi-judicial functions could be able to delivery orders in
Hindi. At present these Departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi,
because the appeal against their orders in High courts/Supreme Court
would have to be conducted in English".




                              35
 These are not at all substantial reasons to compel the Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts to deliver their Judgments and decrees
in Hindi.


Nothing prevents Government Officers from passing orders in Hindi.
When such orders are challenged in the High Courts and the Supreme
Court the practice presently followed is to produce the English
translation of the orders and the work is going on quite smoothly in the
Courts. In order to enable the Officers of Government who know only
Hindi and can't read or understand the Judgments of Courts given in
English is concerned, they may be provided Hindi translation of
Judgments of Court which are in English. This would solve their
problem.


In some States, Government Officers write their orders in their
respective State languages. For their benefit Courts orders may be
translated into the respective State languages and provided to the
Officers concerned.


Hence none of the reasons stated in support of the recommendation are
tenable.


We should not forget that Lawyer and Judges have been using English
Language for centuries. Their legal education is mostly in English.
Thousands of laws are in English. It is not easy to find precise



                              36
 equivalent legal terms, maxims and principles in Hindi. Most of the text
books on laws are in English. Journals and law books of other countries
which are helpful to decision making process are in English. They
cannot be used if Hindi is used.


In my opinion time is not ripe to switch over from English to Hindi for
delivering Judgements in Hindi. Switching over to Hindi will further
add to delay in disposal of cases.


Eminent Lawyers from other countries cannot appear in our Courts if
Hindi is introduced. The entire legal community consisting of Lawyers
and Judges would be against introduction of Hindi in High Courts and
Supreme Court. Thus introduction of Hindi in the superior Courts will
bring in more problems than benefits.


It is enough if provision is made to translate the decisions of the
Supreme Court and High courts into Hindi and other State languages. If
the real object is to enable the litigant to understand the decision in his
case it would serve the purpose if a translation is provided to him.


I therefore see no good reason whatsoever to interfere with the present
use of English in the Supreme Court and the High Courts. The country
is facing enough number of other problems. Let us not add some more
problems and disturb the smooth functioning of the Supreme Court and




                                37
      the High Courts. I am quite against the recommendation 16.8(e) of the
     Committee.


     I strongly urge you to oppose the two recommendations of the
     Committee."


Mr. P.P. Rao, Sr. Advocate

       This is in response to your kind letter dated October 8, 2007
regarding the recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on
Official Language. I am not in favour of implementation of the
recommendations at Sl.No.16.8(d) and (e) made by the Committee at
present for the following reasons:

       Conditions are not ripe for switching over from English language
to Hindi in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts. In several parts
of the country even now people are not fully conversant with Hindi,
notwithstanding the mandate of
Art. 351
to the Union to promote the
spread of the Hindi language. The Judges of the Supreme Court and
of all High Courts belong to Hindi speaking states as well as non-Hindi
speaking States. Therefore, it is necessary to continue English, which
is a common language for all Indians, in the Supreme Court and in the
High Courts. As you are aware,
Section 7
of the Official Language Act,
1963 permits the use of Hindi as the official language of a State in
addition to the English language for the purpose of any judgment,
decree or order passed or made by the High Courts for that State,
provided the Governor of a State with the previous consent of the
President authorizes such use. There have been a very few instances
where judgements of High Courts were written in Hindi. In these cases
when the aggrieved party had to approach the Supreme Court the
entire judgement had to be translated into English which involves time
and additional expenditure for the litigant, which are avoidable. Till
such time as all the Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts are fully
conversant with Hindi and are proficient enough to write judgments in
Hindi, it is not at all advisable to amend the Constitution.


                                  38
       So far as legislative business is concerned, in the Hindi speaking
States already Bills are prepared in Hindi language and debates take
place in Hindi language. Likewise Government Orders are passed in
Hindi language. Noting on files also done in many cases in the Hindi
language.
Section 3
of the Official Languages Act, 1965 provides for
continuation of English language for official purposes for Union and for
use in Parliament in addition to Hindi and for the transaction of the
business in Parliament.

      For the successful implementation of the recommendations, it is
necessary to prepare the ground first by propagating Hindi all over the
country to such an extent that no inconvenience is felt by anyone by
switching over from English language to Hindi language with respect to
proceedings in the Supreme Court and in all High Courts. In the past,
there was a large scale violence resistance to making Hindi a
compulsory language in schools in the South. Prime Minister Nehru
gave an assurance that English would not be replaced by Hindi against
the will of the people and that status quo will be maintained till the non
Hindi speaking people themselves desire a change. Language is a
sensitive issue which can easily arouse emotions of the people. In the
interest of national integration and maintaining the unity and solidarity
of the country, it is not desirable to rake up this issue at a time when
several fissiparous and divisive forces are at work. Every effort should
be made to promote fraternity among all citizens of the country in the
interest of the unity.

     I am apprehensive that any attempt to implement the
recommend-dations of the Parliamentary Committee at this juncture
may spark off violent protests and agitations in some parts of the
country."


Mr. T.L. Viswanatha Iyer, Sr. Advocate


       "Your letter dated October 11, 2007 regarding amendment to
Article 348
of the Constitution of India. I am giving below my views on
the proposed amendments.


                                   39
 a. Regarding Original drafting of enactments in Hindi:-

       I do not think this is either welcome or advisable. Whatever be the
status awarded to Hindi as one of the official languages, the fact
remains that all the High Courts transact their judicial business in
English. This includes the Supreme Court also. Interpretation of
statutes is one of the common matters which occurs day in and day out
in our courts. Draftsmanship in English has reached a level of
advancement with its own nuances and inflexions which I do not think
drafting in any other language has so far reached. Case law in the
interpretation of statutes in English is rich and legion. We have in
addition the abundant treasure of comparable statutes in U.K. and the
Common Wealth countries as also in the United States.

      All this will become unavailable and useless while interpreting
statutes in other languages. The common medium of understanding
such statutes especially in the vast chunk of Southern India is English.
This cannot be upset by giving up the drafting in the English language.
Nothing is gained by drafting the original enactments in Hindi except
perhaps satisfying an ego.

      We may also lose in the process the benefit of comparison with
statutes in other States on the same subject in the concurrent list (e.g.
Rent Control Legislation) with the plethora of case law from the various
High Courts. This will be an added disadvantage and loss to the legal
knowledge available in the country.

      Regarding the second query that the High Courts/Supreme Court
should start delivering their judgments in Hindi, I am emphatically of the
view that this will be a retrograde step. English has been the language
of the judgements, since the Superior Courts were established in this
country about a century and a half back or even earlier. The Court
language of the common law countries of which India is one is also
English. The doctrine of precedents still holds sway in the country and
is one of the mainstay principles of the judicial system. Our Courts
draw freely on English, American and commonwealth precedents which
are all in English. If judgements were to be in Hindi, in view of the



                                   40
 inevitable quotations from the precedents, they will be partly in Hindi
with all the quotations in English. The judgement will look grotesque.

      The idea of a uniform Judicial system for the whole country is
necessarily to have a uniform set of legal principle applicable in every
part of the country, by the courts drawing upon the Judicial wisdom in
other parts of the country through their judgements. The advantage will
be lost if Judgements are to be drawn in Hindi instead of English.

       If Judgements are to be written in Hindi, it will require an
enormous amount of literature by way of glossary of legal terms.
Delivery of Judgements which are already getting delayed in many
courts if judges who are not trained to write in Hindi are constrained to
write the Judgements in Hindi, will get further delayed.

     Add to this, the non availability of the latest technological
advancements in the communications field particularly the computers,
which may take their own time to seep through our system.

      Let us also analyse what will be the advantage of Judgements in
English. It is not as if these Judgements will not be understood by the
Departments concerned. Nor will they be precluded from passing their
orders in Hindi or the regional language. In fact most of the
Government orders touching the common man are already being made
in the regional language. Even the file notings are very often in the
regional language.

     There is therefore no special gain or advantage to government
departments by the language of the courts being in Hindi.

      The judgements of our courts are nowadays being quoted in
foreign courts, just as our courts lean heavily on foreign judgements to
sustain their reasoning. The access and the respect which our courts
earn by such reliance by the foreign courts will be totally lost by our
judgements being in Hindi.

     The advantage, if any gained by adopting Hindi as the court
language will be far outweighed by retaining English as the court
language."


                                  41
 Mr. Vijay Hansaria, Sr. Advocate

     "You were kind enough to write the aforesaid letter seeking my
views on the proposed amendment in
Article 348
of the Constitution
regarding official language of High Courts/Supreme Court.

      I have examined the matter and also discussed with my
colleagues. In my opinion that there is no justification for accepting the
recommendation of the Committee of Parliament of Official Language
on the aforesaid subject for the following reasons:

     1.
The recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee
           appears to be on the basis that because of the judgments of
           the High Courts/ Supreme Court being in English, various
           Government Departments are not able to pass orders in
           Hindi. This is not a valid reason since in almost all the
           States throughout the country, official orders are passed
           either in English or in respective official language of the
           State which may be Hindi, Telugu or Assamese.
Whenever, these orders are challenged in the High Courts
           they are translated in English and then filed in the High
           Court.    However, some High Courts permit filing of
           documents in the regional languages of the State as well.
So also whenever there is any direction by the High Courts/
           Supreme Court, they may be carried out by the respective
           Governments by passing an order in the official language of
           the respective State which need not necessarily be in
           English.
2.    Since India is a multi-lingual country, a large section of
           population of our country and also a large number of judges
           of the High Courts/ Supreme Court are not conversant with
           the Hindi language. If the judges of the High Courts/
           Supreme Court are asked/permitted to deliver their
           judgments/orders in Hindi, those judges who are not
           conversant with the Hindi language would not be able to
42
understand the same. Our judicial system is governed by
     the principle of the stare-decisis, if the judges are not able
     to understand the judgments of their own court or of the
     superior court, it would cause lot of confusion and ambiguity
     and may result in delivery of conflicting judgments.
Further, in our judicial system, judgment of one High Court
     is relied upon and referred to in a case in another High
     Court. Though judgment of one High Court does not have a
     binding precedent value in another High Court, they do
     have persuasive value. If judgments are pronounced in
     Hindi, they cannot be understood in non Hindi speaking
     States.
3.   If Hindi is permitted to be the official language of High
     Courts, similar demand may come from non Hindi speaking
     States that in their High Courts, the regional language of the
     State should be used.
4.   Further the judgments of the High Courts are appealable to
     the Supreme Court and the Apex Court comprising of
     judges many of whom have no knowledge of Hindi language
     at all. Writing of judgment in Hindi would create problems in
     this regard as well.
5.   In our Constitutional Scheme, judges of the High Courts are
     transferable and we have many judges in the Hindi belt area
     who are not conversant with the Hindi language.
Judgments delivered in Hindi may not be understood by the
     transferee judges from non Hindi belt area. Consequently
     there would be judges in the High Courts who would not be
     able to understand judgments of their own court.
6. Under
Section 7
of the Official Language Act, 1963, the
   Governor with the previous consent of the President may
   authorize use of Hindi or the official language of the State for
   the purpose of judgments/order of the High Court for that
   State. However, in such a case the section further requires
   that such judgments/orders "shall be accompanied by a
43
translation of the same in the English Language issued under
          the authority of the High Court." Thus even if the judgment /
          order of the High Court is permitted to be delivered in Hindi, it
          will require simultaneous translation of the judgment in
          English. This will increase the workload of the courts which are
          already over burdened.
In view of the aforesaid reasons, it is my humble opinion that the
Law Commission of India may give its opinion that it is not desirable to
permit delivery of judgments by the High Courts/Supreme Court in Hindi
language."
Mr. K.K. Venugopal, Sr. Advocate

     "Thank you for your letter of October 8, 2007.
I am expressing my brief views on the recommendations of the
Committee on Official Language as follows:
1)     The proposal will be disruptive of the unity of the country.
Schedule VIII to the Constitution of India contains as many
            as 22 languages, which are recognized by the Constitution.
            Language, as all of us are aware, is a very emotive issue
            which has resulted in redrawing the map of India by dividing
            it into linguistic States. Even after six decades of the
            Constitution, Hindi is not spoken by an overwhelming
            section of the population in a large number of the States in
            the country. Carrying out the recommendations of the
            Committee of Parliament would be highly destructive of the
            harmony which now exists between the people of the
            different States. I seriously apprehend that language riots
            may break out in many States in the South against the
            imposition of Hindi, as we have seen in the past. Why does
            one want history to repeat itself?
2)     Today we have in the higher judiciary judges from different
            parts of the country, some of whom do not understand
            Hindi. If the language of the Supreme Court of India were
44
to be Hindi, perhaps, no judge from the southern States
           could possibly be on the Bench and participate intelligently
           and effectively in the deliberations of the court. So too
           would be the position if judges from the High Courts of
           some States who would not have the proficiency in Hindi to
           be able to understand the arguments and write judgments
           in Hindi are to the High Courts of Hindi-speaking States.
           The lawyers from the non-Hindi speaking States would be
           at a tremendous disadvantage.
3)    I see one more problem. The cost of translation is
           prohibitive. If the Government and other documents are in
           English, as is the case in many of the States, they would all
           have to be translated. So too the evidence and judgments
           which are in English. Today English is the language in
           which judgments are written in the South-Asian countries
           except Nepal. Our judgments will no more have any
           influence and force in, say Bangladesh or Sri Lanka. Nor
           will they be read and understood in the other parts of the
           English-speaking world consisting mainly of Common Law
           countries. It is in the larger interests of the country that
           matters are left where they stand.
These are a few of my thoughts which certainly represent the
point of view of a very large section of the population of this country. I
have no doubt that any attempt to implement the recommendations of
the Parliamentary Committee would bring about divisiveness among,
and confrontation between the people of India."
Mr. Arvind Datar, Sr. Advocate

"1. The Parliamentary Committee on Official Language has made the
following recommendations at Sl.Nos.16.8(d) and 16.8(e):
"16.8(d)
Article 348
of the Constitution may be amended to
     enable the Legislative Department to undertake original drafting in
     Hindi.
45
16.8(e) After the amendment of
Article 348
of the Constitution,
      High Courts/Supreme Courts should be asked to start delivering
      their judgments and decrees, etc. in Hindi so that large number of
      Government Departments who are carrying out judicial/quasi-
      judicial functions, could be able to delivery orders in Hindi. At
      present, these departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi,
      because the appeal against their orders in High Courts/Supreme
      Court would have to be conducted in English".
2.     Historical background:
Article 348(1)
requires that all
proceedings of the Supreme Court and High Court shall be in English
language until Parliament by law otherwise provides.
Article 348(2)
enables the Governor of a State to authorize the use of the Hindi
language or any other language used for official purpose in a particular
State in proceedings in that High Court. Clause (2) enables a language
other than English to be used in a particular High Court. But the
proviso thereof categorically states that the judgment, decree and order
will not be affected by such a proviso. In other words, the judgments of
the High Courts shall continue to be in English. [It must be noted that
the previous consent of the President is required under
Article 348(2)].
3.   Section 348 is based on
Sections 214(5)
and
227
of the
Government of India Act, 1935 which prescribed English as the
language to be used in all proceedings of the Federal Court and the
High Courts.
4.    Constituent Assembly debates: (to verify and add)
      xxxxxxx
5.    Difficulty in implementing the recommendations:
Para (d) is difficult to implement. The original draft of a statute
cannot be in Hindi with regard to several English laws. For example,
the new
Income Tax Act
is expected to be announced next year. It will
be very difficult for the Act to be drafted in Hindi. A vast majority of tax
payers speak the English language.               The community of tax
practitioners, auditors, investors are all conversant with the drafting of
the statute in English. Any enactment in Hindi will be virtually useless.
46
6.    India has signed several Double Taxation Agreements with
various countries. If the Indian tax statutes are going to be in Hindi,
then it is bound to lead to grave difficulty.
7.     Apart from Revenue laws, several new subjects like information
technology, stem cell development, telegraphic laws and laws relating
to cyber crime can be provided for only in English. Many of the phrases
and expressions which are used in English language. It would be
difficult and, indeed a complete waste of public time and money, to
prepare them in Hindi.
8.    Judgments of High Courts/Supreme Court:
8.1   It is virtually impossible to implement the recommendation in
      Clause 16.8(e). In several non-Hindi speaking States, Judges will
      find it impossible to deliver their judgments in Hindi.
8.2   Any amendment to this effect is bound to generate tremendous
      resistance and lead to further allegations of Hindi domination.
8.3   Even judges whose mother tongue is Hindi will find it difficult to
      deliver judgments in Hindi. The legal education of all the High
      Court and Supreme Court judges has been in English. Judges
      who have been members of the Bar have all dealt with cases only
      in English. In all the High Courts, the arguments advanced
      mainly in English. Therefore, it will be impossible to deliver
      judgments in Hindi.
8.4   Several Central statutes have all India applicability. It is difficult
      to understand how a judgment can be delivered in Hindi with
      regard to tax laws, intellectual property and so on. A judgment
      has to be clear and its ratio discidendi should be easily
      discernible. Delivering it in Hindi is bound to lead to confusion
      and chaos as several legal expressions do not have a meaningful
      Hindi equivalent.
8.5   The object of such a far-reaching recommendation is not clear.
An analysis of the Clause 16.8(e) indicates that this
      recommendation is made on the following grounds:-
47
a)    Large number of Government Departments who are carrying out
      judicial and quasi-judicial functions would be able to deliver the
      orders in Hindi;
b)    At present, these Departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi
      because the appeal against their order are in High
      Courts/Supreme Court would have to be conducted in English.
8.6   Both these grounds cannot be the basis for all judgments to be
      delivered in Hindi by the High Courts and Supreme Court.
a)    In several Government Departments the orders of quasi-judicial
      nature are passed only in English.
b)    Maximum number of quasi-judicial orders are passed in revenue
      and service matters. The appellate authorities under various
      under various Central enactments pass their orders only in
      English.
c)    It is not clear how a judgment in English will cause any handicap
      to any Government Department from delivering its order in Hindi.
      If the concerned Government Officer or authority is unable to
      understand English, the simpler mechanism would be to have a
      particular judgment translated in Hindi.
d)    As regards ground (b), it is not clear as to why the appeal being
      conducted in English would handicap or disable Departments to
      pass orders in Hindi. If any Department wants to pass an order in
      Hindi, it is at liberty to do so. The aggrieved party while
      challenging the order will enclose an Engloish translation thereof.
      Frequently, orders passed by the State Governments or the
      Central Government in the local language or in Hindi is translated
      in English and taken up for consideration by the respective High
      Courts/Supreme Court.
e)    The Supreme Court judges deliver more than 10 to 15,000
      judgments per year. The reported cases alone run to 12,000
      pages. It is impossible to expect the Supreme Court judges who
48
come from various States to deliver their judgments in Hindi.
       Even if they deliver it in Hindi, there would be a Herculean task of
       having it translated in English for the understanding of the legal
       and accounting professions and for various industries. (This
       problem will be multiplied 20 times for various High Courts)
f)     The implementation of such a recommendation will lead to a
       further delay in the disposal of cases. Merely because some
       Government Department wants to deliver its orders in Hindi
       cannot be a ground for all High Courts and the Supreme Court
       being required to render their judgments in Hindi.
g)     At present juncture, such a recommendation will lead to serious
       friction, particularly between the Northern and Southern States.
       English has been a unifying language and any attempt to
       substitute English with Hindi is fraught with grave consequences.
       It may not be out of place to mention that China is taking
       extraordinary efforts to ensure that the country is English literate.
       Our major advantage in the global economy is fluency in English
       language. Let us not destroy that advantage. The judgments of
       our courts are being cited in the different Commonwealth
       countries and also in the US and Europe. Requiring the High
       Court and Supreme Court to deliver judgments in Hindi would be
       a retrograde step.
h)     It must be recognized that several attempts to substitute English
       with Hindi or regional languages in the High Courts have been a
       colossal failure.
i)     Recommendations:

(i)    It is therefore recommended that High Courts and the Supreme
Court should continue to deliver their judgments in English.
       Wherever a particular judgment is required for passing of orders
       in Hindi, that judgment can be translated in Hindi.
(ii)   In the vast majority of cases, there has been no need for
       judgments to be in the Hindi language.     There has been no
       analysis of specific instances where judgments in English have
49
created a severe handicap in the functioning of the Government.
      Unless a scientific study is made, such a recommendation should
      not be implemented."
Mr. C. Lakshmi Narayanan, Advocate

     "As you are aware, I have been practicing in the Madras High
Court from 1956 onwards and I am shocked to see that the Department
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice by its letter dated 29-3-
2006 has sent to various Legislative Departments with the copy of the
recommendation of the Committee of Parliament on Official Language,
seeking their views on

       "No.16.8(d)
Article 348
of Constitution proposing Legislative
Department to undertake original drafting in Hindi and 16.8(e)
proposing 'after such amendment of High Courts/Supreme Courts
should be asked to start delivering their judgments and decrees, etc in
Hindi.
I am totally against "16.8(e) After the amendment of
Article 348
of
the Constitution, High Courts/Supreme Courts should be asked to start
delivering their judgments and decrees, etc. in Hindi so that large
number of Government Departments, who are carrying out
judicial/quasi-judicial functions, could be able to deliver orders in Hindi.
At present, these departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi,
because the appeal against their orders in High Courts/Supreme Court
would have to be conducted in English".
If such orders are passed by the High Court and Supreme Court
in Hindi, it will cause virtual chaos in the judicial system. India is a
country with several states having their own official language and
imposing Hindi on the litigants and the Courts especially High Courts
and Supreme Court is unwarranted and will cause great harm to the
litigants and Courts in non-Hindi states. In a federal set up of the
Government, the rights and convenience of each state has got to be
respected and taken note of.
50
Though in these states upto the District Court level, legal
proceedings including judgments are delivered in their local languages,
the proceeding before the High Courts and Supreme Court are carried
on in English language which is most convenient for the litigant public
and the advocates arguing those cases. English being universal
language, the Judgment of the High Courts and Supreme Court in
English are of great importance. Though Hindi is declared as National
Language all other languages are given importance and cannot be
thought as inferior than Hindi. It is only a small percentage of cases
reach the High Courts and Supreme Court compared to several lakhs
of cases at the lower level. Moreover, the Judgment of the High Court
and Supreme Court are binding on all subordinate Courts and after the
judgments are delivered in Hindi, it will cause havoc in other states
where Hindi is not official language. I will involve huge expenses for
translation and cause delay in delivering judgments, thus negative the
rights of litigants for speedy justice. The present system of judgments
being delivered in English at the High Courts and Supreme Court is the
most suitable in the interest of litigant public and the advocates hailing
from non-Hindi states. Further the present system of the post of Chief
Justice of High Court being held by a senior judge from different Court
particularly from non-Hindi region will cause great hardship to such
appointees.
Moreover, this kindly of recommendation will create ill-feeling
among various states in India which have their own language for
administration and revive the much forgotten anti Hindi agitations which
is healthy for a federal country like India.
I request your Lordship to kindly reject the proposed amendment
in the interest of unity of the country."
Article 348
of the Constitution of India reads thus:-
"
Art. 348.
Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the
High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding anything in
51
the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides:-
(a)     all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High
Court,
(b)     the authoritative texts -
(i)     of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to
                     be moved in either House of Parliament or in the
                     House or either House of the Legislature of a State,
(ii)    of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of
                     a State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the
                     President or the Governor of a State, and
(iii)   of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
                     under this Constitution or under any law made by
                     Parliament or the Legislature of a State,

shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) the
Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the President
authorize the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for
any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court
having its principal seat in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment,
decree or order passed or made by such High Court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1),
where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other
than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed
by, the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the
Governor of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law
referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause, a translation of the
same in the English language published under the authority of the
Governor of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be
52
deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language
under this article."
Dr. R.G. Padia, Senior Advocate

"REPORT REGARDING RECOMMENDATION NO. 16.8(d) & 16.8(e)
OF THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE

       In any country, democratic or otherwise, language is a vehicle of
great importance not only emotionally for its people, but also as a very
formidable means of the process of thinking as well as its
communication to others. In a democracy, however, its importance
becomes of particular importance, since one of the basic rights in a
democracy conferred on every citizen is the Freedom of Speech and
Expression in any way and in any manner that a citizen desires to
express. In those democracies, which are based on the concept of
Federalism, its role is still more vital since there are divergent and
different views of the people belonging to different regional entities and
their conflicting claims have to be reconciled in various fields including
their languages.      Federalism demands its own price to be paid and
one of such relevant factors is the problem of finding out consensus in
respect of recognition and use of a common language. In a Federal
Constitution, the political structure in various States may be entirely
heterogeneous, i.e, one region may opt for its political institutions, the
concept of liberal democracy, while another may opt for the principles
based on marxism, and yet another region may opt for the system
based on a particular religious faith and the policies emanating from the
same. Populations comprising in such diverse regions may have their
own distinct language, spoken as well as in script. Thus, there may be
not only a case of bilingualism, but, in fact, even a case of
multilingualism, and balancing of such conflicting interests is a major
difficult task. Experience has taught us that in India with a very huge
population and with 28 States and 7 Union Territories, such task of
making a delicate balance is rather difficult. The great author, Granville
Austin in his classic Treatise 'The Indian Constitution - Cornerstone of
a Nation' has rightly observed that the solution that has been evolved
after marathon discussion in the Constituent Assembly is the half-
hearted compromise.
53
2.    While drafting the Constitution itself, there was a massive debate
over the question of language to be adopted in the country and the
proceedings of three dates, i.e, 12th September, 1949, 13th September,
1949 and 14th September, 1949 are duly reported in Volume No. IX,
Book No. 4 of the Constituent Assembly Debates running from pages
1314 to 1491, i.e, more than 175 pages and only thereafter the new
Part XIV-A containing Articles 301-A upto Article 301-I was duly
accepted and adopted by the Members of the Constituent Assembly.
3.    It is of great significance to recall that, while adopting the
Preamble, inter alia, Unity of the Nation was solemnly proclaimed and
thus the Founding Fathers had in their mind the greater goal for the
country, namely, to maintain the Unity of the Nation, in spite of the
serious difficulties in finding a total consensus over the language issue.
It is also worthwhile to note that, while the Preamble lays great
emphasis on various fundamental concepts, like justice, liberty, equality
and fraternity, it does not refer to the language at all, but it refers to the
ultimate end and that is the Unity of the Nation.
4.     Under the Indian Constitution in
Article 343
, the official language
of the Union is declared to be Hindi in Devanagari script, but the same
Article has also provided that for a period of 15 years from the
commencement of the Constitution, the English language shall
continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union.
5.    In this connection, it is not, really speaking, necessary to recall in
great detail the extremely difficult political situation that emerged in the
year 1965, particularly in the Southern States when the English
language was sought to be given a subordinate status and the events
are well-known on account of which the status quo was permitted to be
continued under the Constitution which obtains even today.
6.    I would like to add in this connection one vital feature of our
Constitution that the question of language is not included in Part IV, i.e,
Directive Principles of State Policy. Although under
Article 37
the
Directive Principles are declared to be Fundamental in the governance
of the country and the duty has been imposed on the State to apply
these principles in making law, yet that mandate is conspicuous by its
absence as far as language is concerned. It should, however, be
conceded that the implementation of various Directive Principles has
54
been very slow like
Article 45
relating to compulsory and free primary
education and in respect of certain Directive Principles like Uniform
Civil Code under
Article 44
, no progress has been made as yet. The
point that I wish to emphasise is that like the Directive Principles, which
are Fundamental in the governance of the country, it is likely to take
substantial time in evolving consensus in finding a compromise formula
to the language problem facing our country, but the delay should not be
regarded as very startling or disastrous for the implementation of the
Constitutional provisions.
7.    It must be vehemently emphasized that the language is a very
potent force for National Integration in any country, but at the same
time, it is also a very potent force for National Dis-integration. In a
really working and functional society, no imposition should be
attempted against the will of a substantial number of people of the
society and any such imposition, even in respect of language, is likely
to be counter-productive, especially when the issue also involves
hugely potential weapon for evoking emotional out-bursts.              An
atmosphere has to be created over a very long period of time, in the
mind, psyche and ethos of the people to move towards the adoption of
a uniform language for their own welfare as well as for the welfare of
the entire people. The development and growth of any language in any
Nation is bound to be very slow and the process cannot be abrupt
imposition of any particular language creating an artificial vacuum. I
must admit that our efforts for the promotion of the officially declared
language of the Union, i.e, Hindi have not been fully and satisfactorily
substantiated over such a long period of time, but the redeeming
feature is that it does not necessarily have any serious adverse
consequences. A reference can be made to a country like Canada
which has two declared Official languages, namely, English and
French, or a very small country like Switzerland which has three
declared Official languages, namely, English, French and Italian.
Basically, one of the important elements is the internal and implicit
strength of the language itself depending upon its quality and speed of
growth and once it is so developed in its vocabulary and use, it by itself
offers solutions to the people by making general use of the same and
this aspect is Fundamental.
55
8.    It may also be pointed out that under our own Constitution in
Schedule VIII, at present, we have as many as 22 recognized
languages and apart from this, under
Article 347
there is also a
provision that in a particular State if there is any other language which
is being used by a substantial portion of the population of that State,
and a demand is made on their behalf by the State concerned, then
even such other language could also be officially recognized by the
President as the official language of that State.
9.    A mandate contained under
Article 351
to strengthen the
vocabulary of Hindi language based primarily on Sanskrit, and
secondarily on other languages has yet to be fulfilled and we have not
enriched Hindi language by incorporating a very large number of
commonly used words of all other 22 languages contained in Schedule
VIII. This assimilation of making other words of other languages as
part of Hindi, is really vital for the growth, development and use of Hindi
throughout the country and this mandate has to be effectively
implemented and also expeditiously.
Now I come to the two specific queries. As regards the first
recommendation, being recommendation no. 16.8(d) :
10.   Clause (1) of
Article 348
is quoted below :
"Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
            part until Parliament by law otherwise provides -
(a)   all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every
                  High Court,
(b)   the authoritative texts -
(i)      of all Bills to be introduced or amendments
                           thereto to be moved in either House of
                           Parliament or in the House or either house of
                           the Legislature of a State,
                  (ii)     of all Acts passed by Parliament or the
                           Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances
56
promulgated by the President            or   the
                          Governor of a State, and
                 (iii)    of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws
                          issued under this Constitution or under any
                          law made by Parliament or the Legislature of
                          a State,
           shall be in the English language."
11. Under Clause (2) of the said Article, the Governor of the State
may authorize the use of Hindi language or any other language either
for the official purposes of the State or in proceedings in the concerned
High Court subject to the previous consent of the President. Clause (3)
of the said Article provides that, where in any state, its Legislature has
prescribed any language other than the English language for use in the
Bills being introduced in the Legislature or the Acts passed by the
Legislature of that State or the Ordinances, promulgated by the
Governor of that State or has made any other subordinate legislation
made in the State, a translation in the English language shall also be
published in the official gazette and the same shall be deemed to be
the authoritative text contained in the English language.
12. Analysis of the aforesaid provisions clearly indicates that it starts
with a non-obstante clause, i.e., irrespective of what has been stated
under
Articles 343
, 344
, 345
, 346
and
347.
Thus, in other words, this
Article has been given a pre-dominant importance.
13. The most vital part of Clause (1) of this Article is "until Parliament
by law otherwise provides". Thus, the entire Article is based on the
assumption that anything to the contrary could be provided by
Parliament by law. It is also clear that, no special majority has been
provided for Parliament, and, in fact, any ordinary law made by the
Parliament will supersede all the provisions of the three Clauses of this
Article. Thus, the Parliament has been given the over-riding rights
under the Article.
14. In view of the scheme of the said Article, as stated above, in my
considered view, there is absolutely no necessity for amending
Article
57
348
to enable the Legislative Department to undertake original drafting
in Hindi. The Legislative Department, in fact, is subsidiary wing of
Parliament and thus even without amending the Constitution, the
desired result may be obtained. However, whether even Parliament
should undertake such an exercise is an altogether different matter and
regarding that I have already made my submissions in the earlier part
of my report, which may kindly be perused.
15. Moreover, our political system is based on the British Model of
Cabinet Form of Government and there is a total cohesion between the
two wings of the Government, namely, the Legislature and the
Executive. Assuming without admitting that the Legislative Department
belongs to Executive Wing, it presents no difficulty whatsoever, since
the Executive can make a recommendation to the Parliament to make
such a law under
Article 348
and the advice of the Cabinet would be
binding on the President and a law will have to be made by the
Parliament on the basis of the said advice. Thus, even this hypothesis
creates no fetters for the Parliament to make the intended law.
16. A closer look at various Articles contained under Part XVII,
namely, Official Language, clearly reveals that the aforesaid power of
the Parliament is not circumscribed by any other subsequent Article of
the said Part.
As regards the Recommendations of the Parliamentary
Committee being Recommendation no. 16.8(e), my respectful
submissions are as under :
17. The Fundamental premise of the said recommendation is, in fact,
non-existent. As submitted above,
Article 348
does not require any
amendment as proposed by the Committee under its recommendation
16.8(d).
18. In my preface to the present report, I have already emphasized
the importance of the language as also the fact that English language
has continued throughout in the same role and capacity since 1950.
19. As stated above, we have not been able to enrich Hindi language
as mandated under
Article 351
even for the use of the common man
58
throughout the country. I must immediately admit that we have already
undertaken the task of translating various Acts, ancient as well as
modern in Hindi language, but the translated vocabulary is not very
workable since Hindi language itself has not been made sufficiently rich
enough for its common use. The mere textual translation of the laws,
ancient as well as present, does not sub-serve the necessary purpose
for delivering judgments either for the Judges or the lawyers, who are
the necessary limbs for the justice delivery system. Delivery of
judgment depends upon not merely the textual translation of the
provisions of law, but it contains many other necessary and integral
component parts like pleadings at all levels including subordinate level,
evaluation of evidence, efficacy and strength of arguments at all levels
in the hierarchy of the Courts. In my personal view, the Judges of
various High Courts as well as of the Supreme Court are sufficiently
well-versed in the use of English language and it must be remembered
that the process of delivering a judgment at the High Court or the
Supreme Court level is not a mechanical process. Today, English
language is very well written, spoken and received well at the High
Courts and the Supreme Court by the lawyers and Judges and in my
considered view, there is likely to be a complete consensus among
them for the continued use of English language in the justice delivery
system.
20. At present, the working system in the Supreme Court consists of
submitting English translations of the pleadings, the evidence and the
judgments of the authorities or the Courts below and this facilitates the
Supreme Court to render its judgment. Under our Constitution, it is the
Supreme Court and the High Courts which have a unique sense of
importance and not departmental authorities working as quasi-judicial
Tribunals. Under the constitutional scheme of things, independence of
judiciary consists of independence basically of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court and not of any quasi-judicial authority or Tribunal.
Moreover, it is the judgment of the quasi-judicial Tribunal or of a
government authority or of the Government Department which is
subject to judicial review under the Indian Constitution and not vice
versa. Thus, the ultimate authority is not these Departments or the
authorities, but the higher Courts. In my view, therefore, the suggestion
should be just the reverse, i.e, in order to enable these Government
Departments which are carrying out the judicial/quasi-judicial functions,
59
an authoritative text/translation of the language of their choice should
be furnished to them of the judgments delivered by the Supreme Court
or the High Courts. It is for the concerned Government to develop a
mechanism for such authoritative translations, particularly in the kind of
language that these authorities could understand and thereafter they
should be able to understand the merit and the impact of the judgments
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts and act accordingly. If
somehow, they are unable to appreciate the translated version of the
judgments, their judgments can always be corrected by the High Courts
and the Supreme Court and this is the scheme of things under our
Constitution.
21. It should also be remembered that the function of a judgment of
the Supreme Court or the High Courts is not merely its binding force on
the concerned parties or even on all others, not merely the declaration
of law of the land by these Courts, but basically it serves as a
pronouncement of the law applicable to govern the relationships of all
people throughout the country in their future relations and in regard to
which their lis is to be decided. Thus, it is of utmost importance and for
the strengthening of the rule of law and for the advancement of public
interest that this important value-orientation impact of a judgment
should not be affected needlessly by the language controversy.
22. In my considered opinion, the most serious objection to the
Recommendation would be based on the doctrine of violation of the
basic structure of the Constitution. Justice delivery system by the
Supreme Court and the High Courts is the basic structure of the
Constitution and this necessarily includes the manner, mode and the
expression of that judgment by the particular Court. No linguistic
imposition of any kind could be made upon any Judge of the Supreme
Court or the High Courts obligating him not to deliver his judgment in
English. Use of language, whether Hindi or English is not a basic
feature or part of fundamental structure of our Constitution, but the
concept of judicial review is indeed such a part and this aspect cannot
be over-emphasized and has to be kept in mind throughout. At any
rate, in my well considered view, before any final decision is taken, the
views of the Courts including the Judges of the Supreme Court must be
taken before any action is taken towards the implementation of the
Recommendations. It is particularly so, because the Recommendation
60
in a circuitous way imposes the study, the knowledge and use of Hindi
on the Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. Further, the
transfer policy regarding the judges of the High Courts has not been
finally given up and, in fact, is fully applicable in respect of the transfer
of the Chief Justice. He normally stays for a brief time and during his
stay he is already obligated to understand and use the language of his
transferred State.
23. That, moreover, it is common knowledge that our Indian Supreme
Court uses the judgments delivered by various foreign Courts and vice
versa. The judgments delivered by our Courts are being increasingly
referred to and relied upon throughout the world by the Courts of
various countries. It is common knowledge that by and large, English is
the language used throughout the globe in the justice delivery in the
democratic world and nothing should be done which affects the
relevance and the efficacy of our judgments to be used by other Courts
throughout the world. Nothing should be done to undermine the
international value and utility of the judgments of our Courts, particularly
the Supreme Court. Further, present is the age of globalization and
there is an unfettered growth of trade and commerce, attempts to make
common universal policies regarding customs and excise, removal of
trade barriers and uniform investment policies. More particularly,
reference must be given to the fast growing concept of Arbitration
where Arbitrators decide the disputes of high stakes of the parties
belonging to different countries of the world. All these matters including
the awards of the Arbitrators ultimately come to the higher Courts, i.e,
High Courts or Supreme Court in India in many situations depending
upon territorial operations and it will be highly inequitable and
anomalous to burden our Courts not to deliver their judgments in
English.
24. If the Judges are ordaining not to deliver their judgments in
English, the quality of the judgments is liable to be gravely and
adversely affected.    One of the basic infrastructures for delivering
judgments, namely, reliance on the foreign text books and foreign
jurisprudential concepts delivered by jurists would be missed by our
Courts.
25. Finally, I might add that present political situation is not very
conducive to the implementation of the Recommendation.           The
61
language issue should not be precipitated into a kind of political rivalry
in order to gain political advantage. Already there is a great deal of
debate going on regarding the scope of judicial review by the High
Courts and the Supreme Court pertaining to the legislative and the
executive acts of the governmental authorities and the debates remain
inconclusive in spite of taking place at regular intervals, very frequently
and in a highly emotive way. Any precipitate action although taken in
great earnest and with strong national feeling, may result into the kind
of agitations that the country has already faced long back in the year
1965 and ultimately the remedy may turn out to be worse than the
disease."
Mr. T.P.K. Nambiar, Senior Advocate
      "Respected Dr. Justice Lakshmanan,

             I received your letter, of October 8, 2007, in re:
Article 348
imbroglio, at a time when I was worried by lack of worries. The
      subject-matter of your query is as sensitive and important today
      as it was in 1949, when
Article 348
was born.
Whenever I am to study an aspect relating to any provision
      in the Constitution of India, my mind travels back to the
      Constituent Assembly for the discussion on the corresponding
      Draft Article. Turning the pages of the Constituent Assembly
      Debates, I found that the Debates on the corresponding draft
      Articles took place on 12th, 13th and 14th September 1949.
When the Constituent Assembly re-assembled in the
      afternoon "at Four of the Clock', on 12th September 1949, Mr.
      President (The Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad), took up Part
      XIV-A - 'Language'. Dr. Rajendra Prasad started:
"We have now to take up the articles dealing with the
            question of language. I know this is a subject which has
            been agitating the minds of Members for sometime.....
            There is no other item in the whole Constitution of the
            country which will be required to be implemented from day
62
to day, from hour to hour, I might even say, from minute to
      minute in actual practice..... I have found that there are
      some three hundred or more amendments to these articles.
      If each one of the amendments is to be moved I do not
      know how many hours it will take...."
The main speaker of the day on the subject was the
Honourable Shri N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar. Shri Ayyangar
started with a bang:
"Opinion has not always been unanimous on this question.
      There was, however, one thing about which we reached a
      fairly unanimous conclusion that we should select one of
      the languages in India as the common language of the
      whole of India, the language that should be used for the
      official purposes of the Union..... I for one did not easily
      reach the conclusion that was arrived at the end of these
      discussions, because it involved our bidding good-bye to a
      language (meaning, English) on which, I think, we have built
      and achieved our freedom.          Though I accepted the
      conclusion at the end that that language should be given up
      in due course and in its place, we should substitute a
      language of this country, it was not without a pang that I
      agreed to that decision".
Shri Gopalaswamy Ayuyangar went on to say that we could
not afford to give up the English language at once. "We had to
keep the English language going for a number of years until Hindi
could establish for itself a place, not merely because it is an
Indian language, but because as a language it would be an
efficient instrument for all that we have to say and do in the future
and until Hindi established itself in the position in which English
stands today for Union purposes". Shri Ayyangar continued:
"We then proceeded to consider the question of the
      language that should be used in our Legislatures and the
      highest courts of justice in the land and we came to the
      conclusion after a great deal of deliberation and discussion
      that while the language of the Union 'Hindi' may be used for
63
debates, for discussions and so forth in the Central
     Legislature, and where while the language of the State
     could be used for similar purposes in the State Legislature,
     it was necessary for us, if we were going to perpetuate the
     existing satisfactory state of things as regards the text of
     our laws and the interpretation of that text in the courts, that
     English should be the language in which legislation,
     whether in the form of Bills and Acts or of rules and orders
     and the interpretation in the form of judgments by Judges of
     the High Court - these should be in English for several
     years to come. For my own part I think it will have to be for
     many many years to come. It is not because that we want
     to keep the English language at all costs for these
     purposes. It is because the languages which we can
     recognize for Union purposes and the languages which we
     can recognize for State purposes are not sufficiently precise
     for the purposes that I have mentioned, viz., laws and the
     interpretation of laws by Courts of law".
The Honourable Member concluded, with a whimper:
"I would only appeal to the House that we must look at this
     problem from a purely objective standpoint. We must not be
     carried away by mere sentiment or any kind of allegiance to
     revivalism of one kind or another. We have to look at it
     from the stand point of practicability. We have to adapt the
     instrument which would serve us best for what we propose
     to do in the future and I for one agree with you, Sir, that it
     will be a most unhappy thing, a most disappointing
     illustration of our inability to reach an agreed conclusion on
     so vital a matter if on this point we have to divide the House.
     I am sure that good sense will prevail".
I should think that even at present the apprehension voiced
by Shri Gopalaswamy Ayyangar has not ceased to exist.
According to me, we have not still reached the stage at which
Hindi language could substitute English. The position as on
today has to be continued for a long time. It is not yet time to
amend
Article 348
of the Constitution as recommended by the
64
Committee of Parliament on Official Language. It is not yet time
at all to ask the High Courts/Supreme Court to start delivering
their judgments and decrees, etc. in Hindi.
What is the position of Hindi language now. What is today's
standard of education in Hindi. How much has Hindi grown up to
stand up to face the situation involved in the recommendations of
the Committee.       I do not find any scholarly allure in the
suggestion. It would be too hasty to agree with the suggestion.
The question is not one concerning filling up the blank pages of
the law. The question is a loaded one.                I regret my
embarrassment, but I have to say, with humble apologies to the
Committee though, that there should not be any amendment on
the lines suggested by the committee in a hurry, only for the
reason that the Legislature/Parliament suffers from Constitutional
impatience. One fault leads to the next. Serious thought should
be bestowed on the question of constitutional amendments in
relation to "Language", especially when legislation is not a
pastoral letter; and, further, English language is an enticing
treasure. The situation in 1949 is different from that in 2007.
Technology has changed our brains, in this clicking, bleeping,
flashing world of screens. These are days of E-learning, and
globalization. Even Russia and China have changed their views
on language. There is change on all fronts - social, political,
educational, regional etc. India does not consist only of Hindi-
speaking areas. The Constitutional corridor is not the preserve of
Hindi. Regional languages have grown; in fact, over-grown.
Here, States re-organisation based on language, has played a
great part, and that, against the Hindi language. The situation of
the Constitutional Courts delivering their judgments, is
unimaginable, in these days. Anybody concerned with the
administration of justice by High Courts and the Supreme Court,
would be prepared, with little hesitation, to release his opposition
to the suggestion. When we take not of the constitution,
organisation, and method of appointment of judges, of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court, we may have no difficulty to
perceive the utter impossibility of judges delivering judgments in
Hindi, especially judges with honourable ignorance of the
65
language.    Let not the inhabitants of the Constitutional Courts
     disturbed.
At the end of the day, I could formulate only one conclusion;
     and that is, it is not yet time to act on the lines of the
     recommendation of the Committee of Parliament on Official
     Language, in regard to "Language", especially
Article 348
of the
     Constitution. The period of 15 years stipulated in
Article 343
of
     the Constitution can never be adhered to in the changed
     situation, making it impossible for a long time from now to adhere
     to the said stipulation.       Times have changed against the
     stipulation. Situation has not improved in favour of the stipulation.
     The soft sobs of forgotten statesmen/politicians on the question
     of language will not abate for a long time to come.
Mr. Fali S. Nariman, President, Bar Association of India

     "Dear Dr. Justice Lakshmanan,

           I am receipt of your letter of 30th September, 2008.
2.    I may be old fashioned but I would earnestly request both
     Parliament and the Government of India not to tinker with the
     legal system as it has existed - principally because the entire
     legal system in India is based on, and has much in common with,
     the English-language: both were originally imported from abroad.
     Over the course of over 300 years, each has become distinctively
     Indian. The language of our law, in more senses than one, is
     English. It is true that the English language as spoken and written
     in India has the same alphabet and conforms to the same rules of
     grammar - but the idioms, the expressive phrases and even the
     pronunciation of words are vastly different. Many new words have
66
crept in. We have institutionalized and localized the English
     language; as some with said, it has become English - so it is with
     the legal system. Originally an English transplant with Anglo-
     Saxon roots, the legal system in India has grown over the years,
     nourished in Indian soil; it has become indigenized; what was
     intended to be an English Oak, has turned into a large sprawling
     Banyan tree whose serial roots have descended to the ground to
     become new trunks.
3.    To change the language in which Acts are drafted and to
     require Courts to deliver judgments in Hindi is at present
     something impossible to conceive - unless we throw out our legal
     system and adopt a new one by consensus. Indians would then
     all have to speak and think in Hindi in a new indigenous system of
     law that is truly Indian (and not Anglo Saxon): this requires a
     major surgical operation and at the present time I would earnestly
     suggest that we postpone this exercise till India has become what
     it was always meant to be: a unified, united and pluralistic society
     of peace loving citizens."
A.P. High Court Advocates' Association, Hyderabad

      "The A.P. High Court Advocates' Association unanimously
resolved that the proposed amendment to
Article 348
of the
Constitution of India enabling the Legislative Department "to undertake
original drafting in Hindi which is expected to pave way for delivery of
judgments in Hindi by the Hon'ble High Courts and the Supreme Court
of India" should be dropped as it would have ominous consequences to
67
the federal and pluralistic structure of Indian Society as well as the
body polity. The members of the Association strongly feel that any
such attempt to disturb the existing arrangement would only strengthen
the forces of fissiparous tendencies. Fortunately the judiciary has been
free from linguistic jingoism though the presence of the same is
ominous elsewhere in the democratic institutions of Independent India.
The present move would open the Pandora's Box leading to multitude
of claims and counterclaims across the nation. Besides, such a move
would divide India into two invisible Nations.
The members of the Association also opine that the rest of the
society is fast evolving towards emancipation taking advantage of
cutting edge information technology and assimilating the mind-boggling
technological avalanches taking place elsewhere in the world because
of widespread use of English language.
The members of the Association further feel that the proposed
amendment to
Article 348
would give leverage to the reactionary forces
in the body polity. Besides, the Indian Judiciary would have a
disconnect with world thought. Reforms in Indian judiciary are already
overdue which are possible when English alone is allowed to be used
for the higher judiciary besides availing the emerging advancements in
science and technology.
It is myth to think bringing in Hindi would serve the purpose of the
Indian masses. The founding fathers of the Constitution have rightfully
preserved the domain of the Constitution for English language to the
exclusion of all vernacular languages.
The members of the Andhra Pradesh High Court Advocates'
Association hereby adopt an unanimous resolution to oppose the
proposed amendment to
article 348
of the Constitution of India in the
larger interests of Indian judiciary and people of India."
Kerala High Court Advocates' Association

      "The General Body Meeting of the Kerala High Court Advocates'
Association convened on 28.1.2008 to elicit the opinion of the members
of the Association about the proposed Amendment of
Article 348
of the
68
Constitution of India.       The members of the Kerala High Court
Advocates' Association hereby adopt a unanimous resolution to oppose
the proposed Amendment to
Article 348
of the Constitution of India, in
the larger interest of people of India and the Indian Legal System.
I hereby enclose a copy of the resolution of the Extraordinary
General Body meeting held on 28.1.2008.
RESOLUTION

      The Kerala High Court Advocates' Association unanimously
resolved that all the proposed Amendments to
Article 348
of the
Constitution of India enabling the Legislative Department to undertake
original drafting in Hindi which is expected to pave way for delivery of
Judgments in Hindi instead of English language by the Hon'ble High
Courts and the Supreme Court of India should be dropped. Further,
members of the Association strongly oppose that the original drafting of
Bills introduced in and Acts passed by the Parliament or State
Legislatures, Ordinances promulgated by the President or Governors,
all Orders, Rules, Regulations and Bye Laws issued under the
Constitution or under any law in Hindi instead of English language
should be dropped."
"
Article 348
Imbroglio
     (By T.P. Kelu Nambiar, Sr.Advocate, High Court of Kerala)
Article 348(1)
of the Constitution of India says:
"Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
until Parliament by law otherwise provides -
(a)   all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High
              Court,
(b) the authoritative texts -
(i)     of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to
                  be moved in either House of Parliament or in the
                  House or either House of the Legislature of a State,
69
(ii)    of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of
                   a State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the
                   President or the Governor of a State, and
(iii)   of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
                   under this Constitution or under any law made by
                   Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
                   shall be in the English language".
It was at a time when I was worried by lack of worries, I noticed
the recommendation of the Committee of Parliament on Official
Language that "
Article 348
of the Constitution may be amended to
enable the Legislative Department to undertake original drafting in
Hindi; and after such amendment, High Courts/Supreme Court should
be asked to start delivering their judgments and decrees etc. in Hindi so
that large number of Government Departments, who are carrying out
judicial/quasi-judicial functions, could be able to deliver orders in Hindi;
at present, these departments are unable to pass orders in Hindi,
because the appeal against their orders in High Courts/Supreme Court
would have to be conducted in English". The subject-matter of this
recommendation is as sensitive and important today as it was in 1949,
when
Art. 348
was born.
Whenever I am to study an aspect relating to any provision in the
Constitution of India, my mind travels back to the Constituent Assembly
for the discussion on the corresponding Draft Article. Turning the
pages of the Constituent Assembly Debates, I found that the Debates
on the corresponding draft Articles took place on 12th, 13th and 14th
September 1949.
When the Constituent Assembly re-assembled in the afternoon 'at
Four of the Clock', on 12th September 1949, Mr. President (The
Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad) took up Part XIV-A-'Language'.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad stated:
"We have now to take up the articles dealing with the question of
language. I know this is a subject which has been agitating the minds
of Members for sometime..... There is no other item in the whole
Constitution of the country which will be required to be implemented
70
from day to day, from hour to hour. I might even say, from minute to
minute in actual practice..... I have found that there are some three
hundred or more amendments to these articles. If each one of the
amendments is to be moved I do not know how many hours it will
take........"
The main speaker of the day on the subject was the Honourable
Shri N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar. Shri Ayyangar started with a bang:
"Opinion has not always been unanimous on this question. There
was, however, one thing about which we reached a fairly unanimous
conclusion that we should select one of the languages in India as the
common language of the whole of India, the language that should be
used for the official purposes of the Union.... I for one did not easily
reach the conclusion that was arrived at the end of these discussions,
because it involved our bidding good-bye to a language (meaning,
English) on which, I think, we have built and achieved our freedom.
Though I accepted the conclusion at the end that that language should
be given up in due course and in its place, we should substitute a
language of this country, it was not without a pang that I agreed to that
decision".
Shri Gopalaswamy Ayyangar went on to say that we could not
afford to give up the English language at once. "We had to keep the
English language going for a number of years until Hindi could establish
for itself a place, not merely because it is an Indian language, but
because as a language it would be an efficient instrument for all that we
have to say and do in the future and until Hindi established itself in the
position in which English stands today for Union purposes".           Shri
Ayyangar continued:
"We then proceeded to consider the question of the language that
should be used in our Legislatures and the highest courts of justice in
the land and we came to the conclusion after a great deal of
deliberation and discussion that while the language of the Union 'Hindi'
may be used for debates, for discussions and so forth in the Central
Legislature, and where while the language of the State could be used
for similar purposes in the State Legislature, it was necessary for us, if
we were going to perpetuate the existing satisfactory state of things as
71
regards the text of our laws and the interpretation of that text in the
courts, that English should be the language in which legislation,
whether in the form of Bills and Acts or of rules and orders and the
interpretation in the form of judgments by Judges of the High Court -
these should be in English for several years to come. For my own part
I think it will have to be for many years to come. It is not because that
we want to keep the English language at all costs for these purposes.
It is because the languages which we can recognize for Union
purposes and the languages which we can recognize for State
purposes are not sufficiently developed, are not sufficiently precise for
the purposes that I have mentioned, viz., laws and the interpretation of
laws by Courts of law".
The Honourable Member concluded, with a whimper:
"I would only appeal to the House that we must look at this
problem from a purely objective stand point. We must not be carried
away by mere sentiment or any kind of allegiance to revivalism of one
kind or another. We have to look at it from the stand point of
practicability. We have to adapt the instrument which would serve us
best for what we propose to do in the future and I for one agree with
you, Sir, that it will be a most unhappy thing, a most disappointing
illustration of our inability to reach an agreed conclusion on so vital a
matter if on this point we have to divide the House. I am sure that
good sense will prevail".
I should think that even at present the apprehension voiced by
Shri Gopalaswamy Ayyangar has not ceased to exist. According to me,
we have not still reached the stage at which Hindi language could
substitute English. The position as on today has to be continued for a
longtime. It is not yet time to amend
Art. 348
of the Constitution as
recommended by the Committee of Parliament on Official Language.
It is not yet time at all to ask the High Courts/Supreme Court to start
delivering their judgments and decrees, etc. in Hindi.
What is the position of Hindi language now. What is today's
standard of education in Hindi. How must has Hindi grown up to stand
up to face the situation involved in the recommendations of the
Committee. I do not find any scholarly allure in the suggestion. It
72
would be too hasty to agree with the suggestion. The question is not
one concerning filling up the blank pages of the law. The question is a
loaded one.       I regret my embarrassment, but I have to say, with
humble apologies to the Committee though, that there should not be
any amendment on the lines suggested by the committee in a hurry,
only for the reason that the Legislature/Parliament suffers from
Constitutional impatience.       One fault leads to the next.      Serious
thought should be bestowed on the question of constitutional
amendments in relation to 'Language', especially when legislation is not
a pastoral letter; and, further, English language is an enticing treasure.
The situation in 1949 is different from that in 2007.     Technology has
changed our brains, in this clicking, bleeping, flashing world of screens.
These are days of E-learning, and globalization. Even Russia and
China have changed their views on language. There is change on all
fronts - social, political, educational, regional etc.     India does not
consist only of Hindi-speaking areas. The Constitutional corridor is not
the preserve of Hindi. Regional languages have grown; in fact, over-
grown. Here, States reorganization based on language, has played a
great part, and that, against the Hindi language. The situation of the
Constitutional Court delivering their judgments in Hindi is unimaginable,
in these days. Anybody concerned with the administration of justice by
High Courts and the Supreme Curt, would be prepared, with little
hesitation, to release his opposition to the suggestion. When we take
note of the constitution, organization, and method of appointment of
judges, of the High Courts and the Supreme Court, we may have no
difficulty to perceive the utter impossibility of judges delivering
judgments in Hindi, especially judges with honorable ignorance of the
language.      Let not the inhabitants of the Constitutional Courts be
disturbed.
At the end of the day, I could formulate only one conclusion; and
that is, it is not yet time to act on the lines of the recommendation of the
Committee of Parliament on Official Language, in regard to "Language",
especially
Article 348
of the Constitution.          The period of 15 years
stipulated in
Article 343
of the Constitution can never be adhered to in
the changed situation, making it impossible for a long time from now to
adhere to the said stipulation.          Times have changed against the
stipulation. Situation has not improved in favour of the stipulation. It
73
remains Joseph Heller's Catch-22.         The soft sobs of forgotten
statesmen/politicians on the question of language will not abate for a
long time to come.
It is not virtuous to be obstinate."
The Bar Council of Tamilnadu And Puducherry

Resolution No.189 of 2007 dated 24.11.2007

       "It is unanimously resolved to strongly oppose the
recommendations of the Committee of Parliament ton Official Language
to amend the
Art. 348
of Constitution of India as appeared at Page
No.112 in Madras Law Journal (2007) Part 5. The proposal for
delivering the Judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts in
Hindi will certainly jeopardise the rights of the people, various
Government Officers and Members of Bar and Bench in the non-Hindi
speaking areas. This move may be dropped immediately and the
existing system of delivering judgments in English should continue. It is
further resolved to send a detailed memorandum to the Chairman, Law
Commission, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India with a
copy to Bar Council of India and all State Bar Councils."
"With reference to the appeal of the Law Commission to the Bar
regarding amendment of
Art. 348 (d)
and (e) of the Constitution of
India, we have already forwarded to you a copy of the unanimous
resolution passed by us in respect of the above subject.
In continuation of the same, we are hereby furnishing a
Memorandum on the subject for your perusal and consideration:-
(a)   The proposed amendment to the Constitution suggested by
           the Committee of Parliament on Official Languages is not
           accepted by the Bar Council of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry.
(b)   The proposed amendment will impose an unknown
           language on a large section of Indian population much
           against their wish.
74
(c)   This will lead a lot of practical problems in concluding cases
           in the High Courts as most the Judges, Advocates and
           almost all the litigant public are not conversant with Hindi
           language.
(d)   Enforcing propagation of an unknown language on a large
           section of the population may disturb the common fabric of
           India and may result in social disturbances as well as law
           and order problems.
In the circumstances, we, the Bar Council of Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry strongly oppose any move to replace English with Hindi
language in High Courts and Supreme Court."
Though opinions have been sought from Dr. Justice A.S. Anand,
Justice R.C. Lahoti, Justice S.N. Variava, Justice Ruma Pal, Shri Arun
Jaitley, Shri K. Parasaran, Shri Soli Sorabjee and Shri Rajiv Dhawan,
there was no response.     Likewise, there was no response from the
Supreme Court Bar Association, Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association, Karnataka High Court Advocates' Association, and the
High Court Association of Madras, Mumbai, Calcutta, New Delhi,
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Patna, Punjab and
Haryana, Rajasthan.
Conclusion


     I have given my anxious and thoughtful consideration to the
question at issue. All the retired Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court
and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and Judges of High Court and
75
lawyers are of the uniform view that the Constitution should not be
amended to enable the Legislative Department to undertake original
drafting in Hindi and that the proposal was stoutly opposed.           The
learned Judges are also of the opinion that since the Judges of the
Supreme Court and High Courts are drawn from all over India, and they
are not all conversant with Hindi, they should not be asked to deliver
their judgments in Hindi. Furthermore, the unity and integrity of the
country is bound to be affected by the linguistic chauvinists and that the
switch over from English to Hindi in the Supreme Court and High
Courts will create political and legal unrest through out the country,
which is an avoidable exercise.
Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer was of the opinion that he is all for Hindi
as a personal preference, but all against Hindi by compulsion,
especially of judgments of the Supreme Court of India.             He also
suggested giving Hindi a high place in national expression and full
facility in instant translation of every representation people wish to
make to the higher courts as an integral part of free legal aid.
Justice B.N. Srikrishna is of the considered view that the proposal
to require the Supreme Court and the High Courts to deliver judgments
in Hindi would definitely result in chaos and will affect the administration
of justice.
The former Chief Justice of India Mr. Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah
says that one must acknowledge that Hindi as our national language
76
must assert its rightful place in all areas of our national life and higher
judiciary should be no exception.          However, he said that the
parliamentary views should be respected and a beginning has to be
made though circumspection requires that we should hasten slowly.
Justice Jagannatha Shetty, former Judge of the Supreme Court is
of the opinion that the Supreme Court and High Courts cannot be
asked to start delivering their judgments and decrees in Hindi and that
the same is a very very contentious issue which may have far reaching
consequences.
Mr. Justice A.M. Ahmadi, former Chief Justice of India is of the
opinion that it may not be advisable to ask the Supreme Court and High
Courts to switch to Hindi. He was of the opinion that the base to take
the hop is not available and it would be wise to leave the matter of
introduction of Hindi in the State High Court to the judgment of the
Governor of the State under
Article 348(2)
of the Constitution and that
he would be the best judge to decide if the time was ripe to take the
step in that direction.
Justice Santosh Hegde, former Judge, Supreme Court of India is
of the view that this move is neither politically wise nor constitutionally
correct, and hence he strongly opposed this move.
Mr. Justice S.S.M. Quadri, former Judge, Supreme Court of India,
is of the opinion that the conditions in our country are not ripe to make
77
such amendment and to issue directions requiring the High Courts and
Supreme Court to start delivery of judgments and orders in Hindi and,
therefore, for these and many other reasons switching over to dictating
judgments, orders, decrees, etc. in Hindi will be entirely an exercise in
futility.
Mr. Justice K.S. Paripoornan, former Judge, Supreme Court, has
also expressed his opinion against the proposal to amend
Article 348
of
the Constitution, regard being had to the world events since 1949 and
the totality of circumstances by which we have accepted, adopted and
been substantially benefited by the English language.
Mr. K.K. Venugopal, Senior Advocate, has expressed the view
that    any   attempt   to   implement   the   recommendations   of   the
Parliamentary Committee would bring about divisiveness among, and
confrontation between the people of India.
Only three High Court Advocates' Associations have responded
to our request to offer their opinion. The Andhra Pradesh Advocates'
Association, Kerala High Court Advocates' Association and Pondicherry
Advocates' Association have passed resolution opposing the proposal.
Language is a highly emotional issue for the citizens of any
nation. It has a great unifying force and is a powerful instrument for
national integration. No language should be thrust on any section of
the people against their will since it is likely to become counter-
productive.
78
It is not merely a vehicle of thought and expression, but for
Judges at the higher level, it is an integral part of their decision-making
process. Judges have to hear and understand the submissions of both
the sides, apply the law to adjust equities. Arguments are generally
made in higher courts in English and the basic literature under the
Indian system is primarily based on English and American text books
and case laws. Thus, Judges at the higher level should be left free to
evolve their own pattern of delivering judgments.
It is particularly important to note that in view of the national
transfer policy in respect of the High Court Judges, if any such Judge is
compelled to deliver judgments in a language with which he is not well-
versed, it might become extremely difficult for him to work judicially. On
transfer from one part of the country to another, a High Court Judge is
not expected to learn a new language at his age and to apply the same
in delivering judgments.
At any rate no language should be thrust upon the Judges of the
higher judiciary and they should be left free to deliver their judgments in
the language they prefer. It is important to remember that every citizen,
every Court has the right to understand the law laid down finally by the
Apex Court and at present one should appreciate that such a language
is only English.
The use of English language also facilitates the movement of
lawyers from High Courts to the Apex Court since they are not
confronted with any linguistic problems and English remains the
language at both the levels. Any survey of the society in general or its
cross-sections will clearly substantiate the above proposition which
79
does not admit of much debate, particularly in the present political,
social and economic scenario.
Paragraph 23. 10 of HM Seervai's Constitutional Law of India, 1996 Ed, Vol.
III, page 2585, runs as follows ;
"23.10. If the unity of the judicial administration, and of the
      Bench and the Bar is to be preserved. It is to be hoped that such
      permission will not be given. Entry 78, List I expressly confers on
      Parliament the power to legislate In respect of persons entitled to
      practise before the High Courts.
The Advocates Act, 1961
has
      created a unified autonomous Bar of India. Today the legal
      profession is one united profession entitled to practise throughout
      India. If the language of different High Courts is to be different,
      the right to practise throughout India becomes illusory in practise
      and each High Court will be isolated by the barrier of its own
      language. It will also be deprived of the assistance to be derived
      from judgments of other Courts, and the uniform interpretation of
      Central laws, so desirable in judicial administration, would be
      unattainable. The work of the Supreme Court and the recruitment
      of Judges to the Supreme Court must greatly suffer, for Judges of
      the Supreme Court could not be recruited from High Courts
      where the language was different from that spoken in the
      Supreme Court. The unifying influence of a Supreme Court on
      judicial administration would be seriously impaired, if not
      destroyed, and the quality of its Judges and of its judgments must
      necessarily suffer."
It may, however, be admitted that in so far as legislative drafting
is concerned, every legislation although authoritatively enacted in
English may have a Hindi authoritative translation along with the same
at the central level. Same analogy may be applied even in respect of
80
executive actions at the central level, but, as submitted above, the
higher judiciary should not be subjected to any kind of even persuasive
change in the present societal context.
(Dr. Justice AR. Lakshmanan)
                                Chairman



     (Prof. Dr. Tahir Mahmood)            (Dr.Brahm A.Agrawal)

           Member                         Member-Secretary



     Dated: 14.12.2008
81
