Title: Search
Court: High Court (Appellete Side)
Date: 6 of 2017
Citation: Citation not found
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/61089113/

[Cites
28
, Cited by
11
]
Calcutta High Court (Appellete Side)
Waish Ahmed vs The State Of West Bengal on 18 January, 2019
Author:
Asha Arora
Bench:
Asha Arora
1


                 In the High Court at Calcutta
                Criminal Revisional Jurisdiction

Present:
The Hon'ble Justice Asha Arora
                      C.R.R 382 of 2018

                               Waish Ahmed
                                    ........Petitioner
                           Versus
                      The State of West Bengal
                                     ......... Respondent


For the Petitioners      : Mr. Pawan Kumar Gupta, advocate
                           Mr. Ayan Bhattacharya, advocate
                           Ms. Sofia Nesar, advocate
                           Mr. Santanu Seth, advocate

For the State            : Mr. Arun Kumar Maity, advocate
                           Mr. Sanjoy Bardhan, advocate

Hearing concluded on     : 10/01/2019



Judgment on              : 18th January, 2019.



 Asha Arora, J. :
By the instant application petitioner has assailed the order
dated 2/1/2018 passed by the learned Judge, Special Court
under
NDPS Act
Howrah in T.R No. 6 of 2017 arising out of
Nischinda P.S. case No. 9 of 2017 dated 23/4/2017 under
section   21(c)
/
22(c)
/
23
/
29
of       the   NDPS   Act   whereby   the
2
petitioner's application for   return of the seized vehicle (truck)
bearing No. UP 32 HN 3425 was rejected.
The brief facts leading to the present application are as
follows:
On 22/4/2017 S.I Sudipta Panigrahi of Detective Department,
Howrah Police Commissionerate lodged a suo moto           complaint
stating that in course of raid at zero point NH2 Toll Free Road,
near Bamundanga Math, P.S. Nischinda, Howrah, he along with
force arrested three accused persons from whose possession
19,995 bottles of phensedyl cough linctus in a truck bearing No.
UP 32 HN 3425 were seized. Preliminary charge-sheet             was
submitted against the aforesaid three accused persons namely,
Gopal Sadhu, Sankar Debnath and Debu Kundu under
section
21(c)
/
22(c)
/
23
/
29
of NDPS Act while the driver of the seized
truck could not be traced.       During further investigation, on
27/11/2017 Waish Ahmed, the petitioner herein went to the D.D.
office and identified himself as the owner of the seized vehicle and
produced documents in support of his ownership which were
seized from his possession.     He also disclosed the name and
address of his driver who was driving the vehicle at the relevant
time. In course of investigation it transpired that the petitioner is
the owner of the transport company named PBH Kolkata
Transport Carrier and he intentionally suppressed this fact from
the police. Further investigation culminated in the submission of
supplementary charge-sheet under
section 21(c)
/
22(c)
/
23
/
29
of
3
the
NDPS Act
against the absconding driver of the seized truck
and the owner who is the petitioner herein.
On 11/8/2017 the petitioner herein filed an application
before the learned Judge Special Court under
NDPS Act
Howrah
for return of the seized truck bearing no. UP32 HN3425 as its
registered owner.    It is the contention of the petitioner that he
had no knowledge about the user of the truck for carrying or
transporting contraband articles. The learned Judge rejected the
application for return of the seized truck on the ground that the
Investigating Officer in his report has not stated anything with
regard to the claim of the petitioner that as the owner of the
truck   he   had     no   knowledge     or   connivance   regarding
transportation of the seized 19,995 bottles of phensedyl cough
linctus in his truck and that the owner of the vehicle was
vicariously liable for the act done by his agent. Further, in view
of the provision of
section 60(3)
of the NDPS Act the vehicle is
liable to confiscation.   Aggrieved by the impugned order the
petitioner has approached this Court.
Petitioner has contended in his application that he is
running a transport business at Lucknow and is the owner of
several trucks.    He is the registered owner of the seized truck
which was sent to a transport agency for supply of plywood from
a company in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh to a company in Kolkata.
The aforesaid truck left Kanpur on 17/4/2017 but did not reach
its destination in West Bengal on 19/4/2017. Petitioner came to
know that the truck was seized in connection with the above
4
mentioned case under the
NDPS Act
. According to the petitioner,
his vehicle was misused by unknown persons during the transit.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as the
registered owner of the seized vehicle the petitioner should be
given interim custody of the same during the pendency of the
trial. Referring to
section 60
and
63
of the NDPS Act it is argued
that the seized vehicle carrying contraband articles is liable to
confiscation on conclusion of the trial in accordance with the
procedure prescribed under the Act. It is contended that the
petitioner had no knowledge that the vehicle was carrying
contraband articles.     Supplementary charge-sheet was filed
against the petitioner during the pendency of this application.
Learned counsel submits that the anticipatory bail prayer of the
petitioner was allowed by the High Court. It is further canvassed
that the seized vehicle will be damaged and reduced to scrap
material if kept indefinitely in the open at the police station till
the conclusion of trial. So interim custody of the seized vehicle
may be given to the petitioner under the provisions of section 451
or
section 457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. To buttress his
argument learned counsel for the petitioner        relied upon the
decisions reported in 2002 (10) Supreme Court Cases 283 in
the case of
Sundarbhai Ambalal Desai versus State of Gujarat
,
2006(2) CHN 198 in
Tridip Mitra versus State of West Bengal
,
2011(2) Mh L.J 903 in
Anil Navnath Marathe versus State of
Maharashtra
and 2016(1) Cal Cri LR 142 in
Ainul Haque
versus State of West Bengal and another
.
5
Opposing the application under consideration, learned
counsel for the State countered that in view of
section 35
of the
NDPS Act read with
section 54
of the Act there is a presumption
that the petitioner who is the owner of the seized truck cum
transporter had knowledge that the said vehicle was carrying
contraband articles.    It is argued that in course of further
investigation it transpired that the petitioner was running
transport business and there was deliberate suppression of the
aforesaid fact by the petitioner against whom supplementary
charge-sheet has been submitted
u/s 21(c)
/
22(c)
/
23
/
29
of the
NDPS Act.
There is no specific provision in the
NDPS Act
for return of
the seized article, vehicle or conveyance during inquiry or trial of
the offences under this Act.
Section 60
sub-section (3) of the
NDPS Act
casts an obligation on the Court to confiscate the
animal or conveyance used for carrying narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance which reads as follows:
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and
conveyances to confiscation.--
(1)..........................................................................................
(2)..........................................................................................
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled substance], or
any article liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of
the animal or conveyance proves that it was so used without
6
the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent,
if any, and the person-in-charge of the animal or conveyance
and that each of them had taken all reasonable precautions
against such use."
It will also be beneficial to refer to
section 63
of the NDPS Act
which is as follows:
"63. Procedure in making confiscations.--(1) In the trial of
offences under this Act, whether the accused is convicted or
acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether any
article or thing seized under this Act is liable to confiscation
under
section 60
or
section 61
or
section 62
and, if it
decides that the article is so liable, it may order confiscation
accordingly.
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act
appears to be liable to confiscation under
section 60
or
section 61
or
section 62
, but the person who committed the
offence in connection therewith is not known or cannot be
found, the court may inquire into and decide such liability,
and may order confiscation accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or
thing shall be made until the expiry of one month from the
date of seizure, or without hearing any person who may
claim any right thereto and the evidence, if any, which he
produces in respect of his claim:
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other
than a narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, [controlled
7
substance,] the opium poppy, coca plant or cannabis plant is
liable to speedy and natural decay, or if the court is of
opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of its owner, it
may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of
this sub-section shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply
to the net proceeds of the sale."
It is evident from the aforesaid provisions that the article or
conveyance/vehicle seized under the
NDPS Act
is liable to
confiscation on conclusion of trial in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in
section 63
of the Act unless the owner of
the conveyance or vehicle proves that it was so used for carrying
any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or any article liable
to confiscation under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section
60
of the Act without his knowledge or connivance and that he
had taken all reasonable precautions against such use of the
seized vehicle. It is clear that there is no provision in the
NDPS
Act
for grant of interim custody of the seized vehicle to its owner
during the pendency of the trial. However, learned counsel for
the State could not refer to any provision under the Act which
specifically prohibits the grant of interim custody of the seized
vehicle to its owner pending final disposal of the case.
In
Tridip
Mitra versus State of West Bengal
reported in 2006(2) CHN
198 the learned Single Judge of this Court held that during
pendency of the trial the learned Judge of the Special Court
under the
NDPS Act
has jurisdiction under section 451 and
section 457
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to pass necessary
order in accordance with law regarding prayer for release of the
8
seized vehicle as an interim custody. The relevant paragraphs 12
and 16 of the aforesaid judgement read as follows:
"12.
In
B.S. Rawant vs. Shaikh Abdul Karim
(supra), the
Bombay High Court passed order relating to interim custody
of property seized in
NDPS Act
and observed that operation
of sections 451 and/or 457(1) of the Code is not excluded by
any provision of the
NDPS Act
. The Bombay High Court held
that, the provisions of
section 41
/
42
/
43
/
51
/
53
/
55
/
60
/
63
of
the NDPS Act do not exclude the operation of section 451 or
section 457(1) of the Code. The High Court observed that,
"Under
sections 60
and
63
such an article or vehicle used for
the purpose of commission of an offence under this Act, is
liable for confiscation.   In other words, the article or the
vehicle must be available at the time of trial or at the end of
the trial for the purpose of confiscation. It does not mean
that the vehicle shall always remain at the concerned police
station pending the trial...........Under
section 457(1)
of the
Code of Criminal Procedure the learned Magistrate has a
discretion to pass an order granting interim custody or to
decline. But, in either case, the discretion has to be
exercised judicially, and not in a cavalier fashion."
Paragraph 16 of the Judgement is quoted herein below:
"16. The decision of the Supreme Court in Sunderbhai
Ambalal Desai and decision of the Bombay High Court
mentioned above clearly reveal that, provisions of
sections
41
,
42
,
43
,
51
,
53
,
55
,
60
and
63
of the NDPS Act do not
exclude   operation of sections 451 and 457(1) of the Code.
9
The decision of this Court in
Asis Bose vs. State of West
Bengal
(
supra) and Sri Jiban Aich vs. State of West Bengal
(supra) concerning
Forest Act
reveal that vehicle used in
transporting forest produce should not be released normally
but can be released imposing certain conditions which will
have deterrent effect on the owner and putting different
conditions     including   condition       that   the    said   vehicle
henceforth shall not be used in indulging similar type of
offence in future.
Besides that, the general provision
laid
down by
the Supreme Court in
Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai
(supra) cannot be ignored as it was observed that the vehicles
should not be kept in Court compound or thana compound
for indefinite period till the conclusion of trial to allow the
vehicle to lose its value open to sky, sun and rain.                 The
Supreme Court and this Court                clearly   laid down      the
consideration of the Court is production of the vehicle at the
time of trial and also during confiscation proceeding if any
confiscation proceeding is started at all and for securing that
the said vehicle is not used in similar type of offence in
future.   If Government fiscal policy of fetching money by
auction   of    vehicles   after       confiscation     proceeding    is
considered then also it is desirable that the vehicles should
be in good condition.      A vehicle if kept at thana or Court
compound open to sky for indefinite period would become
scrap material within a year or two for want of maintenance.
A scrap material cannot fetch such money which a good
conditioned vehicle would fetch."
10
It is obvious that the considerations would be the production
of the seized vehicle during the trial and also during the
confiscation proceeding if any such proceeding is initiated and for
securing that the vehicle in question is not used for commission
of any such offence in future. For the reasons aforestated and in
view of the decisions hereinabove referred, I am of the opinion
that the interim custody of the seized truck no. UP32 HN 3425
may be given to its registered owner/petitioner on proper
verification and identification subject to the following conditions:
(1) The petitioner shall furnish bank guarantee of rupees
     twenty five lacs before the trial court.
(2) The petitioner shall produce the seized vehicle before the
     trial Court as and when called for during the trial and also
     during the confiscation proceeding if any such proceeding is
     initiated.
(3) To facilitate production of the seized vehicle before the trial
     Court as and when called for, the seized vehicle shall not
     leave the district of Howrah till the conclusion of trial and
     the confiscation proceeding, if any such proceeding is
     initiated, without prior permission of the trial court.
(4) The petitioner shall not alienate the seized vehicle or
     change its nature and character during the pendency of the
     case.
(5) The seized vehicle shall not be used for the commission of
     any offence.
11
The impugned order is accordingly set aside and the
application being CRR 382 of 2018 is thus disposed of.
Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be
given to the applicant upon compliance of requisite formalities.
(Asha Arora, J.)
