Title: Search
Court: High Courts, viz., Delhi and Gujarat has considered identical issues
Date: Unknown Date
Citation: SCC 494
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/81933278/

[Cites
41
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Vasapu L. Kumar, S/O Lakshmana ... vs Ongc Field Operators Union, Regd. ... on 5 January, 2018
Author:
M. Ganga Rao
Bench:
M. Ganga Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN and THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. GANGA RAO                    

Writ Appeal Nos.285 of 2017 AND BATCH    

05-01-2018 

Vasapu L. Kumar, S/o Lakshmana Swamy,aged 31 years, R/o H.No.2-109, Main Road,Penumarthi, Kakinada, East Godavari District A      

ONGC Field Operators Union, Regd. No.G.3048/3.C.1,Zone-II, Rajahmundry Asset; and others .. Respondents   

Counsel for the appellant in all W.A.s :  Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao,
 Except W.A.No. 285 of 2017 for Mr. K. Venkata Rao 
 Counsel for Appellant in W.A.No 285 of 2017 : Mr.K.R.K.V.Prasad

Counsel for the respondents:  Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, 
                                   Mr. Vedula Venkataramana 
                                   Mr. A. Satyaprasad
                                                
Counsel for petitioners in W.Ps.: Mr. Dasari S.V.V.S.V.Prasad
                                  Mr. Rama Mohan Palanki  

Counsel for respondent in W.Ps. :  Mr. K. Venkata Rao        

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1. (2015) 6 SCC 494 
2. AIR 2008 SC 1867 
3. 2015) 2 SCC 317 
4. (2006) 4 SCC 1
5. (2009) 8 SCC 556 
6. (2013) 14 SCC 65 
7. Judgment dt. 12.10.2015 in L.P.A.654/2010
8. L.P.A.No.797/2013 and batch dt.29.04.2015 
9. Order dt.20.11.2015 in W.A.Nos.229/2010 & batch 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. GANGA RAO        

Writ Appeal Nos.285, 287, 302, 303, 305, 306, 328,
373, 374, 375, 376, 378, 381, 382, 383, 384, 390, 391,
392, 405, 456, 513, 548, 551 and 558 of 2017
and 
Writ Petition Nos.21077 of 2016, 8726, 36866 and 36884 of 2017

COMMON JUDGMENT:
(V. Ramasubramanian, J)        

        Aggrieved by a common order passed by the learned Judge  
directing the management of ONGC to regularize the services of
persons, who had completed 240 days of service in a period of 12
months, after their appointments on tenure basis in the year 2008,
together with notional benefits, the management of ONGC has come  
up with 24 writ appeals. The 25th writ appeal (W.A.No.285/2017) is
filed by an individual, who applied for appointment to a post in
ONGC, pursuant to the recruitment notification issued in September,
2014. His dream is that if hundreds of workers are deprived of the
benefit of regularization, he will get appointment. Apart from these
25 writ appeals, there are 4 writ petitions, which were left out of the
batch of cases disposed of by the learned Judge and hence they are
also tagged along with the writ appeals.
2. Heard Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellant/management in 24 writ appeals Mr.
K.R.K.V. Prasad, learned Counsel appearing for the appellant in one
writ appeal and Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. 
Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned Senior Counsel and Mr. A.   
Satyaprasad, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
respondents. We have also heard Mr. Dasari S.V.V.S.V. Prasad and  
Mr. Rama Mohan Palanki, learned counsel appearing for the 
petitioners in the writ petitions.
3. The respondents in the writ appeals, filed by the
management, were originally engaged as Field Operators through 
private contractors on contract basis from the year 1994/1995 or so.
Raising certain demands on behalf of these contract labourers, the
ONGC Contract Workers Union served a strike notice on 06-11- 
1996. Subsequently, three more strike notices were issued on
16-07-1997, 03-10-1997 and 20-10-1997, demanding the  
recognition of the contract workers as the employees of the ONGC.
4. The strike commenced on 04-11-1997 and continued up to  
28-11-1997, leading to a meeting being organised between the
representatives of the management, office bearers of their union and
also the Local Member of Parliament and the local Member of
Legislative Assembly. In the meeting held on 11-10-1997, an
understanding was reached between the management and the trade   
union, to organise these workers into Cooperative Societies and to
engage their services through these Cooperative Societies. It was
also agreed that the Cooperative Societies so formed will enter into
agreements with the management under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947
and that the agreement so reached will be operative from
01-01-1998 for a period of 5 years.
5. Immediately, after the expiry of the initial period of 5 years,
another meeting was held on 12-01-2003 between the 
representatives of the management and the representatives of the
Cooperative Societies, for chalking out the future course. It was
agreed in the said meeting that the existing contracts with some of
those Cooperative Societies will stand terminated with effect from
01-01-2003 and that fresh contracts will be entered into between the
societies and the ONGC for a period of 5 years with effect from 01-
01-2003. It is was further agreed in the said meeting that the
members of the Cooperative Societies, who were academically/ 
technically qualified in the areas of their assignments (I.T.I.,
Diploma, Competency Certificate, Certificate in Fire Fighting,
Degree, Post Graduation etc., from recognized Universities/
Institutions) may be taken up for consideration from existing semi-
skilled to skilled categories. It was also agreed that ONGC will create
and fill up 60 posts to meet operational requirements and to start the
process of recruitment immediately. The process of recruitment in
the second phase was agreed to be initiated in January, 2004 and it
was agreed that ONGC will make efforts to fill up 60 posts per year
totaling to 300 posts in a period of 5 years. ONGC also agreed that
the members of the societies, who were found suitable for identified
posts as per ONGC Modified Recruitment and Promotion Rules,   
1980 and registered with Employment Exchange will be considered  
for appointments by granting age relaxation wherever required.
6. Pursuant to the agreement so reached on 20-01-2003, the
management appears to have obtained details of workers and also 
sent proposals for creation of 60 posts to be filled up in the first
phase. It is not known as to whether the promise to absorb 300
persons over a period of 5 years was fulfilled or not.
7. However, history repeated itself, when the term of 5 years
agreed under the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) dated 20-    
01-2003 was about to come to an end, with the union serving a
strike notice on 12-11-2007. The Assistant Commissioner (Labour),
Vijayawada initiated conciliation proceedings and the proceedings
continued before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central),
Hyderabad on 08-01-2008.  In the conciliation proceedings held on
08-01-2008, the management agreed to provide term based  
employment to those society workers, who were technically 
qualified, subject to verification of certificates pertaining to fire
fighting, paramedical, heavy vehicle driving licence, Telecom
Competency Certificate, Degrees and Diplomas etc. The 
management also agreed that those society workers, who did not 
possess technical qualifications will be taken for term based
employment upon their acquiring technical qualifications within 3
years and that till then they would continue as society workers.
Society workers not falling under the aforesaid two categories, were
agreed to be continued on contract basis for a period of 5 years with
effect from 09-01-2008.
8. It appears that after the agreement reached in the course of
conciliation proceedings, the management conducted a written
examination followed by oral interview and medical examination. The
society workers, who came out successful, were issued with orders
of appointment dated 05-07-2008 as Field Operators on tenure basis
for 4 years. Upon the expiry of the first period of 4 years in 2012,
they were granted a second renewal for a further period of 4 years.
9. At this stage, the management issued a circular dated
01-09-2014 followed by a paper publication dated 05-09-2014
inviting applications for filling up the posts in A1, A2 and W1 levels
from the open market. Fearing a breach of the agreement, the
ONGC Field Operators Union and some of the workers employed   
on tenure basis, came up with a first batch of writ petitions seeking
regularization of their services and also challenging the notification
for recruitment from the open market. Thereafter, another set of writ
petitions came to be filed in the year 2015 and one writ petition
came to be filed in 2016 with similar prayers.
10. All the writ petitions were tagged together and heard by a
learned Judge of this Court. By a final order dated 30-12-2016, the
learned Judge allowed all the writ petitions with certain directions.
The operative portion of the order of the learned Judge in paragraph
147 of his judgment reads as follows:
Accordingly the writ petitions are allowed as
follows:
(a) Those of the writ petitioners (except those
mentioned in the para-142 above) who have been 
given term based appointments and who have  
completed 240 days in the period of 12 months after
their respective appointments on term basis in 2008
shall be regularized by the ONGC in the posts to
which are attached duties being performed by them
presently within two months from today;
(b)  They shall be granted notional benefits from the
date they complete 240 days of service within the 12
calendar months from their first term based
appointment in 2008 and also regular pay and
allowances.
(c) Till the petitioners services are regularized as
directed above, the ONGC shall not take up any
regular recruitment for the posts in A1, A2 and W1
levels including as per circular dated 01.09.2014
issued by it. No costs.
11. Aggrieved by the directions issued by the learned Judge,
the management has come up with the above writ appeals. A few  
individuals, who were denied relief by the learned Judge, have also
come up with writ appeals.  One person, who applied from the open
market in response to the recruitment notification, also came up with
a writ appeal. The writ appeals filed by the unsuccessful employees,
require consideration on a case to case basis and hence, they were
separated from the present batch.  As a consequence, the present
batch of cases is concerned only the claim for regularization and the
directions issued by the learned single Judge.
12. Before looking at the grounds of attack to the order of the
learned Judge, it will be useful to see how the learned Judge dealt
with the claim of the workmen for regularization of their services. To
begin with, the learned Judge took note of the historical
developments by splitting them into five different periods of time,
viz., (1) position prior to 1997, during which the respondents were
engaged through private contractors; (2) the period from 1997 to
2002 when the respondents were formed into cooperative societies
under the agreement dated 11.12.1997 and engaged through those  
cooperative societies; (3) the period between 2003 and 2008 when
the engagement of workers through cooperative societies was
ordered to continue with an additional undertaking on the part of the
management to create about 300 posts in a phased manner over a  
period of five years and to accommodate the workmen as against 
those posts; (4) the period between 2008 and 2012 when in
pursuance of an agreement reached before the Regional Labour 
Commissioner, the workers were given term based appointment  
directly by the management without any intermediary, for a period of
five years; and (5) the breach committed by the management 
towards the end of the year 2012, of the undertaking given before
the Regional Labour Commissioner on 08.01.2008.
13. After recording the historical facts, the learned Judge took
note of the contentions of both the parties and formulated the
following points for consideration:
(a)     Whether the contention of the respondents that the cases involve
disputed questions of fact and cannot be entertained under
Article
226
of the constitution of India is correct?
(b)     Whether the existence of a remedy of seeking a reference through
the ONGC Field Operator Union under
Section 10
of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 is, in the facts and circumstances of these case,
a bar for entertainment of these Writ Petitions by this Court?
(c)     Whether, in the facts and circumstances of these cases, it can be
said that the ONGC is guilty of unfair labour pactice as defined in
Section 2(ra)
r/w Item 10 of
Schedule V of the Act
?
(d)     Whether, on the facts of these case, the relief of regularization of
their services sought by the petitioners in these Writ Petitions can
be granted by this Court exercising power under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India?
(e)     Whether the decision in Umadevi (11 Supra) is a bar for grant of
any relief of regularization to the petitioners?
(f)     What is the relief to be granted?
14. On the 1st point arising for consideration, the learned
Single Judge held that there are neither any disputed questions of
fact nor any complex facts that could persuade the Court not to
entertain the writ petitions and that in view of the decision of the
Supreme Court in
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited v.
Petroleum Coal Labour Union
, a writ Court was entitled to deal
with the issue of unfair labour practice.
15. On point No.(b), the learned Single Judge held that the
availability of alternative remedy is not always a bar, but only a self
imposed restriction and that since the workmen have been employed 
for more than 20 years through different modes of engagement
designed by the management that may tantamount to unfair labour 
practice, the writ petitions cannot be thrown out on the ground of
availability of alternative remedy.
16. On point No.(c) the learned Judge held that the act of the
management in engaging the respondents first through private
contractors, then through cooperative societies and later on term
based appointments with a view to deprive them of the status and
privileges of a regular workmen, tantamounted to an unfair labour
practice as defined in
Section 2(ra)
r/w
Item No.10 of Schedule-V of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
. To come to the said conclusion,
the learned Judge relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Hindalco Industries Limited v. Association of Engineering
Workers
and
Sudershan Rajpoot v. Uttar Pradesh State Road  
Transport
corporation .
17. On points (d) (e) and (f), the learned Judge took note of
the reliance placed by the management on the decision of the
Supreme Court in
State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
and the decision
of the Supreme Court in
Maharashtra State Road Transport 
Corporation v. Casteribe Rajya Parivahan Karmachari
Sanghatan
, in which Uma Devi  was distinguished.
The learned
Judge also took note of the decision in
Nihal Singh v. State of
Punjab and others
, and concluded that the decision in Petroleum
Coal Labour Union pushed of the other decisions to the background.
Thereafter the learned Judge went on to point out that at least two
High Courts, viz., Delhi and Gujarat has considered identical issues
respectively in Krishan Gopal v. ONGC  and the Executive
Director/Basin Manager Oil and
Ntural Gas Corporation Ltd. v.
ONGC Employees Mazdoor Sabha
and held in favour of the   
workmen.
Therefore, the learned Judge thought fit not to follow the
decision of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in
M. Rajan
v. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
and eventually held that the
relief of regularization can be granted by the writ Court and that the
decision in Umadevi was not a bar for grant of regularization.
18. After holding so, the learned Judge segregated the cases
of a few individuals in para146 of his decision and held that except
those individuals everyone else was entitled to the reliefs that were
indicated in para-147 of his judgment. We have already extracted
para-147 earlier.
19. Assailing the judgment of the learned Judge, it is
contended by Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao, learned Senior Counsel  
appearing for the management
1.      That the learned Judge committed a serious error in framing
the first point for consideration, by mistaking an argument
advanced on behalf of the management;
2.      That the learned Judge overlooked the fact that having raised
an industrial dispute leading to the initiation of conciliation
proceedings, it was not open to the workers to invoke the writ
jurisdiction of this Court;
3.      That the learned Judge erred in holding that there were no
disputed questions of fact nor any complex facts, when the
very nature of the duties performed by the writ petitioners
were in dispute;
4.      That the question of unfair labour practice prohibited by the
Industrial Disputes Act
should normally be allowed to be
adjudicated only by the mechanism provided under the
Industrial Disputes Act
itself;
5.      That the probable delay on the part of an Industrial Tribunal/
Labour Court in adjudicating industrial disputes cannot be a
ground for directly invoking the writ jurisdiction of this Court;
6.      That the very finding of unfair labour practice recorded by the
learned Judge was contrary to facts, as the respondents are
receiving almost all benefits as the regular employees are in
receipt of;
7.      That even by the standards stipulated in the decision of the
Constitution Bench in Umadevi, a writ Court cannot direct
regularization of the services of workmen;
8.      That the inspiration drawn by the learned Judge from the
decision in Petroleum Coal Labour Union, is not correct in
view of the fact that
the said decision
of the Supreme Court
arose out of an adjudication by appropriate authorities under
the
Industrial Disputes Act
;
9.      That the direction issued by the learned Judge to regularize
the services of the respondents in the posts to which are
attached duties being performed by them presently is
meaningless and unsustainable; and
10.     That the prohibition order issued by the learned Judge not to
make appointments to posts in A1, A2 and W1 levels, went 
beyond the scope of the writ petition.
Contentions 1, 2 & 3:
20. The first contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the
management is that the first mistake committed by the learned
Judge was in the very framing of points (a) and (b) arising for
consideration. The second contention is that the workers, after
having raised an industrial dispute leading to the initiation of
conciliation proceedings, could not have invoked the writ jurisdiction
of this Court and that this objection of the management was
misunderstood by the learned Judge to be an argument revolving
around the existence of disputed questions of fact and the
availability of alternative remedy. The third contention is that the
question revolving around the nature of the duties performed, is
actually a question of fact.
21. We have carefully considered the above submissions.
22. It is conceded by Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao, learned Senior
Counsel for the management that there is no dispute at least with
respect to the following facts, which are borne out by the very
records produced by the appellant/management:
(a) The respondents were engaged through contractors even
prior to the year 1997 and these contract workers at Narsapur went
on a strike with effect from 04-11-1997 and also intensified their
strike with effect from 10-11-1997 and continued the strike up to
28-11-1997. The strike was actually a sequel to a strike notice
served by the ONGC Labour Contract Workers Union, Narsapur,  
on 06-11-1996 leading to the initiation of conciliation proceedings
and the reference of the matter to the Industrial Tribunal,
Visakhapatnam, by the Government of India for adjudication. In the
meantime, two other strike notices were served on 16-7-1997 and
03-10-1997 followed by the contract workers going on strike from
04-11-1997. One of the demands made by them was to recognize   
the contract workers as ONGC employees. The 2nd and 3rd strike  
notices led to a fresh conciliation before the Assistant Commissioner
of Labour, Visakhapatnam. But since the deadlock could not be
broken, a meeting between the high level officials of ONGC with the
office-bearers of the Union took place on 25-11-1997 in the
presence of the Member of Parliament representing Narsapur 
Constituency. On the basis of the assurance given at the meeting,
the workers withdrew their strike from 28-11-1997. In a 2nd meeting
held on 11-12-1997, a settlement was reached and the
understanding was reduced into writing. As per this understanding
signed by all parties, the workers were to form themselves into
Cooperative Societies and the work entrusted till then to the
contractors should be entrusted to the Cooperative Societies. What
was agreed to was to become operative from 01-01-1998 and the 
same was to remain in force for a period of five years. All these facts
are borne out by the Memorandum of Understanding dated  
11-12-1997, a copy of which is filed in the material papers by the
Management.
(b) In Annexure-I to the Memorandum of Understanding dated
11-12-1997, the terms and conditions of engagement of the workers
through Cooperative Societies were incorporated. These terms and
conditions included  (i) a revision of wage at the specified rate,
(ii) provision of kits and liveries like safety shoe, helmet etc.,
(iii) minimum food facilities along with dormitory accommodation,
wherever drill site accommodation is available, (iv) medical facilities
either through ESI or through Jan Arogya Insurance Policy,
(v) bonus as per the
Payment of Bonus Act
, (vi) coverage under the
Workmens Compensation Act, 1923
, (vii) PF at the stipulated rate
and (viii) Group Insurance coverage for every member of the
Cooperative Society for an amount of Rs.one lakh.
(c) Two clauses in Annexure-I to the Memorandum of
Understanding dated 11-12-1997 may be of importance. The first is
Clause 6 under which the question of payment of arrears was
referred to arbitration. We do not know the outcome of this
arbitration. The 2nd provision is Clause 9 which stipulated that in
case any vacancy arises in future in K.G. Project, Narsapur, the
members of the Cooperative Society will be considered subject to
fulfillment of current applicable R&P Regulations of ONGC.
(d) Under Clause 12 of the Annexure-I to the Memorandum of
Understanding dated 11-12-1997, it was agreed that the firemen on
deputation, will be considered by the Management for appropriate
posts, as and when they get qualified and undergo prescribed
training and get trade certificates at their own cost.
(e) The above Memorandum of Understanding dated 
11-12-1997 was to be in force for a period of five years from
01-01-1998.
(f) A few days before the expiry of the term of five years under
the Memorandum of Understanding dated 11-12-1997, the Contract  
Workers Union formed a Joint Action Committee and raised 
a demand through a notice dated 20-12-2002 for regularization/
absorption.
(g) Thereafter, discussions were held and the minutes of the
meeting held on 12-01-2003 were recorded with representatives of
both sides signing the same.
(h) The agreement reached in the meeting held on
12-01-2013, included  (i) an undertaking by the Management to
renew the contracts with the Cooperative Societies for a period of
five years from 01-01-2003, (ii) revision of wages, (iii) availability of
the services of the duty doctors at ONGC, for the contract workers,
(iv) the consideration of the cases of members of Cooperative
Societies who are technically/academically qualified in the areas of
their assignments, for conversion from semi-skilled to skilled
categories, (v) the creation and filling up of 60 posts in the first
phase to meet the operational requirements, (vi) the creation of
300 posts to be filled up at the rate of 60 posts per year and
(vii) the filling up of those posts with the members of the Societies
who are found suitable as per ONGC Modified Recruitment and 
Promotion Rules, 1980. These particulars could be culled out from
the minutes of the meeting dated 12-01-2003 filed in the material
papers by the Management.
(i) The aforesaid agreement reached on 12-01-2003 was also
to be in force for a period of five years viz., up to 31-12-2007.
(j) Therefore, a few days before the said tenure was to expire,
the Union again served a strike notice dated 12-12-2007.
(k) Immediately, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour,
Vijayawada, initiated conciliation proceedings.
(l) The discussions continued before the Regional Labour
Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad, on 08-01-2008.
(m) In the discussions held before the Regional Labour
Commissioner, it was suggested by the Conciliation Officer that
around 280 society workers who were technically qualified should be
considered for term based employment.
(n) In the discussions held before the Regional Labour
Commissioner, the Management agreed to give age relaxation and  
provide term based employment to the society workers who were 
qualified, subject to verification of certificates.
(o) Those workers having non-technical qualifications were
also agreed to be taken for a term based employment on condition
that they acquired the technical qualifications within three years.
(p) The remaining society workers were agreed to be engaged
on contract for a period of five years with effect from 09-01-2008.
(q) Interestingly, one of the agreements reached before the
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad, was that the 
workers who were members of the Cooperative Societies, will not
initiate any proceedings before any Forum in respect of any issues
directly or indirectly related with the subject matter of the agreement,
during the period of five years of the validity of the contract.
(r) Pursuant to the agreement reached before the Regional
Labour Commissioner on 08-01-2008, the Management appears to    
have conducted a written examination followed by oral interview, not
only for 280 society workers who were technically qualified and
whose cases were agreed to be considered for a term based 
employment, but also for the candidates from the open market.
Candidates who were successful were engaged as Field Operators  
for a period of four years on tenure basis.
(s) On the expiry of the period of four years, a similar process
of short listing in the form of written examination, oral interview and
medical examination was held and the candidates were appointed 
for a further period of four years with effect from 2012.
(t) It is not known whether the original undertaking given by
the Management for the creation of 300 posts and the filling up of
the same at the rate of 60 posts per year, was ever fulfilled by the
Management.
(u) But by a Circular dated 01-9-2014 and an advertisement
issued in the Newspapers on 05-9-2014, the Management sought to  
fill up posts in A1, A2 and W1 levels, triggering the litigation on hand.
23. Since all the facts that we have extracted in the preceding
paragraph are borne out by the copies of documents filed by the
Management themselves in the material papers, it was virtually
conceded by Mr. B.Adinarayana Rao, learned Senior Counsel  
appearing for the appellant/Management, that there was no dispute
in this batch of cases on facts. On the other hand, his contention
was that the learned single Judge misunderstood the nature of his
objections to the maintainability of the writ petitions as one revolving
around disputed questions of fact or complicated questions of fact.
The learned Senior Counsel admitted that there were no disputed
questions of fact and that it was not his contention that the writ
petitions are not maintainable on account of the existence of
disputed questions of fact.
24. The contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the
Management is that what was in dispute was jurisdictional facts
which would determine the maintainability of the writ petition.
According to the learned Senior Counsel, the Union as well as the
respondents were seeking regularization of the services of the
workers in the posts to which the duties performed by them were
attached. But there was nothing on record to show what was the
nature of the duties performed by these respondents. Hence, his
contention is that the question as to what kind of duties the
respondents were called upon to perform and the question as to
what type of posts were available in the organization for the
performance of these duties, became questions of fact that could not
be gone into in a writ petition, but could be conveniently dealt with
only by the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal. It was this contention
raised by him, that according to the learned Senior Counsel, was not
properly understood and appreciated by the learned Judge.
25. Let us assume for a moment that the true nature and spirit
of the contentions raised by the Management were not looked at
from the proper perspective by the learned Judge. Even then we do
not think that a different conclusion could have been reached by the
learned Judge.
26. The question as to the nature of the duties performed by
the respondents and the question as to the existence of posts to
which such duties are assigned in the organization, are all questions
that may be relevant, from the point of view of service jurisprudence.
These questions have no relevance to industrial or labour law
jurisprudence. Unfortunately, the dichotomy between service law
and labour law is lost sight of many a time and the principles
applicable in one branch are applied wrongly in the other.
27. Two expressions are of significance in service law. They
are  (i) civil posts and (ii) Civil Services of the State.
The appointment of a person to a civil post or in the Civil Services of
the State, brings within it, certain consequences, both for the holders
of these posts and for the Government. For instance, the
appointment of a person to a civil post or to the Civil Services of the
State, is one of status. It is protected by the provisions of the
Constitution, as the sovereign functions of the State are sought to be
performed through them. Therefore, for anything and everything they
have to look up to the appointing or controlling authority and their
services are to be available throughout. The service conditions of
persons appointed to civil posts or the Civil Services of the State are
governed by Statutory Rules issued in exercise of the power
conferred by the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution. There are
any number of Rules such as Fundamental Rules, General Rules,  
Special Rules, Leave Rules, Pension Rules etc., which apply to
these persons, whom we call in common parlance as Government   
Servants.
28. In contrast, the engagement of a person in an industry or
factory or other establishment is not one of status. It could be one of
contract, but the Management and the workmen are not entitled to
contract out of the Statutes such as Factories Act, Industrial
Disputes Act, ESI Act, EPF Act, Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, Payment of Wages Act, Payment of Gratuity Act, 
Maternity Benefit Act etc.
29. Another important distinguishing feature is that a person
who is engaged by an industrial establishment in a workman
category, acquires statutory protection only after his appointment.
In respect of some benefits, such as ESI, PF etc., he acquires
protection after being engaged for 60 days or more. He acquires
protection against termination, upon completion of 240 days of
service in a period of 12 calendar months. He acquires permanency,
in some States (and not in all States), upon completion of 480 days
of service within a period of 24 calendar months under certain
special enactments such as Tamil Nadu Industrial Employment  
(Conferment of Permanent Status on Casual Workmen) Act, 1981   
(such an enactment is not there in the State of Andhra Pradesh).
30. In other words, a workman category employee in
an industrial establishment acquires statutory rights, only after
appointment and that too after completing a particular period of
service. On the contrary, every person qualified for appointment to
a civil post or to the Civil Services of the State, acquires
a Constitutional right, even before appointment, for consideration of
his case for appointment in accordance with the Constitutional
scheme.
31. Under labour law, strike is a weapon in the hands of the
workmen and lockout is a weapon in the hands of the management,  
to strike a balance. But in service law, Government servants have no
right to strike work (Refer TK Rangarajan vs Government of Tamil
nadu (2003) 6 SCC 581). The fact that the decision in Umadevi lies
in the realm of service law and not labour law, was already indicated
by the Supreme Court in Para 17 of Ajaypal Singh Vs. Haryana 
Warehousing Corporation (2015) 6 SCC 321).
32. Therefore, we must always keep in mind the complete
distinction between persons whose cases are to be tested on the
principles of service jurisprudence and persons whose cases are to
be tested on labour law jurisprudence. We must also be cautious
while looking at the ratio decidendi of the decisions pronounced by
the Supreme Court, in these two different jurisdictions.
33. If we keep in mind the above distinction, it will be clear
that the questions relating to the nature of the duties performed by
the respondents and the posts to which these duties are attached,
may hardly be of significance, while dealing with a demand for
permanency made by a workman category employee in an industrial   
establishment. If it is so, then it follows that there were virtually no
jurisdictional facts as sought to be contended by the learned Senior
Counsel for the Management that required the workmen to have 
these questions adjudicated by the Labour Court.
34. Yes, it is true that the workmen as well as the Unions
repeatedly raised industrial disputes, participated in conciliation
proceedings, but came up before this Court invoking the writ
jurisdiction. But we do not think that there was anything wrong in the
respondents choosing to do so. On the other hand, we are of the
view that the Management left them with no alternative except to
invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court, in the peculiar
facts and circumstances. This can be seen from the number of times
the workmen raised an industrial dispute and how such industrial
disputes came to be resolved. At the cost of repetition, we shall
record the following:
(i) The story that unfolds in the batch of cases on hand has its
origin, to a strike notice served on the Management by the ONGC
Limited Contract Workers Union, Narsapur, on 06-11-1996. Since
the expression industrial dispute is defined in
Section 2(k)
of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, to mean any dispute between
employers and employees or employers and workmen or workmen     
and workmen, which is connected either with employment or with 
non employment or the terms of the employment or with the 
conditions of labour of any persons, the service of a strike notice by
the ONGC Limited Contract Workers Union was construed rightly as 
giving rise to an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Act. This
lead to the initiation of conciliation proceedings and upon failure of
the conciliation, the matter appears to have been referred to the
Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam, by the Ministry of Labour,
Government of India. These facts are stated in para 02 of the
Memorandum of Understanding reached between the Management      
and the Union in the presence of the local Member of Parliament on
11-12-1997.
(ii) Three more strike notices dated 16-7-1997, 03-10-1997
and 20-10-1997 were served by the Union, forcing the Assistant
Commissioner of Labour (Central), Visakhapatnam to initiate fresh
conciliation.
(iii) But both parties went out of the conciliation proceedings
and participated in a high level meeting held on 25-11-1997, at the
behest of the local Member of Parliament, as seen from para 03 of
the Memorandum of Understanding, dated 11-12-1997. The   
agreements reached between the parties on 11-12-1997 have  
already been discussed by us elsewhere and hence they are not 
repeated. But it is sufficient to point out that under the said
understanding, persons who were working through contractors, were
formed into Cooperative Societies and they were engaged through
these Cooperative Societies for a period of five years with effect
from 01-01-1998.
(iv) Towards the end of the five year period, a Joint Action
committee was formed by the Unions of Contract Workers and they  
served a notice on 20-12-2002. Immediately, a meeting was
organized on 12-01-2003 between the representatives of the
Management and the office-bearers of the Union, in the presence of
one Union Minister of State in the Government of India and another
Minister of the State Government. The Director (HR) of ONGC also
participated in the meeting convened in the presence of the Minister
of State for Consumer Affairs, Government of India and the Minister
for Energy, Coal and Boilers of the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
(v) In the agreement reached on 12-01-2003, the contracts of
the Cooperative Societies were agreed to be renewed for a further
period of five years. In para 6 of the said agreement, an
understanding was given by the Management to convert semi-skilled 
workmen to skilled category, if they were technically/ academically
qualified in the areas of their assignments. In para 8 of the said
Memorandum of Understanding dated 12-01-2003, 300 posts were   
agreed to be created over a period of five years, to be filled up at the
rate of 60 posts per year. Thus an industrial dispute was averted
probably before even the initiation of conciliation proceedings, in
January, 2003.
(vi) History repeated itself towards the end of the five year
term under the Memorandum of Understanding dated 12-01-2003,   
when a strike notice was served by the Union on 12-12-2007.
The Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Vijayawada, initiated
conciliation and they were taken over by the Regional Labour
Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad, on 08-01-2008. In the minutes
of the conciliation proceedings held on 08-01-2008 the Regional
Labour Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad, informed all parties that
around 280 society members who are technically qualified will be
considered for term based employment. With regard to relaxation in
physical requirements, the matter was taken up with the Chief
Labour Commissioner (Central), New Delhi. In fact, the proceedings
dated 08-01-2008 were signed even by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad, we do not know why the  
proceedings dated 08-01-2008 were not accorded the status of
a settlement under
Section 12(3)
of the Industrial Disputes Act,
despite the fact that the agreement was reached in the course of
conciliation proceedings. In the last paragraph of the minutes of the
conciliation proceedings dated 08-01-2008, the Unions as well as
the members of the Cooperative Societies agreed to withdraw the
cases from the Courts/Tribunals/Conciliation Officers/High Court and
to submit proof of withdrawal of cases to the Management, so as to
enable the Management to provide term based employment to the  
society workers. The Unions also agreed, as seen from the last
paragraph of the minutes of the conciliation proceedings dated
08-01-2008, not to facilitate any proceedings before any Forums in
respect of any issues which are directly or indirectly related with the
subject matters covered by the meeting, during the subsistence of
the fresh contracts for a period of five years.
(vii) But unfortunately, the members of the Societies were
subjected to a process of written examination followed by interview,
in the year 2008, to be given a term based appointment for four
years. Upon expiry of the period of four years, they were again
subjected to similar written examination followed by interview in the
year 2012, to be granted just an extension for another 4 years.
35. The above sequence of events which are not controverted
would demonstrate that every time the workmen served a strike
notice leading to the initiation of conciliation proceedings, some kind
of sops were given by the Management for a temporary period of
time to avert the danger of the drilling operations coming to
a grinding halt. But even the undertaking given by the Management
before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), does not
appear to have been fulfilled. The Management appears to have
gained an expertise in dousing the fire of labour unrest once in five
years, without actually conceding to the demand made by the
workers for more than 20 years from 1996. It is in these
circumstances that the workmen have taken recourse to the 
Constitutional remedy, since their right to life and livelihood
guaranteed under
Article 21
, has been made a mincemeat by the  
Management.
36. To be precise, whenever there was labour unrest and
an industrial dispute was raised, the same was tackled either
through political intervention or through the Conciliation Officer.
From the year 1997 till date, the industrial disputes were resolved
twice in the presence of the political leaders and twice in the
presence of the Conciliation Officers, without the original demand for
absorption and permanency not bearing fruit at all. Probably one
more round of industrial dispute and conciliation would have ensured
for the Management that those who staked a claim for regularization
in 1997 would have reached the age of superannuation. If this is
what the Management actually wanted, the workers were well within
their rights to come to this Court.
37. It is also not as though the respondents rushed to the
Court without first making a demand. The ONGC Field Operators 
Union sent a representation dated 09-6-2014 to the Management 
with copies to various Ministries and also to the Regional Labour
Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad. The Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) called for a report from the Management
and also advised the Labour Enforcement Officer of the locality to
make an inspection and submit a report. The Labour Enforcement 
Officer (Central), Rajahmundry, made an inspection and submitted
a report merely recording a portion of the past history. Unlike the
previous occasions, even the conciliation proceedings do not appear
to have been initiated. At least nothing is placed before us on record
to show the initiation of conciliation after the year 2014.
38. In the light of the above circumstances and the history of
this long drawn out litigation, we do not think that the workers had
a better alternative in proceeding through the industrial disputes
route.
39. Persons who were identically placed as the respondents
herein, but from the Karaikal region, adopted the industrial disputes
route even in the first instance and eventually got the award passed
by the Industrial Tribunal confirmed by the Supreme Court in its
decision in Petroleum Coal Labour Union.
40. It was not as though the Management was very charitable
to the workers who went through the industrial disputes route. After
fighting their case before the Industrial Tribunal, the Management
prosecuted the dispute before a learned single Judge of the High
Court, then a Division Bench of the High Court and thereafter before
the Supreme Court. Therefore, the contention that the respondents
ought to have pursued their remedy through the industrial disputes
route, is not borne out of the noble intentions.
41. In fact, persons in Management today do not seem to
have appreciated the fact that the failure of the respondents to take
the industrial disputes route has actually benefited the Management.
Since the High Court dealing with a writ petition under
Article 226
does not merely look at the plight of the individual workmen before
the Court but also takes into account a larger picture including the
stability of the Management, we are very conservative in granting
benefits to the workmen. This is why the learned Judge directed
absorption with effect from the date of completion of 240 days of
service after the appointment on term based employment in the year
2008. If the workmen had gone to the Labour Court (or if they had
been allowed by the Management to go before the Labour Court in
1997 or 2003), the workmen would have gained regularization from
a period much before 2008 or 2009, causing a severe dent in the
coffers of ONGC. In fact, the Management should thank the workers
for approaching this High Court and walking away with a limited
benefit than what they would have got through the Labour Court.
Hence, we are of the considered view that the first three contentions
do not merit acceptance.
CONTENTION No.4 -- UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICE:
42. The fourth contention of the learned Senior Counsel for
the appellant/Management is that the question of unfair labour
practice should normally be allowed to be adjudicated by the
mechanism provided under the
Industrial Disputes Act
and that
a Writ Court should not venture to adjudicate upon the same. But the
learned Judge recorded that the Management was guilty of unfair
labour practice within the meaning of
Section 2(ra)
of the Industrial
Disputes Act read with
Item No.10 of Schedule-V of the Industrial
Disputes Act
. This according to the learned Senior Counsel, was
an error of jurisdiction.
43. It is true that unfair labour practice within the meaning of
Section 2(ra)
read with
Schedule-V to the Industrial Disputes Act
is
prohibited by the
Industrial Disputes Act
. Employing workmen as
badlies, casuals or temporaries and to continue them as such for
years with the object of depriving them of the status and privilege of
permanent workmen is included in
Item No.10 of Schedule-V to the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
44.
Chapter VC of the Industrial Disputes Act
contains two
provisions, one in
Section 25T
prohibiting unfair labour practices and
another in
Section 25U
providing for penalty for committing unfair
labour practices.
45.
Section 25T
prohibits the employer, as well as the
workmen and Trade Union, irrespective of whether the Trade Union
is registered under the
Trade Unions Act
or not, from committing any
unfair labour practice. Any person committing an unfair labour
practice is made liable for punishment under
Section 25U
.
46. But under
Section 34(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, no Court can take cognizance of any offence punishable
under the Act, except on a complaint made by or under the authority
of the appropriate Government. Therefore, if the workmen had taken
the industrial disputes route, they could have at best sought the
prosecution of persons responsible, in terms of
Section 25U
. Such
prosecution would not have brought the desired results for the
workmen.
47. We may also look at the issue from another angle. Right
from the year 1997, the plight of these workers and the act of the
Management in retaining them for a long number of years as
temporaries has been brought to the notice of the appropriate
Government. But the Government did not take any action for
preventing this unfair labour practice. Therefore, all that the workers
did was to bring to the notice of the learned Judge that what has
been done for the past 20 years on admitted facts constituted
an unfair labour practice. In fact, the Supreme Court took note of this
in Petroleum Coal Labour Union, the facts of which were exactly
identical to the facts of the batch of cases on hand, except that the
Union in that case undertook a long sojourn from the Industrial
Tribunal up to the Supreme Court.
48.
Inviting our attention to the decision of the Supreme Court
in
Sarva Shramik Sangh v. Indian Smelting & Refining Co. Ltd.,
and others
, it is contended by Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao, learned
Senior Counsel for the appellant that the sine qua non for the
application of the concept of unfair labour practice is the existence of
a direct relationship of employer and the employee and that until that
basic question is decided, the forum recedes to the background.  In
other words, his contention is that if the learned Judge had to give
relief on the ground that there was unfair labour practice, the learned
Judge ought to have found that there was a direct relationship of
employer and employee, but a decision on the said question may 
have to be made only by the Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal
and not by a Writ Court.
49. We have two difficulties in accepting the above contention.
The first is that the decision in Sarva Shramik Sangh arose out of a
dispute as to whether the workmen were entitled to go before the
Labour Court under the
Industrial Disputes Act
or before the
appropriate authority under the
Maharashtra Recognition of Trade
Unions and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971
. The
Supreme Court held that in order to entertain a complaint under the
Maharashtra Act
, the complainant should first establish that he was
an employee of the person against whom the complaint is made.  In
the batch of cases on hand, no conflict of jurisdiction as between the
two different authorities created under different Labour Welfare
Legislations has arisen.
50. The second difficulty in accepting the above contention of
the learned Senior counsel for the appellant is that in the batch of
cases on hand, the workmen were first engaged through contractors
up to 1997, then engaged through Cooperative Societies for a period
of 10 years and later engaged with effect from 01-01-2008, directly
by the appellant. Therefore, there is no dispute with respect to the
existence of employer and employee relationship.  Paragraph 24 of
the decision in Sarva Shramik Sangh itself clarifies that where there
is no dispute, with respect to the relationship, there is no confusion
with respect to jurisdiction.
Contention 5:
51. The next contention of the Learned Senior Counsel for
Management is that the possibility of delay in having the matter
adjudicated through the industrial dispute route cannot be a ground
for the workmen to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
52. We agree. As a matter of fact the availability of alternative
remedy used to be countered by persons who invoke the writ
jurisdiction of this Court on the ground that the alternative remedy
will not be efficacious. But delay, by itself may not lead to the
presumption that the remedy was ineffective.
53. Today the remedy of a Writ itself has become ineffective in
some cases and in some Courts, due to the huge pendency in High  
Courts. Therefore, it is true that the possible delay in getting relief
through the industrial disputes route cannot be a ground for
bypassing the alternative remedy.
54. But in the batch of cases on hand, there is a long history.
Whenever the workmen and the unions ignited the fire of industrial
dispute, the Management switched over to the fire-fighting mode and
eventually ensured that a permanent solution to the problem was
never reached. In this process a period of more than 20 years has
gone. Therefore, this is not a case where the workmen could be
expected to go to the first point in the game of Snakes & ladders and
start the exercise all over again.
Contention 6:
55. The next contention of the Learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant-Management is that the respondents are actually receiving
almost all benefits like the regular employees and that therefore the
finding that they are retained as temporaries for the purpose of
depriving them of the benefits available to regular employees, is
contrary to facts.
56. But we fail to understand the logic behind the refusal of the
Management to grant the relief of regularisation, if the Management
is providing all benefits to these workmen as are admissible to the
regular employees. If the respondents are in receipt of all benefits as
are payable to the regular employees, then the grant of
regularisation to these workmen may not cause any prejudice to the
Management. The Management can as well treat them as regular   
employees, if they were not discriminating them from the regular
employees.
57. On admitted facts it is seen that the Management is fighting
a similar litigation before various Courts across India from persons
who are identically placed as the respondents herein. All those
litigations are meaningless and they all can come to a close if the
Management was extending the same benefits as admissible to the  
regular employees.
Contention 7:
58. The next contention of the Learned Senior Counsel for the
Management is that even by the standards stipulated in the decision
of the Constitution Bench in Umadevi, a Writ Court cannot direct
regularisation of the services of the workmen. The learned Senior
Counsel for the Management conceded that the decision in Umadevi  
arose under the Service law, as it concerned (a) the cases of
persons engaged in the Commercial Taxes Department of the State  
of Karnataka, whose claim for regularisation was rejected by the
Administrative Tribunal and (b) the cases of persons engaged by the
Government of Karnataka and its local bodies. But according to the
Learned Senior Counsel the Constitution Bench laid down the law in
para 43 of the report, in general terms, to the effect that the High
Courts acting under
Article 226
of the Constitution should not
ordinarily issue directions for absorption, regularisation or permanent
continuance unless the recruitment itself was made regularly and in
terms of the Constitutional scheme. Therefore the Learned Senior
Counsel for the Management contended that the principle
laid down
by
the Constitution Bench in Umadevi is not confined to service law,
but also applicable to industrial law and that a Writ Court under
Article 226
, cannot issue a direction for regularisation/absorption.
59. But we do not think that the decision in Umadevi is so
elastic as to cover cases under the industrial law. The reference to
daily wage employees, temporary employees etc in Umadevi should  
be taken to be confined only to persons employed in Government 
service or those employed in institutions that fall within the definition
of the expression State under
Article 12
of the Constitution. The
Judgment in Umadevi should be read with reference to the context
in which it was rendered. In Umadevi the Supreme court was dealing
with cases of persons employed on daily wages in the Commercial 
Taxes Department or in Zilla Parishads. Therefore the reference to
the Constitutional scheme, wherever it appears in Umadevi, is a
reference to
Articles 14
, 16
, 309
, 320
and
335
of the Constitution.
60. As we have pointed out in a separate Paragraph devoted
to the distinction between service law and labour law, all labour
welfare legislations are aimed at the prevention of exploitation of
labour, which has a direct nexus to
Article 21.
Therefore
predominantly the reference to a Constitutional scheme, whenever it
takes place in labour law, is with reference to
Article 21.
In contrast,
it is always with reference to
Articles 14
, 16
, 309
, 320
and
335
in
Service law. Therefore the observation made by the Supreme Court
in Umadevi that a Writ Court cannot normally issue a direction for
regularisation, absorption etc is confined to the service law context.
61. Though the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant
placed heavy reliance upon a few portions of the judgment in
Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation and another v.
Casteribe Rajya Parivahan Karmchari Sanghatana
, in support 
of his contention that a High Court cannot issue directions for
absorption or regularization, we do not think that
the said decision
can be understood in that fashion.  What happened in Maharashtra
State Road Transport Corporation was that the registered Trade
Union filed complaints before the Industrial Court, Bombay under the
provisions of
Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions and
Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971
. Some of the
practices adopted by the Management were held to be Unfair 
Labour Practices and the others not. When the matter landed up
before the Supreme Court, the contention of the Management was 
that the grant of permanent status was contrary to the procedure
prescribed in General Standing Order 503 and contrary to the law
laid down in
Umadevi. While rejecting the said contention, the
Supreme Court pointed out in Para-35 of the report that Umadevi is
an authoritative pronouncement for the proposition that the Supreme
Court under
Article 32
and the High Courts under
Article 226
should
not issue directions for absorption, regularization etc. But in Para-36,
the Supreme Court pointed out that Umadevi does not denude the 
Industiral and Labour Courts of their statutory power under
Section
30
read with
Section 32
of the Maharashtra Act.
62. Therefore, what was said by Umadevi  in Para 35 was not
in the context of the question whether the workmen should have
gone to the Labour Court or could have come to the High Court
under
Article 226
directly.
63. At the cost of repetition, we have to point out again that
the decision in Umadevi was in the context of Service Jurisprudence
and unfortunately there is a tendency to mix up the chaff and the
grain.
In the batch of cases on hand, one set of employees adopted
the industrial disputes route as against the very same employer viz.,
ONGC and succeeded before the Supreme Court in
Petroleum    
Coal Labour Union
case. Therefore, driving every group of
employees in every region to go back to the original point of travel,
could at the most give a sadistic pleasure and nothing else.  As we
have pointed out earlier, in Petroleum Coal Labour Union, the very
same Management challenged even the jurisdiction of the Industrial
Tribunal to grant the relief. Therefore, it is not as though the
management is going to accept the jurisdiction of any of the Courts.
Perhaps according to the management, any Court Civil, Industrial or
Writ, which orders regularization, would have no jurisdiction.
64. The reliance placed upon the decision in
Union of India v.
Vartak Labour Union
, is also misplaced. In Vartak Labour
Union, the dispute concerned persons employed as casual  
labourers in the Border Roads Organisation, which was part of a
department of Union of India. Therefore, the principles
laid down in
Umadevi will naturally be applicable to them. Interestingly, the
Supreme Court set aside the direction issued by the High Court in
Vartak Labour Union but nevertheless issued similar directions in
the last paragraph.
65. The decision of the Supreme Court in
Nihal Singh v.
State of Punjab
, made a distinction between irregular
appointments and illegal appointments, again with reference to the
Service Jurisprudence.  Therefore, if at all, this decision can go only
to the rescue of the respondents, as rightly observed by the learned
Judge, since despite the directions in Uma Devi, the Supreme Court
directed the regularization in Nihal Singh.
66. Placing reliance upon the decision of the Supreme Court
in
Hari Nandan Prasad v. Food Corporation of India
, it is
contended by Mr. B. Adinarayana Rao, learned Senior Counsel for 
the appellant that the Labour/Industrial Tribunals are given wide
powers not only to enforce the rights but even to create new rights
and that therefore, the respondents should have done well to
approach the mechanism created under the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
67.
In response to the above contention, Mr. Vedula
Venkataramana, learned Senior Counsel appearing for one set of
workmen contended that the jurisdiction of a Writ Court has already
been held to be wide, by a Three Member Bench of the Supreme  
Court in
Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd., v. Gujarat Steel Tubes
Mazdoor Sabha
.  In paragraphs 78 and 79 of its decision, the
Supreme Court pointed out that so broad are the expressive
expressions designedly used in
Article 226
that any order which
should have been made by the lower authority could be made by the 
High Court.
68. But the decision in
Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd., v. Gujarat
Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
was sought to be distinguished by the  
learned Senior Counsel for the appellant on the ground that
the said
decision
arose out of arbitral proceedings under
Section 10 A
of the
Industrial Disputes Act.
69. We do not think that we need to go as far as the Supreme
Court had gone in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. In the case of the very
same management, one group of individuals originally appointed
through contractors before the year 1997, later appointed through
Cooperative Societies for a period of 10 years from 1997 and then
appointed on tenure basis directly by the employer from 2008
onwards, went through the rigmarole of an industrial dispute and
reached the Supreme Court in Petroleum Coal Labour Union. A  
Writ Court is duty bound to ensure that similarly placed employees,
who were first appointed through contractors before 1997 and
appointed thereafter through Cooperative Societies for a period of
10 years from 1997 and then appointed on tenure basis by the
Employer himself receives the same benefit.
70. As we have pointed out elsewhere, the management  
should thank the workmen for not going to the Labour Court/
Industrial Tribunal.  Since the workmen came up with a writ petition,
they could get a benefit only with prospective effect from 2008,
thereby wiping out a period of service that they rendered for more
than 20 years before 2008.
Contention 8:
71. The next contention of the Learned Senior Counsel for the
Appellant is that the inspiration drawn by the Learned Judge from
the decision in Petroleum Coal Labour Union may not be correct in
view of the fact that
the said decision
arose out of an adjudication by
the appropriate authorities under the
Industrial Disputes Act
.
72. Factually it is true that the decision in Petroleum Coal
Labour Union arose out of a case that traveled from Karaikal in the
Union Territory of Puducherry up to Delhi, on board the passenger
train of the Industrial Tribunal. But all the facts that the workers
established
in that case
before the Industrial Tribunal are exactly
similar to the facts admitted in the cases on hand. Therefore the
attempt of the workmen to make their travel from point to point
without stopping at all stations cannot be said to be a shortcut.
73. In fact the Supreme Court did not dismiss the case of the
Management in Petroleum Coal Labour Union on the short ground  
of the limited nature of the jurisdiction available to the High Court
and the Supreme Court over the decisions of fact finding bodies
especially like the Industrial Tribunals. If the Supreme Court had
done this, it may be possible to contend that in Petroleum Coal
Labour Union the hands of the Court were tied in view of the findings
of fact recorded by the Industrial Tribunal. But that is not the case
here. Apart from the fact that all the facts found established before
the Industrial Tribunal in
Petroleum Coal Labour Union
case are
identical to the admitted facts in the batch on hand, one more aspect
is to be taken note of. As seen from the caption given above para 27
of the report in
Petroleum Coal Labour Union
case, the very same
management questioned before the Supreme Court, the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal to order regularisation. Today the Management
questions the jurisdiction of this Court to order regularisation. In
other words if the workmen takes the Industrial disputes route the
Management erects a traffic diversion post there. If the workmen
come to the High Court, the Management reverses the direction of
the signpost. Therefore we do not think that the Learned Judge
committed any error in following the decision in Petroleum Coal
Labour Union whose facts are exactly identical to those on hand.
Contention 9:
74. The next contention of the Learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant-Management is that the direction issued by the learned
Judge to regularize the services of the workers in the posts to which
are attached the duties being performed by them presently, is
meaningless, since there are no such posts in the Organization.
75. But we do not think that the direction issued in Para 147(a)
by the learned judge in his decision, can be understood or
interpreted to be to have something to do with post, cadre post or
ex-cadre post, as these expressions are used in Service
Jurisprudence. The direction issued by the learned Judge should be
understood to mean only a direction to absorb the respondents/
workmen and regularize their services. The essence of the direction
issued by the learned Judge is absorption and regularization. The
manner in which the relief is couched, cannot be taken advantage
of, as the same may tantamount to missing the tree for the wood.
Contention 10:
76. The last contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant is that the direction issued by the learned Judge in Para
147(c) of his judgment not to take up the regular recruitment for the
posts in A1, A2 and W1 levels till the completion of the process of
regularization, went beyond the scope of the Writ Petitions.
77. But we do not think so. The main reliefs sought in the writ
petitions, included a prayer for injuncting the Management from
going ahead with recruitment to certain posts, if the recruitment will
make the claim for absorption and regularization infructuous. In fact,
one of the persons selected in the recruitment, pursuant to the
Circular dated 01-09-2014 impugned in the writ petition, has actually
come up with a Writ Appeal in W.A.No. 285 of 2017. But by the time
the writ appeal came up hearing, he was already issued with
appointment orders. Therefore, we do not know whether the
Management actually complied with the direction contained in Para
147(c) of the impugned judgment.
78. In any case, if the direction issued by the learned Judge to
regularize the services of the respondents will not be affected, it may
always be open to the Management to take a stand that the claim of
the respondents-workmen will not get frustrated by fresh recruitment.
But, today the Management is not prepared to make a statement  
that the recruitment that they wanted to make will not hamper the
chances of regularization of the respondents. Moreover one point
that goes against the Management is that their undertaking to create
300 posts and to absorb the respondents-workmen against 60 posts  
year after year, does not appear to have been fulfilled. This
undertaking was given exactly 15 years ago on 12-01-2003 as seen 
from the minutes of the meeting. Therefore, the Management has no
moral authority to contend that recruitments are stalled. Hence, the
last contention also deserves to be rejected.
79. Lastly, it is contended by the learned Senior Counsel for
the appellant that the learned Judge could not have
placed reliance
upon
the decision of the Division Bench of Gujarat High Court in
Executive Director/Basin Manager, ONGC v. ONGC Employees     
Mazdoor Sabha
(decision dated 29-04-2015), as the same arose  
out of the award of the Industrial Tribunal.
The learned Senior
Counsel for the appellant further contended that under similar
circumstances, a Division Bench of the Madras High Court refused
relief under
Article 226
, in its decision in M. Rajan and others v.
ONGC (dated 20-11-2015).
80. We have carefully considered the above submissions.
81. It could be seen from the facts of the case out of which the
decision of the Madras High Court arose in M. Rajan that the
workmen therein filed a writ petition in the year 1999 itself. There
was no checkered history to the case before the Madras High Court.
That was not a case where a slow transition took place over a period
of 20 years, as has happened in the batch of cases on hand. More
over the case before the Madras High Court related to security
guards posted at several places such as Harbour Stores, Regional
Office, the residences of Officers etc.  But in the batch of cases on
hand, the respondents are engaged as Field Operators, who are
carrying on the core activity of the ONGC.
82. More over it is not as though the respondents herein
approached to the Writ Court at the earliest point of time. From the
year 1997, the workmen served strike notices once in five years,
participated in the conciliation proceedings and got something better
than what they claimed, in the forum of a settlement, even before a
reference could be made by the Government to the Labour Court or
before an adjudication can take place before the Industrial Tribunal.
Every time the management ensured that a settlement was reached  
either before a reference is made or immediately after the reference
is made.  As part of such settlements entered into once in five years,
the management also ensured that the workers did not agitate the
issue before any forum. Hence, the reliance placed upon the
decision of the Madras High Court, cannot be accepted.
83. Mr. A. Satyaprasad, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
some of the respondents placed reliance upon a few decisions in
support of his contention that there is no absolute bar for a Writ
Court to issue a direction for regularization.
The first decision relied
upon by him was that of the Supreme Court in
National Federation
of Railway Porters, Vendors and Bearers v. Union of India
.
This decision and the next decision relied upon by the learned
Senior Counsel for the appellant in
Union of India v. Subir
Mukharji and others
, were rendered before the decision in
Umadevi. Both cases related to appointment to the Railway
Administration. Therefore, we do not wish to go into these decisions
especially after the decision in Umadevi has come to fill up the void
in Service Law.
84. The decision in
Mineral Exploration Corporation
Employees Union v. Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.
,
drew a distinction between irregular appointments and illegal
appointments, after taking note of the decision in Umadevi.  But
the
said decision
arose out of an award of the Industrial Tribunal.
Therefore, we will not go into it, lest it may give a handle for the
management to contend that the same is inapplicable.
85. As rightly contended by Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing for some of the respondents, the decision
of the Gujarat High Court relied upon by the learned single Judge,
was confirmed by the Supreme Court. The learned Senior Counsel  
was also right in pointing out that the Constitution Bench, in
Umadevi, exempted persons selected through a constitutionally
accepted mode. In the batch of cases on hand, the respondents 
herein were made to appear for written examination followed by
interview, not once but twice, first in the year 2008 and then in the
year 2012 and were granted term basis employment for 4 years at a
stretch. They have now completed 8 years under two terms. 
Therefore, even if we ignore that the decision in Umadevi arose out
of the Service Law, the respondents cannot be non-suited.
86. In the light of the above, we are of the considered view,
that none of the grounds of attack to the well considered and well
crafted judgment of the learned single Judge are sustainable in law
or on facts. Therefore, all the 24 writ appeals filed by the
management are liable to be dismissed. Accordingly, they are
dismissed.
87. Coming to the Writ Appeal W.A.No.285 of 2017, it is filed
by an individual, who applied in response to the recruitment
notification issued by management in September, 2014. His 
grievance is that the possibility of his selection is hampered by the
directions issued by the learned Judge.
88. But we do not think that the appellant in W.A.No.285 of
2017 has any locus standi to challenge the order of the learned
Judge. He is an outsider craving for appointment in ONGC. No right
has accrued to him merely by virtue of his application in response to
the notification. More over, it was stated across the bar at the time of
hearing of the writ appeals that this appellant was issued with an
appointment order. Therefore, nothing survives in his writ appeal and
hence it is dismissed.
89. Coming to the four writ petitions, W.P.Nos.21077 of 2016,
8726, 36866 & 36884 of 2017, the reliefs sought by the petitioners in
these writ petitions are identical to the reliefs sought by the
petitioners in the writ petitions out of which the above writ appeals
arise. The petitioners in these writ petitions are also similarly placed
as the respondents in the writ appeals. Therefore, they are also
entitled to the same benefits as the learned Judge granted to the
respondents in the writ appeals.
90. Therefore, in fine, all 25 writ appeals are dismissed and
the four writ petitions are allowed in terms of the order of the learned
Judge in para 147 of his judgment.
As a sequel thereto, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in
the writ appeals and writ petitions shall stand closed.
________________________    
V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J       
________________   
M.GANGA RAO, J    
Date: 05-01-2018
