Title: Search
Court: High Court of Delhi, it has been reiterated that a Tribunal appointed by one
Date: 5 of 1908
Citation: SCC India Limited
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/82326684/

[Cites
49
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi District Court
Hdfc Bank Limited ........Decree ... vs . on 22 November, 2022
BEFORE THE COURT OF SH. SURINDER S. RATHI, DISTRICT JUDGE
            (COMM.)-03 SHAHDARA, KKD, DELHI

Ex. No.121/2022

HDFC Bank Limited                                                                    ........Decree Holder

                                                                          Vs.

Azad Kalam                                                                           ........Judgment Debtor

                                                              'INDEX'

 Sr. No.                                                          Description                                                      Page
    1.         Order on Maintainability of Execution Petition                                                                       2
    2.         Submissions made on behalf of Decree Holder                                                                          3
    3.         Assessment of Executability of Ex-Parte Award Passed by Unilaterally Appointed Sole Arbitrator                       4
         3.1 Scope of Judicial Intervention by Execution Court under
Section 47
CPC                                                 5
         3.2 Objective behind inclusion of
Section 12 (5)
and Schedule 7 in the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act,                   10
1996 by way of
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
w.e.f. 23.10.2015
         3.3 Law Commission of India's 176th and 246th Report on Arbitration and Conciliation Amended Bill                          12
             and "Neutrality of Arbitrators"
         3.4 Law laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Authoritative Judgments:                                                          18
                    •     TRF Limited Vs. Energo Engineering Projects Limited
                    •     Perkins Eastman Architects DPC Vs. HSCC India Limited
                    •     Voestalpine Schienen GMVH Vs. DMRC Ltd.
                    •     Bharat Broadband Network Vs. United Telecoms Limited
                    •     HARSAC and Anr. Vs. Pan India Consultants
                    •     Jaipur JDUSS Ltd. Vs. Ajay Sales and Suppliers
                    •     Ellora Papermills Vs. State of M.P. Dharma Prasthanam Vs. Madhok Construction Pvt. Ltd.

         3.5 UNCITRAL Model Law on Commercial Arbitration 1985 and UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 2021                                 29
             proscribe and forbid Unilateral appointment of Sole Arbitrator by a disputing party
         3.6   Legal position on unilateral appointment of Sole Arbitrator in other countries                                       31
         3.7 Why NBFCs wish to impose their chosen Sole Arbitrator on the borrower and why there is                                 32
             resistance abiding Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled on TRF Limited, Perkins Eastman Judgments?
         3.8 Adverse effect of one sided arbitrators on "Enforcement of Contract" component of "Ease of Doing                       33
             Business" Ranking of India in World Bank's Doing Business Reports of Invesment Friendly Nations
         3.9 Ad-hoc Arbitrations by Unilaterally Appointed Sole Arbitrators weakening people's faith in Arbitration as an           34
             ADR
     3.10 Justice B. N. Srikrishna Report on Arbitration stressed on strengthening 'Institutional Arbitration                       35
          Centres' in India
     3.11 Unilateral appointment of Arbitrator is Anti-thesis to "Nemo Judex in causa cua"- No one can be a                         37
          Judge in his own case
     3.12 Whether CORE Judgment has over-ruled TRF Limited Judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court?                                       37
     3.13 Conclusion                                                                                                                41
     3.14 Petition seeking execution of Ex-Parte Award passed by a Unilaterally Appointed Arbitrator is like                        42
          reaping benefits of one's own wrong-doing and is abuse of Court process




HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                                                   page 1 of 46
 Ex. No.121/2022

HDFC Bank Limited                                                       ........Decree Holder

                                                               Vs.

Azad Kalam                                                              ........Judgment Debtor


22.11.2022


                   Order on Maintainability of Execution Petition

                   This petition seeks execution of an Ex-parte Arbitral Award
dated 27.10.2021 passed by Sh. Rajesh Rai, Ld. Sole Arbitrator at New
Delhi in favour of DH Finance Company and against the JD for a sum of
Rs.3,87,164/- along with interest at contractual rate @ 8% per annum.
                   In so far as the arbitral award sought to be executed through
this Court was an ex-parte award passed by Ld. Sole Arbitrator who was
unilaterally appointed by the DH Finance Company, following order was
passed by this Court qua maintainability of this execution petition on
20.10.2022.
         Present: None

                    This petition seeks execution of ex-parte arbitral award dated 27.10.2021. Perusal of copy
         of the arbitral award shows that the arbitrator was unilaterally appointed by the plaintiff and there was
         no agreement before the accrual of cause of action or thereafter between the parties for appointment
         of Mr. Rajesh Rai. Per se this unilateral appointment appears to be in direct violation of Three-Judge
         judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court titled TRF Limited Vs. Energo Engineering Projects Limited
         2017 Latest Caselaw 918 SC 2017(8) SCC 377 and case title Perkins Eastman Architects DPC Vs.
         HSCC India Limited 2019 Latest Caselaw 1154 SC, 2019 SCC Online SC 1517.

                     This was reiterated by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Central Organisation of Railway
         Electrification Vs. ECI-SPIC-SMO-FCML(JV) 2019 Latest Caselaw 1281 SC. In several
         judgments of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, it has been reiterated that a Tribunal appointed by one
         party is hit by
Section 12
and Schedule 5 & 7 of
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
and that Awards
         passed by such unilaterally appointed Arbitrators are not tenable in law. Relevant caselaws from Delhi
         are:-

         1.        Delhi Integrated Multi Model Transit Systems vs. Delhi Jal Board, 2021 Latest Caselaw 3048 Delhi;
         2.        Proddatur Cable TV Digi Services vs. SITI Cable Network Ltd., 2020 Latest Caselaw 328 Delhi;
         3.        M/s. Omcon Infra Pvt. Ltd. v. Indiabull Investment Advisors Ltd.,2020 Latest Caselaw 2545 Delhi;
         4.        VSK Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. Delhi Jal Board, 2021 Latest Caselaw 274 Delhi;
         5.        Chhaya Rai vs. KLJ Developers Pvt. Ltd., 2021 Latest Caselaw 1440 Delhi.............




HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                                        page 2 of 46
                    Arguments have been heard at length on behalf of Ld.
Counsel for Execution Petitioner, the Execution File is perused and the
judgments cited on behalf of DH company are also perused.
Submissions made on behalf of Decree Holder:


                   While opening his submissions Ld. Counsel for Execution
Petitioner has primarily addressed the Court that there is legal no flaw in
the appointment of Sole Arbitrator, Arbitration Proceedings carved out and
passing of Ex-Parte Award under Execution.
                   The points highlighted for DH during the submissions made
on behalf of DH are discussed as under:


    (1) That the Execution Court cannot go behind the Decree/Award as per
Section 47
CPC.

    (2) That
Section 11(2)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 gives
        autonomy to the parties to agree to the procedure for appointment of Arbitrators.

    (3) That the Arbitration Clause agreed between the parties permit the Finance
        Company to unilaterally appoint the Sole Arbitrator.

    (4) That notice of unilateral appointment of arbitrator was sent to the JD but no
        objection/challenge was filed qua the same.

    (5) That no petition under
Section 12
as
Section 16
was filed during the pendency
        of the arbitral proceedings.

    (6) That no objection qua unilateral appointment of Arbitrator was raised under
Section 34
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 by the DH.

    (7) That the judgments of TRF Limited, Perkins Eastman and Voestalpine stands
        over-ruled/diluted by judgments of CORE Judgment of Supreme Court.

    (8) That Konodia Infratech Judgment of Delhi High Court ruled that once the
        Award is passed the aspect of unilateral appointment of Arbitrator cannot be
        raised.



HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                          page 3 of 46
 Assessment of Executability of the Ex-Parte Award passed by
Unilaterally Appointed Sole Arbitrator

The aspect of maintainability and executabiliy of this Petition seeking
Execution of Ex-Parte Award passed by a unilaterally appointed Arbitrator
as raised can be discussed and decided under following heads:
              I. Scope of Judicial Intervention by Execution Court under
Section 47
CPC.

              II. Objective behind inclusion of
Section 12 (5)
and Schedule 7in
                  the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
by way of
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
w.e.f.
                  23.10.2015.

              III.Law Commission of India's 176th and 246th Report on
                  Arbitration and Conciliation Amended Bill and "Neutrality of
                  Arbitrators".

              IV. Law laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court in authoritative
                  Judgments
                   debarring "Unilateral Appointment of Sole Arbitrators".
                   (i) TRF Limited Vs. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd.1
                  (ii) Voestalpine Schienen GMVH Vs. DMRC Ltd. 2
                  (iii)Perkins Eastman Architects DPC Vs. HSCC IndiaLtd.3
                  (iv) Bharat Broadband Network Vs. United Telecoms Ltd.4
                  (v) HARSAC and Anr. Vs. Pan India Consultants5
                  (vi) Jaipur JDUSS Ltd. Vs. Ajay Sales and Suppliers6,
                  (vii) Ellora Papermills Vs. State of M.P.7
                                                                                        8
                  (viii)Dharma Prasthanam Vs. M/s Madhok Construction Pvt. Ltd.

              V. UNCITRAL Model Law on Commercial Arbitration 1985 and
                 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 2021 proscribe and forbid
                 Unilateral appointment of Sole Arbitrator by a disputing
                 party.

             VI. Legal position on unilateral appointment of Sole Arbitrator in
                 other countries.

             VII. Why NBFCs wish to impose their chosen Sole Arbitrator on

              1    2017(8) SCC 377, 2017 Latest Caselaw 918 SC
              2    (2017) 4 SCC 665, 2017 Latest Caselaw 919 SC
              3    (2020) 20 SCC 760, 2019 Latest Caselaw 1154 SC
              4    (2019) 5 SCC 755, 2019 Latest Caselaw 395 SC
              5    (2021) 3 SCC 103, 2021 Latest Caselaw 33 SC
              6    2021 SCC Online SC 730, 2021 Latest Caselaw 710 SC
              7    (2022) 3 SCC 1 , 2022 Latest Caselaw 8SC
8                  (2005) 9 SCC 686


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                        page 4 of 46
                  the borrower and why there is resistance abiding Hon'ble
                 Supreme Court ruled on TRF Limited, Perkins Eastman
                 Judgments?

           VIII. Adverse effect of one sided arbitrators on "Enforcement of
                 Contract" component of "Ease of Doing Business" Ranking of
                 India in World Bank's Doing Business Reports of Invesment
                 Friendly Nations.

           IX.     Ad-hoc Arbitrations by Unilaterally Appointed Sole
                   Arbitrators weakening people's faith in Arbitration as an
                   ADR.

           X.      Justice B. N. Srikrishna Report on Arbitration stressed on
                   strengthening 'Institutional Arbitration Centres' in India.

           XI.     Unilateral appointment of Arbitrator is Anti-thesis to "Nemo
                   Judex in causa cua"- No one can be a Judge in his own case.

           XII. Whether CORE Judgment has over-ruled TRF Limited
                Judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court?

           XIII. Conclusion

           XIV. Petition seeking execution of Ex-Parte Award passed by a
                Unilaterally Appointed Arbitrator is like reaping benefits of
                one's own wrong-doing and is abuse of Court process.

    Now I will endeavour to discuss these aspects and submissions
    made on behalf of DH at length.


    (I) Scope of Judicial Intervention by Execution Court under
Section 47
CPC.
    1. This Execution Petition has been filed under
Section 36
of
         Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
         "
The Act
" read with
Order 21 CPC
(hereinafter referred to as 'The
         Code'). In the succeeding paras this Court with endeavour to
         ascertain if an "Execution Court" can refuse to execute an Arbitral
         Award if it is found that the same is passed by an Arbitration
         Tribunal which lacked inherent Jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute
         and whether its appointment was non est and void ab initio.

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                        page 5 of 46
     2. It would be handy to have a glance of
Section 36
of '
The Act
'.
Section 36
: Enforcement
                     (1)    When the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral
                             award under
Section 34
has expired, then, subject to the provisions of
                             sub-section (2) such award shall be enforced in accordance with the
                             provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the
                             same manner as if it were a decree of the court.
                     (2)     Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in
                             the Court under
Section 34
, the filing of such an application shall not
                             by itself render that award unforceable, unless the Court grants an
                             order of stay of the operation of the said arbitral award in accordance
                             with the provisions of sub-section (3), on a separate application made
                             for that purpose.
                     (3)     Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the
                             operation of the arbitral award, the Court may, subject to such
                             conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such
                             award for reasons to be recorded in writing:
                             Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for
                             grant of stay in the case of an arbitral award for payment of money,
                             have due regard to the provisions for grant of stay of a money decree
                             under the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 190.
                             Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a prima fcie
                             case is made out that-
                                  (a) the arbitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the
                                      award; or
                                  (b) the making of the award was induced or effected by fraud or
                                      corruption, it shall stay the award unconditionally pending
                                      disposal of the challenge under
Section 34
to the award.
                            Explanation-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
                            above proviso shall apply to all court cases arising out of or in relation
                            to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or court
                            proceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement of
                            the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
(3 of 2016)
                                                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)

    3. A plain reading of the Statutory Provision makes it amply clear that
         the right of Award Holder to seek Enforcement of Award is subject
         to provisions of 'The Code'.
    4. This brings us to
Section 47
of the Code which governs the scope
         of judicial intervention by an Execution Court. For ready reference
         same is reproduced hereunder:
Section 47
CPC: Questions to be determined by the Court
         executing decree
                   (1)     "All questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                      page 6 of 46
                               was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution,
                              discharge or satisfaction of the decree shall be determined by the
                              Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit.
                   (2)        ........

                   (3)        Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
                              representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this
                              Section be determined by the Court.
                              Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Section, a plaintiff whose suit
                              has been dismissed and a defendant against whom a suit has been
                              dismissed are parties to the suit.
                              Explanation II.-(a) For the purposes of this Section, a purchaser of
                              property at a sale in execution of a decree shall be deemed to be a
                              party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and
                              (b) All questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property
                              to such purchaser or his representative shall be deemed to be
                              questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the
                              decree within the meaning of this Section."

    5. Plain reading of the above Statute makes it evident that once a
         decree is passed by a Court or an Award is passed by an Arbitral
         Tribunal all             the questions related to Execution of such
         Decree/Award must be taken up and determined by the Executing
         Court itself and that there shall be no separate suit for this purpose.
         In case title Harmand Rai Badridas Vs. Devidutt Bhagwati
         Prasad and Ors.9 Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled that,
                  "In order to empower the Executing Court to consider and determine
                  all questions relating to the execution of a decree, unless it falls beyond
                  its ambit, the provision of
Section 47
of the Code must be interpreted
                  liberally."

    6. One of the most important duty casted by
Section 47
of the Code on
         Executing Court is to ascertain:
                   •       Whether the Decree/Arbitral Award passed is executable?
                   •       Did the Court/Arbitral Tribunal which passed the Decree/Award
                           lacked inherent jurisdiction rendering such Decree/Award to be a
                           nullity?
           Thus the duty of the Executing Court include:-
                       ➢      To not to go beyond decree.
                       ➢      To not to question the correctness of the Decree unless there is
                              some ambiguity.
                       ➢      To ascertain if the Court/Arbitral Tribunal which passed the
                              Decree/Award had the inherent jurisdiction.

9 AIR (1973) SC 2423


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                       page 7 of 46
      7. Thus the question to be dealt by the Executing Court necessarily
          restricts itself to the execution part of the decree as long as the same
          is lawful, executable and is a not non est or nullity. The Law in this
          regard is no longer res integra. There are several authoritative
          pronouncements in this regard. In case title Sunder Dass Vs. Ram
          Prakash10 of Hon'ble Mr. Justice P. N. Bhagwati while speaking
          in for the Bench ruled,
                 "The validity of a decree can be challenged in execution proceedings only
                 on the ground that the court which passed the decree lacked inherent
                 jurisdiction. A court is said to be lacking in jurisdiction when it could not
                 have seisin of the case because the subject matter was wholly foreign to its
                 jurisdiction or that the defendant was dead at the time of institution of the
                 suit or when the suit was decreed. Inherent lack of jurisdiction means a
                 power or jurisdiction which does not at all exist or vest in a court. A court
                 lacks inherent jurisdiction when the subject matter is wholly foreign to its
                 ambit and is totally unconnected with its recognized jurisdiction."
                                                                           (Emphasis Supplied)

     8. In case title Kiran Singh Vs. Chaman Paswan11 Full Bench of
          Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled,
                 "It is a fundamental principle that a decree passed by a court without
                 jurisdictiion is a nullity and that its invalidity could be set up whenever
                 and wherever it is sought to be enforced or relied upon, even at the stage
                 of execution and even in collateral proceedings. A defect of jurisdiction
                 whether it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether it is in respect of the
                 subject matter of the action, strikes at the very authority of the Court to
                 pass any decree and such defect cannot be cured even by consent of
                 parties."
                                                                          (Emphasis Supplied)

     9. In Case title Urban Improvement Trust, Jodhpur Vs. Gokul
          Narain12, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that,
               15. A decree passed by a Court without jurisdiction over the subject- matter
               or on any other ground which goes to the root of its exercise of jurisdiction
               or inherent jurisdiction, is a nullity. A decree passed by such a court is a
               nullity and is non est. Its invalidity can be set up whenever it is sought to be
               enforced or is acted upon as a foundation for a right even at the stage of
               execution or in collateral proceedings. The defect of jurisdiction strikes at

10 AIR 1977 SC 1201
11 1954 Latest Caselaw 43 SC
12 AIR 1996 SC 1819 , 1996 Latest Caselaw 332 SC


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 8 of 46
                the authority of the Court to pass a decree which cannot be cured by
               consent or waiver of the party."
                                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)

     10.In case title Saraswat Trading Agency Vs. Union of India13, it is
          held by High Court that,
                  "If Court finds that decree is a nullity, Court cannot proceed to
                  execute it. A decree which is a nullity in the eye of law is no decree and,
                  hence, even by consent of the parties such a decree cannot be executed by
                  the Court. But for this reason it cannot be denied the remedy available to
                  it under
Section 47
. If the Court finds that the decree is a nullity, the
                  Court cannot proceed to execute it, and it is the duty of the Court to hold
                  that the decree is not executable."
                                                                               (Emphasis Supplied)

     11. In Daland Uchha Bidyapith Vs. State of Orissa14, it is held that,
                  "Execution cannot be refused except in case of nullity Execution of the
                  decree ought not to be refused, unless the decree itself is a nullity."

     12.In case title Brakewel Automative Components (India Private)
          Ltd. Vs. P.R. Selvam Alagppan15, Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled at
          para 23 that,
                   "Through this view has echoed time out of number in similar
                   pronouncements of this Court in Dhurandhar Prasad Singh Vs. Jain
                   Prakash University and Others, AIR 2001 SC 2552, while dwelling on
                   the scope of
Section 47
of the Code, it was ruled that the powers of the
                   court thereunder are quite different and much narrower than those in
                   appeal/revision or review. The exercise of power under
Section 47
of
                   the Code is microscopic and lied in a very narrow inspection hole and
                   an executing court can allow objection to the executability of the decree
                   if it is found that the same is void ab initio and is a nullity, apart from
                   the ground that it is not capable of execution under the law, either
                   because the same was passed in ignorance of such provision of law or
                   the law was promulgated making a decree unexecutable after its passing.
                   None of the above eventualities as recognised in law for rendering a
                   decree unexecutable, exists in the case in hand. For obvious reasons, we
                   do not wish to burden this adjudication by multiplying the decisions
                   favouring the same view."
                                                                                (Emphasis Supplied)

     13.In Bijendra Kumar Vs. Pradeep Kumar and Ors. 16 Hon'ble Delhi
          High Court while discussing another plea between
Section 47
CPC

13 AIR 2004 Cal 267 (270)
14AIR 1993 Ori 257:1993 (1) Ori LR 77
15 (2017) 5 SCC 371, 2017 Latest Caselaw 235 SC
16Ex.FA no. 38 of 2012 dated 15.10.2014


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 9 of 46
          and
Section 36
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
         observed,
                   "An Award which is a nullity being against public policy can always be
                   challenged even at the stage of execution in as much as, if we take a
                   most extreme example that an Award is passed that 'A' will steal money
                   for 'B' then surely 'B' cannot enforce the Award/decree stating that 'A'
                   should give him particular amount of money which was to be stolen by
                   'B' for being given to 'A'."
                                                                            (Emphasis Supplied)

    14.Thus, on the strength of the above judgments and the discussion it
         can be fairly concluded that generally speaking the Execution Court
         cannot go behind the Decree but as far as the Executability of a
         Decree/Award is concerned, if the Executing Court finds that the
         judgment is non est or that the Decree/Award is a nullity on account
         of lack of inherent jurisdiction with the Arbitral Tribunal,
Section 47
of the Code fully empowers the Execution Court to declare the
         Decree/Award as "Not Executable" but shall stop short of declaring
         it a "Nullity".

         (II) Objective behind inclusion of
Section 12 (5)
and Schedule 7
         of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
by way of
Arbitration
         and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
w.e.f. 23.10.2015.

    15.
Section 12(5)
was introduced in this 1996 Act by way of
Arbitration
         and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
notified with effect from
         23.10.2015 whereby additional ground for challenging the
         appointment of Arbitrator was introduced with simultaneous
         inclusion of Schedule 7. For ready reference
Section 12(5)
of the
         Act and the 7th Schedule are reproduced hereunder:
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
Sections 12(5)
: Grounds of Challenge
                Notwithstanding any prior agreements to the contrary, any person whose
                relationship with the parties or counsel or the subject matter of the dispute,
                falls under any of the categories specified in Schedule 7 shall be ineligible to
                be appointed as an arbitrator.


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 10 of 46
                 "Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between
                them waive the applicability of this suit by an expressed agreement in
                writing."


                                               "The Seventh Schedule"
                i. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past
                     or present business relationship with a party.
                ii. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an
                     affiliate of one of the parties.
                iii. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as
                     counsel for one of the parties.
                iv. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one
                     of the parties.
                v. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a
                     similar controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the
                     affiliate is directly involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration.
                vi. The arbitrator's law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in
                     the case without the arbitrator being invoked himself or herself.
                vii. The arbitrator's law firm currently has a significant commercial
                     relationship with one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
              viii. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the
                     appointing party even though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm
                     derives a significant financial income therefrom.
               ix. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and
                     in the case of companies with the persons in the management and
                     controlling the company.
               x. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial
                     interest in one of the parties or an affiliate in one of the parties.
               xi. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the
                     arbitration.
               xii. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a
                     similar controlling influence in one of the parties.
               xiii. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or
                     the outcome of the case.
               xiv. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the
                     appointing party, and the arbitrator or his or her firm derives a
                     significant financial income therefrom.
               Relationship of the Arbitrator to the dispute
               xv. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on
                     the dispute to a party or an affiliate of one of the parties.
               xvi. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.
               Arbitrator's direct or indirect interest in the dispute
             xvii. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of
                     the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties that is privately held.
             xviii. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial
                     interest in the outcome of the dispute.
             xix. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close
                     relationship with a third party who may be liable to recourse on the part
                     of the unsuccessful party in the dispute.
                      Explanation 1-The term "close family member" refers to a spouse, sibling,
                      child, parent or life partner.
                      Explanation 2- The term "affiliate" encompasses all companies in one group
                      of companies including the parent company.
                      Explanation 3- For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                   page 11 of 46
                    practice in certain specific kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or
                   commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators from a small, specialized pool. If
                   in such fields it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint the
                   same arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into
                   account while applying the rules set out above.



         (III) Law Commission of India's 176th and 246th Report on
         Arbitration and Conciliation Amended Bill and "Neutrality of
         Arbitrators".
    16.Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India had constituted
         Law Commission of India which paved the way for bringing up the
         aforesaid amendments in order to preserve the sanctity of arbitral
         proceedings by making them 'Neutral', 'Impartial' and 'Unbiased'.
         The Law Commission recommended maintaining of a healthy
         balance between the critical component of 'Neutrality and
         Imparitality' on the one hand and simultaneously balancing the
         'Party Autonomy' in arbitrations. The Law Commission Reports
         recommended--
         -         Incorporating guidelines of International Bar Assocation
         to establish the standards of independence and imparitality in
         the form of Schedule 5 and Schedule 7 of the Act.
         -         Introducing
Section 12(5)
of the Act which would
         disqualify any person whose relationship with the parties,
         counsel or the subject matter of the dispute falls under the
         categories set out in the Schedules.
         The Law Commission of India emphasised on the neutrality in
         arbitration in following words in paras number 53 to 60 of its 246 th
         Report:-
          "NEUTRALITY OF ARBITRATORS"
                53. It is universally accepted that any quasi-judicial process including
                Arbitration process must be in accordance with Principles of Natural
                Justice. In this context of Arbitration Neutrality of Arbitrators viz. their


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 12 of 46
                 independence and impartiality is critical to the entire process.

                54.
In the Act
, the test for neutrality is set out in
section 12(3)
which
                provides "An arbitrator may be challenged only if (a) circumstances exist
                that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or
                impartiality..."

                55.
The Act
does not lay down any other conditions to identify the
                "circumstances" which give rise to "justifiable doubts", and it is clear
                that there can be many such circumstances and situations. The test is not
                whether, given the circumstances, there is any actual bias for that is
                setting the bar too high; but, whether the circumstances in question give
                rise to any justifiable apprehensions of bias.

                56.The limits of this provision has been tested in the Indian Supreme
                Court in the context of contracts with State entities naming particular
                persons/designations (associated with that entity) as a potential
                arbitrator. It appears to be settled by a series of decisions of the Supreme
                Court (See Executive Engineer, Irrigation Division, Puri v. Gangaram
                Chhapolia, 1984 (3) SCC 627; Secretary to Government Transport
                Department, Madras v. Munusamy Mudaliar, 1988 (Supp) SCC 651;
                International Authority of India v. K.D. Bali and Anr, 1988 (2) SCC
                360; S. Rajan v. State of Kerala, 1992 (3) SCC 608; M/s. Indian Drugs &
                Pharmaceuticals v. M/s. Indo-Swiss Synthetics Germ Manufacturing
                Co.Ltd., 1996 (1) SCC 54; Union of India v. M.P. Gupta, (2004) 10 SCC
                504; Ace Pipeline Contract Pvt. Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation
                Ltd., 2007 (5) SCC 304) that arbitration agreements in government
                contracts which provide for arbitration by a serving employee of the
                department, are valid and enforceable. While the Supreme Court, in
                Indian Oil Corp. Ltd. v. Raja Transport (P) Ltd., 2009 8 SCC 520 carved
                out a minor exception in situations when the arbitrator "was the
                controlling or dealing authority in regard to the subject contract or if he
                is a direct subordinate (as contrasted from an officer of an inferior rank
                in some other department) to the officer whose decision is the subject
                matter of the dispute", and this exception was used by the Supreme Court
                in Denel Propreitory Ltd. v. Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence, AIR
                2012 SC 817 and Bipromasz Bipron Trading SA v. Bharat Electronics
                Ltd., (2012) 6 SCC 384, to appoint an independent arbitrator under
section 11
, this is not enough.

                57.The balance between procedural fairness and binding nature of these
                contracts, appears to have been tilted in favour of the latter by the
                Supreme Court, and the Commission believes the present position of law
                is far from satisfactory. Since the principles of impartiality and
                independence cannot be discarded at any stage of the proceedings,
                specifically at the stage of constitution of the arbitral tribunal, it would
                be incongruous to say that party autonomy can be exercised in
                complete disregard of these principles - even if the same has been
                agreed prior to the disputes having arisen between the parties. There are
                certain minimum levels of independence and impartiality that should
                be required of the arbitral process regardless of the parties' apparent
                agreement. A sensible law cannot, for instance, permit appointment of
                an arbitrator who is himself a party to the dispute, or who is employed
                by (or similarly dependent on) one party, even if this is what the parties
                agreed. The Commission hastens to add that Mr. PK Malhotra, the ex

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 13 of 46
                 officio member of the Law Commission suggested having an exception
                for the State, and allow State parties to appoint employee arbitrators.
                The Commission is of the opinion that, on this issue, there cannot be any
                distinction between State and non-State parties. The concept of party
                autonomy cannot be stretched to a point where it negates the very basis
                of having impartial and independent adjudicators for resolution of
                disputes. In fact, when the party appointing an adjudicator is the State,
                the duty to appoint an impartial and independent adjudicator is that
                much more onerous - and the right to natural justice cannot be said to
                have been waived only on the basis of a "prior" agreement between the
                parties at the time of the contract and before arising of the disputes.

                58.Large scale amendments have been suggested to address this
                fundamental issue of neutrality of arbitrators, which the Commission
                believes is critical to the functioning of the arbitration process in India.
                In particular, amendments have been proposed to
sections 11
,
12
and
14
of the Act.

                59.The Commission has proposed the requirement of having specific
                disclosures by the arbitrator, at the stage of his possible appointment,
                regarding existence of any relationship or interest of any kind which is
                likely to give rise to justifiable doubts. The Commission has proposed
                the incorporation of the Fourth Schedule, which has drawn from the
                Red and Orange lists of the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in
                International Arbitration, and which would be treated as a "guide"
                to determine whether circumstances exist which give rise to such
                justifiable doubts. On the other hand, in terms of the proposed
section 12
                (5)
of the Act and the Fifth Schedule which incorporates the categories
                from the Red list of the IBA Guidelines (as above), the person proposed
                to be appointed as an arbitrator shall be ineligible to be so appointed,
                notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary. In the event such
                an ineligible person is purported to be appointed as an arbitrator, he
                shall be de jure deemed to be unable to perform his functions, in terms of
                the proposed explanation to
section 14
. Therefore, while the disclosure is
                required with respect to a broader list of categories (as set out in the
                Fourth Schedule, and as based on the Red and Orange lists of the IBA
                Guidelines), the ineligibility to be appointed as an arbitrator (and the
                consequent de jure inability to so act) follows from a smaller and more
                serious sub-set of situations (as set out in the Fifth Schedule, and as
                based on the Red list of the IBA Guidelines).

                60.The Commission, however, feels that real and genuine party autonomy
                must be respected, and, in certain situations, parties should be allowed to
                waive even the categories of ineligibility as set in the proposed Fifth
                Schedule. This could be in situations of family arbitrations or other
                arbitrations where a person commands the blind faith and trust of the
                parties to the dispute, despite the existence of objective "justifiable
                doubts" regarding his independence and impartiality. To deal with such
                situations, the Commission has proposed the proviso to
section 12 (5)
,
                where parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them,
                waive the applicability of the proposed
section 12 (5)
by an express
                agreement in writing. In all other cases, the general rule in the proposed
section 12 (5)
must be followed. In the event the High Court is
                approached in connection with appointment of an arbitrator, the
                Commission has proposed seeking the disclosure in terms of
section 12
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 14 of 46
                 (1) and in which context the High Court or the designate is to have "due
                regard" to the contents of such disclosure in appointing the arbitrator. "
                                                                     (Emphasis Supplied)
    17.While welcoming the above Satutory development in the sphere of
         Arbitration in India, Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Voestalpine
         Schienen GMVH Vs. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd., 17 , a
         case between an Austrian company and Delhi Metro Rail
         Corporation highlighed and emphasised the salutory need of
         "Neutrality of Arbitrators while the DMRC insisted that the
         Contractor shall choose the Arbitral Tribunal from 5 names sent by
         DMRC to them from an inhouse panel maintained by the DMRC. It
         was pleaded by the Austrian company that this is in direct violation
         of
Section 12(5)
of the Act. Hon'ble Supreme Court discussed the
         objective of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
and the various
         amendments brought in it by way of Amendment Act no. 3 of 2016
         w.e.f. 23.10.2015. The Apex Court stressed that these amendments
         were brought in consonance with Law Commission of India's
         176th and 246th Report. Hon'ble Supreme Court observed,


               15. Apart from other amendments,
Section 12
was also amended and the
                  amended provision has already been reproduced above. This
                  amendment is also based on the recommendation of the Law
                  Commission which specifically dealt with the issue of 'neutrality of
                  arbitrators' and a discussion in this behalf is contained in paras 53 to
                  60 and we would like to reproduce the entire discussion hereinbelow:

              17.We may put a note of clarification here. Though, the Law Commission
                  discussed the aforesaid aspect under the heading "Neutrality of
                  Arbitrators", the focus of discussion was on impartiality and
                  independence of the arbitrators which has relation to or bias towards
                  one of the parties. In the field of international arbitration, neutrality is
                  generally related to the nationality of the arbitrator. In international
                  sphere, the 'appearance of neutrality' is considered equally important,
                  which means that an arbitrator is neutral if his nationality is different
                  from that of the parties. However, that is not the aspect which is being
                  considered and the term 'neutrality' used is relatable to impartiality and
                  independence of the arbitrators, without any bias towards any of the
                  parties. In fact, the term 'neutrality of arbitrators' is commonly used in
                  this context as well.
17(2017) 4 SCC 665


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 15 of 46
               18.Keeping in mind the afore-quoted recommendation of the Law
                  Commission, with which spirit,
Section 12
has been amended by the
                  Amendment Act, 2015, it is manifest that the main purpose for amending
                  the provision was to provide for neutrality of arbitrators. In order to
                  achieve this, sub-section (5) of
Section 12
lays down that
                  notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose
                  relationship with the parties or counsel or the subject matter of the
                  dispute falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh
                  Schedule, he shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. In such
                  an eventuality, i.e., when the arbitration clause finds foul with the
                  amended provisions extracted above, the appointment of an arbitrator
                  would be beyond pale of the arbitration agreement, empowering
                  the court to appoint such arbitrator(s) as may be permissible. That would
                  be the effect of non-obstante clause contained in sub-section (5) of
Section 12
and the other party cannot insist on appointment of the
                  arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement.

    18.While highlighting the importance of Neutrality of Arbitrators and
         the need that the Tribunal should work in an independent and
         impartial manner, Hon'ble Supreme Court thus ruled that even if an
         Arbitration Clause allowing unilateral appointments pre-existed
         before 2015 Amendment, it is rendered a cipher and a naught with
         promulgation
Section 12(5)
read with
Seventh Schedule of the Act
specifically when there is a non-obstante clause. Hon'ble Supreme
         Court stated that even prior to inclusion of
Section 12(5)
read with
         Schedule 7 of the Act several judgments were passed in context of
Section 11(8)
of the Act which recommended that the choice of
         Arbitrator made by the parties can be given a go-bye in order to
         maintain the neutrality, independence and impartiality. The Apex
         Court further observed in Voestalpine Judgment:-


            19. "We may mention here that there are number of judgments of this Court even
                 prior to the amendment of
Section 12
where courts have appointed the
                 arbitrators, giving a go-by to the agreed arbitration clause in certain
                 contingencies and situations, having regards to the provisions of unamended
Section 11(8)
of the Act which, inter alia, provided that while appointing the
                 arbitrator, Chief Justice, or the person or the institution designated by him,
                 shall have regard to the other conditions as are likely to secure the
                 appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator."
                 Taking note of the below mentioned judgments, Hon'ble Apex Court in
                 summed up the position. i.e.

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                  page 16 of 46
                    Datar Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr.(2000) 8 SCC 151
                   Punj Lloyd Ltd. v. Petronet MHB Ltd,(2006) 2 SCC 638
                   Union of India v. Bharat Battery Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd.,(2007) 7 SCC
                   684
                   Deep Trading Co. v. Indian Oil Corporation (2013) 4 SCC 35.
                   Union of India v. Singh Builders Syndicate (2009) 4 SCC 523
                   Northern Eastern Railway v. Tripple Engineering Works (2014) 9 SCC 288
                   Union of India and others v. Uttar Pradesh State Bridge
                   Corporation(2015) 2 SCC 52


               20. "Independence and impartiality of the arbitrator are the hallmarks of any
                   arbitration proceedings. Rule against bias is one of the fundamental
                   principles of natural justice which applied to all judicial and quasi
                   judicial proceedings. It is for this reason that notwithstanding the fact that
                   relationship between the parties to the arbitration and the arbitrators
                   themselves are contractual in nature and the source of an arbitrator's
                   appointment is deduced from the agreement entered into between the parties,
                   notwithstanding the same non-independence and non-impartiality of such
                   arbitrator (though contractually agreed upon) would render him ineligible to
                   conduct the arbitration. The genesis behind this rational is that even when
                   an arbitrator is appointed in terms of contract and by the parties to the
                   contract, he is independent of the parties. Functions and duties require him
                   to rise above the partisan interest of the parties and not to act in, or so as to
                   further, the particular interest of either parties. After all, the arbitrator has
                   adjudicatory role to perform and, therefore, he must be independent of
                   parties as well as impartial.



             30.Time has come to send positive signals to the international business
                 community, in order to create healthy arbitration environment and
                 conducive arbitration culture in this country. Further, as highlighted
                 by the Law Commission also in its report, duty becomes more onerous in
                 Government contracts, where one of the parties to dispute is the
                 Government or public sector undertaking itself and the authority to appoint
                 the arbitrator rests with it."
                                                                        (Emphasis Supplied)


    19.As stressed and highlighted by Hon'ble Supreme Court, 'Neutrality
         of the Arbitral Tribunal' is the soul of adjudication of a dispute and
         the same cannot be compromised. By quoting Law Commission of
         India and other judgments of Apex Court of period even prior to
         inclusion of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of the Act, it is
         authoritatively ruled that "Neutrality of the Arbitrators is not
         compromisable."



HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                      page 17 of 46
          (IV) Law laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court in several
         authoritative Judgments debarring "Unilateral Appointment of
         Sole Arbitrators" :
              ● TRF Limited Vs. Energo Engineering Projects Limited (supra)
              ● Perkins Eastman Architects DPC Vs. HSCC India Limited (supra)
              ● Voestalpine Schienen GMVH Vs. DMRC Ltd. (supra)
              ● Bharat Broadband Network Vs. United Telecoms Limited (supra)
              ● HARSAC and Anr. Vs. Pan India Consultants (supra)
              ● Jaipur JDUSS Ltd. Vs. Ajay Sales and Suppliers (supra)
              ● Ellora Papermills Vs. State of M.P. (supra)
              ● Dharma Prasthanam Vs. Madhok Construction Pvt. Ltd. (supra)



    20.In case titled TRF Limited Vs. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd.
         (2017) 8 SCC 377 Full Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court led by
         Justice Deepak Mishra had the opportunity to reprise and articulate
         the course corrective effect introduction of
Section 12(5)
read with
         Schedule 7 of the Act. The issue before Hon'ble Full Bench of the
         Supreme Court was, "Whether a person who is ineligible to
         preside an Arbitral Tribunal on account of operation of law i.e.
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of the Act would be eligible to
         nominate another person as Arbitrator." While comparing the
         unamended
Section 12
of the Act with the amended
Section 12
of
         the Act, post 2015 Amendment, Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled:


              "12.Sub-Section (5) of
Section 12
, on which immense stress has been laid by
                  the learned counsel for the appellant, as has been reproduced above,
                  commences with a non-obstante clause. It categorically lays down that if
                  a person whose relationship with the parties or the counsel for the
                  subject matter of the dispute falls under any of the categories specified
                  in the Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as an
                  arbitrator. There is a qualifier which indicates that parties may
                  subsequent to the disputes arisen between them, waive the
                  applicability by express agreement in writing. The qualifier finds place in


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                  page 18 of 46
                    the proviso appended to sub-
section 5
of
Section 12
. On a careful
                   scrutiny of the proviso,it is discernible that there are fundamentally
                   three components, namely the parties can waive the applicability of the
                   sub-section; the said waiver can only take place subsequent to dispute
                   having arisen between the parties; and such waiver must be by an express
                   agreement in writing."
                                                                        (Emphasis Supplied)

    21.Hon'ble Full Bench distinguished that the Arbitral Agreements
         where both sides are required to appoint one Arbitrator each who, in
         turn, appoint a Third Neutral Arbitrator with cases where the
         Arbitrator Clause gives full power to only one party to appoint a
         Sole Arbitrator in this matter. While appreciating the concern of the
         appellant that by virtue of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of
         the Act an employee/official of a disputing party cannot act as an
         Arbitrator, such an employee/official cannot also appoint another
         Arbitrator unilaterally Hon'ble Apex Court observed:-
                53.The aforesaid authorities have been commended to us to establish the
                   proposition that if the nomination of an arbitrator by an ineligible arbitrator is
                   allowed, it would tantamount to carrying on the proceeding of arbitration by
                   himself. According to learned counsel for the appellant, ineligibility strikes at
                   the root of his power to arbitrate or get it arbitrated upon by a nominee.
                54.In such a context, the fulcrum of the controversy would be, can an ineligible
                   arbitrator, like the Managing Director, nominate an arbitrator, who may be
                   otherwise eligible and a respectable person. As stated earlier, we are neither
                   concerned with the objectivity nor the individual respectablity. We are only
                   concerned with the authority or the power of the Managing Director. By our
                   analysis, we are obligated to arrive at the conclusion that once the arbitrator
                   has become ineligible by operation of law, he cannot nominate another as an
                   arbitrator. The arbitrator becomes ineligible as per prescription contained in
Section 12(5)
of the Act. It is inconceivable in law that person who is
                   statutorily ineligible can nominate a person. Needless to say, once the
                   infrastructure collapses, the superstructure is bound to collapse. One cannot
                   have a building without the plinth. Or to put it differently, once the identity of
                   the Managing Director as the sole arbitrator is lost, the power to nominate
                   someone else as an arbitrator is obliterated. Therefore, the view expressed by
                   the High Court is not sustainable and we say so.
                                                                                (Emphasis Supplied)

    22.The aspect of Unilateral Appointment of Arbitrator and its
         derelictious effect on neutrality, independence and impartiality of
         Arbitral proceedings Hon'ble Supreme Court discussed the issue
         threadbare in case title Perkins Eastman Architects DPC Vs.

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 19 of 46
          HSCC India Limited, (2020) 20 SCC 760. Taking cue from 'TRF
         Judgment' the aspect which was taken up for consideration by the
         Apex Court in Perkins Eastman Judgment is where a Managing
         Director or any official or authority who is a disputing party may not
         be acting as an Arbitrator but empowered under the Arbitration
         Clause to appoint another person of choice or discretion as an
         Arbitrator. The Bench Observed:
                "We thus have two categories of cases. The first, similar to the one dealt
                with in TRF Limited4 where the Managing Director himself is named as an
                arbitrator with an additional power to appoint any other person as an
                arbitrator. In the second category, the Managing Director is not to act as
                an arbitrator himself but is empowered or authorised to appoint any other
                person of his choice or discretion as an arbitrator. If, in the first category
                of cases, the Managing Director was found incompetent, it was because of
                the interest that he would be said to be having in the outcome or result of
                the dispute. The element of invalidity would thus be directly relatable to
                and arise from the interest that he would be having in such outcome or
                decision. If that be the test, similar invalidity would always arise and
                spring even in the second category of cases. If the interest that he has in
                the outcome of the dispute, is taken to be the basis for the possibility of bias,
                it will always be present irrespective of whether the matter stands under the
                first or second category of cases. We are conscious that if such deduction is
                drawn from the decision of this Court in TRF Limited4, all cases having
                clauses similar to that with which we are presently concerned, a party to the
                agreement would be disentitled to make any appointment of an Arbitrator
                on its own and it would always be available to argue that a party or an
                official or an authority having interest in the dispute would be disentitled to
                make appointment of an Arbitrator.

    23. While discussing the above referred Voestalpine Judgment and
         Law Commission of India, 176th and 246th Report the Apex Court
         highlighted that the principles of procedural fairness, impartiality
         and independence cannot be discarded at any stage of the
         proceedings. The Supreme Court Bench quoted in Perkins
         Judgment, "
                "Since the principles of impartiality and independence cannot be
                discarded at any stage of the proceedings, specifically at the stage of
                consideration of the Arbitral Tribunal, it would be incongruous to say that
                "Parties Autonomy" can be exercised in complete disregard of these
                principles and even if the same has been agreed prior to the disputes having
                risen between the parties. There are certain minimum levels of
                independence and impartiality that should be required of the arbitral
                process regardless of parties apparent agreement. A sensible law cannot,

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                       page 20 of 46
                 for instance, permit appointment of an Arbitrator who is himself a party to
                the dispute, or who is employed by (or similarly dependent on) one party,
                even if this is what the parties agree.......
                In fact, when the party appointing an adjudicator in the suit, the duty to
                appoint an impartial and independent adjudicator is that much more
                onerous and the right to natural justice cannot be said to have been
                waived only on the basis of a "Prior:- Agreement between the parties at
                the time of Contract or before arising out of the disputes".
                                                                        (Emphasis Supplied)

    24.In case title Bharat Broadband Network Vs. United Telecoms
         Limited, (2019) 5 SCC 755 while dealing with an issue of
Section
         12(5)
read with Schedule 7 qua unilateral appointment of arbitrator
         by official of the disputing company, the Bench led by Justice R. F.
         Nariman dealt with an issue wherein during the pendency of arbitral
         proceedings before a Sole Arbitrator who was unilaterally appointed
         by CMD of Bharat Broadband Network, an application was moved
         before the Arbitrator by the Bharat Broadband Network company
         that in the light of TRF Limited the Tribunal would be de jure
         unable to perform the function as Arbitrator and that he should
         withdraw from the arbitration so that an application under
Section
         11
of the Act can be filed before the High Court. The plea was
         rejected by the Arbitrator. When                   Bharat Broadband Network
         approached Delhi High Court, the High Court rejected the plea of
         the Bharat Broadband Network on the ground that since the Sole
         Arbitrator was appointed by Bharat Broadband Network itself, it is
         estopped from making a plea for removal of the arbitrator. While
         discussing Voestalpine Schienen Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled that,


             "
Section 12(5)
, on the other hand, is a new provision which relates to the de
             jure inability of an arbitrator to act as such. Under this provision, any prior
             agreement to the contrary is wiped out by the non-obstante clause in
Section
             12(5)
the moment any person whose relationship with the parties or the counsel
             or the subject matter of the dispute falls under the 7 th Schedule. The sub-Section
             then declares that such person shall be "ineligible" to be appointed as
             arbitrator. The only way in which this ineligibility can be removed is by the
             proviso, which again is a special provision which states that parties may,


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 21 of 46
              subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of
Section 12(5)
by an express agreement in writing. What is clear, therefore, is
             that where, under any agreement between the parties, a person falls within any
             of the categories set out in the 7th Schedule, he is, as a matter of law, ineligible
             to be appointed as an arbitrator. The only way in which this ineligibility can be
             removed, again, in law, is that parties may after disputes having arisen between
             them, waive the applicability of this sub-section by an "express agreement in
             writing". The express agreement in writing" has reference to a person who is
             interdicted by the 7th Schedule, but who is stated by parties (after the disputes
             have arisen between them) to be a person in whom they have faith
             notwithstanding the fact that such person is interdicted by the 7th Schedule.

    25.In case title Dharma Prasthanam Vs. M/s Madhok Construction
         Pvt. Ltd. (2005) 9 SCC 686 Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing
         with the aspect of 'Unilateral Appointment of Arbitrator' even in the
         pre-2015 Amendment period ruled,
             "A unilateral appointment as well as a unilateral reference, both will be
             illegal. It would make a difference if in respect of a unilateral appointment and
             reference if the other party had submitted to the jurisdiction of an arbitrator so
             appointed and if the rights which it has under such an agreement has been
             waived, then an arbitrator so appointed may proceed with the reference and the
             party submitting to his jurisdiction and participating in the proceedings before
             him may later on not be allowed to raise any objection in with regard to such
             appointment of arbitrator."

    26.In case title Haryana Space Application Centre (HARSAC) and
         Anr. Vs. Pan India Consultants, (2021) 3 SCC 103 the Full Bench
         of Hon'ble Supreme Court dealt with a case where the petitioner
         appointed the Principal Secretary of the State as Nominee Arbitrator
         and arbitral proceedings were going on in for more than 4 years, Full
         Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled that the application of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of the Act is mandatory and not
         derogable. The Apex Court ruled,
               "We are of the view that the appointment of the Principal Secretary,
               Government of Haryana as the nominee arbitrator of HARSAC which is a
               Nodal Agency of the Government of Haryana, would be invalid under
Section 12(5)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (as amended
               by the 2015 Amendment Act) provides that notwithstanding any prior
               agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship with the parties,
               or cousel falls within any of the categories specified in the 7 th Schedule,
               shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator.........

               The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management of has a


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 22 of 46
                similar controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the
               affiliate is directly involved in the matters in dispute in the
               arbitration.........
Section 12(5)
read with the 7th Schedule is a mandatory and non-
               derogable provision of the Act. In the facts of the present case, the
               Principal Secretary to the Government of Haryana would be ineligible to
               be appointed as an arbitrator, since he would have a controlling influence
               on the Appellant Company being a nodal agency of the State.

               The Counsel for both parties during the course of hearing have consented
               to the substitution of the existing tribunal, by the appointment of a Sole
               Arbitrator to complete the arbitral proceedings."
                                                                            (Emphasis Supplied)

    27.Lately, in case title Jaipur Jila Dugdh Utpadak Sehkari Sangh
         Ltd. Vs. Ajay Sales and Suppliers, 2021 SCC Online SC 730, the
         Supreme Court Bench headed by HMJ M R Shah dealt with a case
         where the Arbitration Clause dated 31.03.2015 provided for
         appointment of Sangh's Chairman as Sole Arbitrator. When the
         dispute arose and Arbitration was invoked on 19.10.2019, the
         respondent approached High Court of Rajasthan which under
Section 11
of The Act where a fresh Arbitrator was appointed. When
         the High Court's order was challenged before the Supreme Court
         with a plea that the Arbitration Clause pre-existed the 2015
         Amendment of The Act and inclusion of
Section 12(5)
and
         Schedule 7 Hon'ble Supreme Court while dismissing the petition
         challenging the High Court order ruled that,
               "So far as the submission on behalf of the petitioners that the agreement was
               prior to the insertion of Sub-
Section 5
of
Section 12
read with 7th
Schedule
               to the Act
and therefore the disqualification under Sub-
Section 5
of
Section
               12
read with 7th
Schedule to the Act
shall not be applicable and that once
               an arbitrator-Chairman started the arbitration proceedings thereafter the
               High Court is not justified in appointing an Arbitrator are concerned the
               aforesaid has no substance and can to be accepted in view of the decision of
               this Court in TRF Limited Judgment(supra), Bharat Broadband Network
               Judgment(supra), Voestalpine Schienen Judgment (supra). In the aforesaid
               decisions this Court had an occasion to consider in detail the object and
               purpose of insertion of Sub-
Section 5
of
Section 12
read with 7th
Schedule
               to the Act
. In the case of Voestalpine Schienen Judgment(supra) it is
               observed and held by this Court that the main purpose for amending the
               provision was to provide for 'Neutrality of Arbitrators'. It is further
               observed that in order to achieve this, Sub-
section 5
of
Section 12
lays

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                  page 23 of 46
                down that notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person
               whose relationship with the parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the
               dispute falls under any of the categories specified in the 7 th Schedule, he
               shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. It is further observed
               that in such an eventuality i.e. when the arbitration clause finds foul with the
               amended provisions (Sub-
Section 5
) of
Section 12
read with 7 th Schedule
               the appointment of an Arbitrator would be beyond pale of the arbitration
               agreement, empowering the Court to appoint such arbitrator as may be
               permissible. It is further observed that , that would be the effect of non-
               obstante clause contained in Sub-
Section5
of
Section 12
and the other party
               cannot insist on appointment of the arbitrator in terms of the arbitration
               agreement..........
It is further observed and held by this Court in the aforeasaid decision that
               independence and imparitality of the arbitrator are the hallmarks of any
               arbitration proceedings. Rule against bias is one of the fundamental
               principles of natural justice which shall apply to all judicial and quasi-
               judicial proceedings. It is further observed that it is for this reason that
               notwithstanding the fact that relationship between the parties, to the
               arbitration and the arbitrators themselves are contractual in nature and the
               source of an arbitrator's appointment is deduced from the agreement entered
               into between the parties, notwithstanding the same non-independence and
               non-impartiality of such arbitrator would render him ineligible to conduct
               the arbitration.
(Emphasis Supplied)
28.In another case title Ellora Papermills Vs. State of M.P., (2022) 3
         SCC 1 Hon'ble Supreme Court on 04.01.2022 dealt with a matter
         wherein the dispute pertained to year 1993-94 and the Arbitral
         Tribunal consisting of officers of State of MP was constituted much
         prior to promulgation of 2015 Amendment and inclusion of
Section
         12(5)
and 7th Schedule w.e.f. 23.10.2015. High Court did not
         interfere with the Tribunal citing the reason that the Tribunal started
         functioning prior to 23.10.2015 and that the appellant had already
         participated in the proceedings. Hon'ble Supreme Court while
         relying on TRF Limited, Bharat Broadband, Voestalpine and
         Ajay Sales Judgments stressed that 'Neutrality of Arbitrators',
         their independence and imparitality is critical for the entire
         process. The Bench reiterated,
                   "Though, the Law Commission discussed the aforesaid aspect under
                   the heading "Neutrality of Arbirators", the focus of discussion was on
                   imparitality and independenceof the arbitrators which has relation to
                   or bias towards one of the parties. In the field of international

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 24 of 46
                      arbitration, neutrality is generally related to the nationality of the
                     arbitrator. In international sphere, the "appearnace of neutrality" is
                     considered equally important, which means that an arbitrator is
                     neutral if his nationality is different from that of the parties. However,
                     that is not the aspect which is being considered and the term
                     "neutrality" used is relatable to imparitality and independence of the
                     arbitrators, without any bias towards any of the parties. In fact, the
                     term "Neutrality of Arbitrators" is commonly used in this context as
                     well........
Keeping in mind the aforequoted recommendation of the Law
                     Commission, with which spirit,
Section 12
has been amended by the
                     Amendment Act, 2015, it is manifest that the main purpose for
                     amending the provision was to provide for neutrality of arbitrators. In
                     order to achieve this, sub-
Section 5
of
Section 12
lays down that
                     notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person
                     whose relationship with the parties or counsel or the subject matter of
                     the dispute falls under any of the categories specified in the 7 th
                     Schedule, he shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. In
                     such an eventuality i.e. when the arbitration clause finds foul with the
                     amended provisions extracted above, the appointment of an arbitrator
                     would be beyond pale of the arbitration agreement, empowering the
                     Court to appoint such arbitrator(s) as may be permissible. That would
                     be the effect of non obstante clause contained in sub-
Section 5
of
Section 12
and the other party cannot insist on appointment of the
                     arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement.
29.In case title
SMS Limited Vs. Rail Vikas Nigam Limited
18,
          wherein Hon'ble Delhi High Court dealt with an aspect where
          Railways claimed that it is offering a panel of 37 names for selection
          of the Arbitrator but the same was opposed by the plaintiff company
          as the proposed Arbitrators were primarily retired Railway Officers
          and few of them were from other PSUs. While referring to
          Voestalpine Judgment and Perkins Eastman Judgment of
          Hon'ble Supreme Court it was ruled by Hon'ble Delhi High Court
          that,
                    " It is pertinent to note that in case of Perkins Eastmen the Supreme
                    Court while dealing with the application under Order 7 Rule 6 read
                    with
Section 11(12)(a)
of the Act held that as per scheme of
Section 11
of the Act if there are justifiable doubts as to the independence and
                    impartiality of the person nominated and if other circumstances warrant
                    appointment of an independent arbitrator by ignoring the procedure
                    prescribed, an appointment can be made by the Court,"
18 2020 Latest Caselaw 190 Delhi


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                       page 25 of 46
30.In case title
Proddatur Cable TV Digi Services Vs. Siti Cable
          Network Ltd.19
, Hon'ble High Court of Delhi dealt with a case
          where appointment of the Arbitrator was challenged on the ground
          that the Arbitrator was 'Unilaterally Appointed' in violations of TRF
          Judgment and Perkins Eastman Judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
          Court. The relevant para of the judgment of Hon'ble High Court is
          reproduced as under:
"Lastly the reliance of the respondent on the judgment of the Supreme Court
              in the case of Central Organisation is also of no avail to the respondent. In
              the said case, the Supreme Court was dealing with an arbitration clause
              which required a panel of arbitrators to be provided by the Railways to the
              other party to the contract, in terms of clause 64.3(a)(ii) of the GCC. The
              Court held that since one party was to provide a panel and the other party
              had the choice to short list the Arbitrator of its choice from the panel and
              only from the shortlisted names, Railways was bound to appoint at least one
              Arbitrator to constitute the Arbitral Tribunal, the parties had a level playing
              filed. The Arbitrator appointed by the Railways of its choice was balanced by
              the second Arbitrator being of the choice of the other party. Thus, the
              elements of fairness, transparency and impartiality were taken care of."
31.In case title
City Lifeline Travels Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Delhi Jal Board
20,
          Hon'ble High Court of Delhi ruled that,
             "The contention that the decision in the case of Perkins Eastman ought to be
             read in a restrictive manner is not persuasive. On the contrary
,
the said
             decision
must be read in expansive manner. The efficacy of arbitration as an
             alternate dispute resolution mechanism rests on the foundation that the
             disputes would be adjudicated by independent and impartial arbitrators. The
             decision in Perkins Eastman recognizes the importance of ensuring that
             Arbitrators not be appointed by persons who are otherwise interested in the
             matter so as to obviate any doubt as to the impartiality and independence of
             the Arbitral Tribunal. The necessity for instituting necessary safeguards for
             the same cannot be understated."
(Emphasis Supplied)
32.In case title
Abraham Memorial Education Trust Vs. Prodigy
          Development Institution21 Delhi
, dated 03.03.2021 Hon'ble High
          Court dealt with the award which was passed Ex-Parte by
          'Unilaterally Appointed Arbitrator' and held,
19 2020 Latest Caselaw 328 Delhi
20 2021 Latest Caselaw 276 Delhi
21 OMP (Comm.)
391 of 2020


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 26 of 46
             "Since the Arbitrator's appointment was contrary to the provisions of
            Arbitration Agreement and Act, the unilateral reference of disputes and the
            proceedings before the Sole Arbitrator are void ab initio and the award so
            rendered is a nullity in law. Hence, the impugned award cannot be
            sustained and the Court has no hesitation in setting aside the award and it
            is ordered accordingly."
(Emphasis Supplied)
33.In case title M/s
Fam Bhagat Infratech Private Limited Vs. Alok
         Kumar Agarwal22
, Hon'ble High Court while dealing with the
         challenge to Arbitral Clause which provided that 'Unilateral
         Appointment of Arbitrator' ruled,
            "Clearly, in view of the law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in Perkins
            Eastman and Bharat Broadband as well as
Section 12(5)
of the Arbitration
            and Conciliation Act, 1996, read with the 7 th Schedule thereto, Clause 9.1 is
            rendered unsustainable in law, as it confers exclusive jurisdiction to one of the
            parties to the arbitration agreement to appoint the arbitrator.
(Emphasis Supplied)
34.In case title M/s
India Cements Capital Limited Vs. William
23,
         Hon'ble Kerala High Court at para no. 20 observed that,
20."Petitioner's contention that if an award is declared to be a nullity in
                    execution proceedings, it will amount to adding one more ground to
Section 34
of the Act is totally unacceptable. As mentioned earlier,
Section 34
of the Act provides seven grounds to set aside an award. If the
                    expression "set aside" is understood correctly, there will not be any lack
                    of clarity or obfuscation. Ordinarily, the expression "set aside" is
                    understood as meaning abandon, abjure, abrogate, discard, dispense
                    with, to omit, reject, repudiate, etc. The term "set aside" is defined in
                    Black's Law Dictionary (8th Edition) as vb.(of a court) to annul or vacate
                    ( a judgment, order, etc.). The term "set aside" in the legal parlance
                    means, to cancel, annul or revoke a judgment or order. It is an
                    indisputable proposition that in order to set aside a decree or order or
                    award, there must be one in existence. In other words, a decree or award
                    not in existence cannot be set aside. No one can seek to set aside a
                    decree or award which is not in existence. That exercised will be as futile,
                    rather as impossible, as one attempting to commit feticide of an unborn
                    foetus. Therefore, what is provided in
Section 34
of the Act is only ways
                    and means to set aside an award made in an arbitral proceedings. As
                    succintly stated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, what is sought to be
                    achieved by taking recourse to
Section 47
of the Code is to make a
                    declaration that the decree(here, an award) sought to be executed is a
                    nullity. In other words, seeking a pronouncement that there is no
                    executable decree of award at all. If the end result of an adjudication
                    under
Section 47
of the Code is entering a finding that there is no decree
                    or award at all, there cannot be a question of setting aside such a decree
                    of award in that proceedings. Therefore, the contention of the revision
22 2021 SCC Online Delhi 2486
23 2015 SCC OnLine Ker 24805


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 27 of 46
                     petitioner that the declaration of nullity of an award in a proceeding
                    under
Section 47
of the Code will tantamount to adding one more ground
                    to
Section 34
of the Act is legally incorrect and therefore, not
                    acceptable."
35.The celebrated judgments of TRF Limited, Perkins Eastman
         Hon'ble Supreme Court have been relied by other High Courts as
         well.
36.In case title Ravi Realcons Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Chief Engineer and
         Anr.24 Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta observed,
                " In the light of judgments in TRF Limited and Perkins Eastman in
Section
                12(5)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, it is clear that a person who
                may have an interest in the outcome of the dispute should not be made an
                Arbitrator."
37.While distinguishing the judgment of CORE judgments of
         Hon'ble Supreme Court on facts this Bench went on to rule that,
                "The judgments in CORE judgment are justiciable on facts as the same
                relate to appointment of arbitrator as per Arbitration Clause has not
                dehorsed the ratio of Perkins Eastman.
38.In case title
Priya Mallaiseth Vs. VLCC Healthcare Limited25
,
         Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruled,
                    "The arbitration agreement between the parties as noted above is not in
                    dispute. Firstly considering Mr. Sethna's second contention that Clause
                    13.1 when it confers an authority on the respondent to appoint an
                    arbitrator, it would be rendered bad in law in view of the principles of law
                    as
laid down by
the Supreme Court in Perkins Eastman needs acceptance
                    adverting to the principles of law as
laid down in
these decisions.
                    Applying these principles the respondent cannot have a unilateral
                    authority to appoint an arbitral tribunal."
39. Owing to inherent illegality in 'Unilateral Appointment of Sole
         Arbitrators' by one of the disputing parties is now so well
         established by Parliament and the Hon'ble Supreme Court that in
         several cases the parties themselves concede to this Legal Position
         and accept that unilateral appointment made by them may be set
         aside. In case titled Ekta Medical Systems Private Limited Vs.
24 2022 SCC Online CAL 751
25 2022 SCC Online Del 1137


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 28 of 46
          Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences26, when the petitioner raised
         the issue of unilateral appointment and carrying on of arbitral
         proceedings in violation of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of
         the Act while citing Perkins Eastman. Ld. Counsel for respondent,
         simply conceded to the legal position and paved the way for
         appointment of a neutral arbitrator by the High Court.
Hon'ble
         Delhi High Court ruled that,
                   "The petitioners, by this petition, seek termination of the mandate of the
                   arbitrator, presently in seisin of the disputes between the parties in view
                   of
Section 12(5)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 ("the
                   1996 Act") read with judgments of the Supreme Court in
Bharat
                   Broadband Network Ltd. Vs. United Telecoms Ltd.
, Perkins Eastman
                   Architects DPC vs. HSCC(India) Ltd. And Haryana Space Application
                   Centre Vs. Pan India Consultants Pvt. Ltd........
                   Mr. Sanjay Poddar, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent, fairly
                   concedes to the applicability of
Section 12(5)
of the 1996 Act as well as
                   the aforesaid decisions and, therefore submits that this Court may
                   appoint an arbitrator in place of the arbitrator presently in seisin of the
                   disputes."
(V) UNCITRAL Model Law on Commercial Arbitration 1985
         and UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 2021 proscribe and forbid
         Unilateral appointent of Sole Arbitrator by a disputing party.
40.The first statutory enactment on arbitrations in India was in the 19 th
         Century i.e. Indian Arbitration Act, 1899. It was replaced by
Arbitration Act, 1940
. However, in so far as the 1940 Act was found
         to be largely dependent on Judicial interventions and the Awards
         passed had no finality till such time they were made a 'Rule of Court
         by a Civil Court, Parliament of India decided to re-enact the Law of
         Arbitration in India on the lines of United Nations Commission on
         International Law (UNCITRAL) Model Law on Commercial
         Arbitration 1985. While adopting the same the current
Arbitration
         and Conciliation Act, 1996
was promulgated and notified on
         22.08.1996.
26 2021 SCC Online DEL 3979


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 29 of 46
41.In the latest UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules adopted in 2021
         under Section II "Composition of Arbitral Tribunal".
Articles 8
,
         9
and
10
pertain to appointment of arbitrators, it is specifically
         provided that in case it is agreed that the dispute shall be resolved
         through 'Sole Arbitrator', the parties have only 2 options.
         First: They can mutually agree on the name of a Sole Arbitrator
         within 30 days of invocation of arbitration. OR
         Second: In case no agreement is reached on the mutually
         acceptable name, party can make a request to the "Appointing
         Authority" who in turn will appoint a neutral and impartial Sole
         Arbitrator.
42.Article 6 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 2021 governs
         designation of "Appointing Authority" it provides that if the parties
         do not reach an agreement on designation of Appointing Authority, a
         party can propose the name of one or more institutions or persons
         including Secretary General of Permanent Court of Arbitration
         (PCA) at The Hague. Once the name is proposed and no consensus
         is reached between the disputing parties out of the institutions and
         names proposed within 30 days, by default Secretary General of
         PCA would become Appointing Authority in the matter.
43.The sum and substances that at no point of time either of the
         disputing party can be allowed to unilaterally appoint a Sole
         Arbitrator in its own dispute. The insistence on the part of NBFCs
         and PSUs to continue to unilaterally appoint Sole Arbitrators of their
         choice is in clear violation of UNCITRAL Model Arbitration Rules
         and is blatant violation of Full Bench decision of Hon'ble Supreme
         Court in TRF Limited.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                  page 30 of 46
          (VI) Legal position on unilateral appointment of Sole Arbitrator
         in other countries
44.Neutrality in arbitration has been adopted as a touchstone for fair
         and impartial arbitration and 'Equality of the Parties' World over.
45.United Kingdom: As per
Section 16-18
of Arbitration Act the
         default mechanism for appointment of arbitrators when the Tribunal
         consists of a Sole Arbitrator provides that such an Arbitrator shall be
         jointly appointed by the parties within 28 days upon invocation of
         Arbitration Clause.
46.France: In a very famous French Judgment of Siemens AG &
         BKMI           Industrienlagen             GMBH   Vs.   Ducto   Consortium
         Construction Co., also famously known as the "Ducto Case", the
         issue of equality as a matter of public policy in appointing an
         Arbitrator was discussed, way back in 1992. The agreement entered
         into between the parties had a multi-party arbitration agreement
         wherein, BKMI and Dutco the two defendants were requested to
         agree on a joint arbitrator, which was done under protest. This was
         subsequently challenged. ICC and Paris Court of Appeal did not see
         any problem with the appointment. However, the Cour de Cassation
         (French Supreme Court) set aside the order passed by the Paris
         Court of Appeal and considered the appointment process to be
         contrary to the public policy stating that the "equality of the parties
         in the appointment of arbitrators is a matter of public policy which
         can be waived only after the disputes has arisen."
47.As a result of this judgment, various arbitration institutions such as
         ICC, the German Institutions of Arbitration etc. provided for
         appointment of arbitrators by the institution wherein the parties are
         unable to agree on a joint arbitrator. Thus, party equality has been
         well-recognised internationally since decades.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                         page 31 of 46
          The landmark Ducto Case has been followed by Hon'ble Supreme
         Court in Perkins Eastman, "An independent mind is indispensable
         in the exercise of judicial powers, whatever the source of that power
         may be and it is one of the essential quality of an Arbitrator."
48. Russia: The rule of equlity of parties is strictly followed in arbitral
         proceedings in Russia. In case titled "Russia Telephone Company
         Vs. Sony Ericsson Communication Rus, Space no.1831/12,
         Presidum of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia ruled
         that,"an arbitration clause that gave one of the parties the
         additional, unilateral option of referring arbitration disputes is
         invalid.
(VII) Why NBFCs continue to impose their chosen Sole
         Arbitrator on the borrower and why there is resistance abiding
         Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled on TRF Limited, Perkins
         Eastman Judgments?
49.As detailed supra, the purpose and purport of
Section 12(5)
read
         with Schedule 7 is to instill neutrality, imparitality and fairness in
         Arbitrations in India. It has been ruled to be mandatory and binding
         on all concerned not only by Full Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
         Court but also by Division Benches of Hon'ble Supreme Court as
         also followed by numerous judgments of Hon'ble High Court in
         Delhi and other High Courts of India. It is strange that the NBFCs
         like the award holder in the case in hand continue to do a shut-eye to
         the above legal provision and the binding dicta of the Supreme
         Court which as per
Article 141
of the Constitution of India is Law
         of the Land and continue to appoint Sole Arbitrators unilaterally.
         The reluctance in having a neutral arbitrator for the purpose of
         adjudication of disputes is either rooted in lack of confidence on the

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                    page 32 of 46
          merits of the dispute or just an act of sheer arrogance, indifference
         and non-abidance of the law. They seem to be toeing the same old
         line of taking a chance, with a mind that they would fall in line only
         when some objection is taken by the respondent at any point of time
         or some Court in some Order objects to the same. This conscious
         illegality which is continuing unabatedly in blatant violation of
         Statutory Laws and Law laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court needs to be
         stopped and curbed effectively.
(VIII) Adverse effect of one sided arbitrators on "Enforcement
         of Contract component of "Ease of Doing Business" Ranking of
         India in World Bank's Doing Business Reports of Investment
         Friendly Nations.
50.Every Nation in the World today strives for improving Social and
         Economic well-being of its citizens. One of the sure way for any
         Economy to thrive is by attracting Foreign Direct Investment(FDI).
         World Bank has been preparing an 'Ease of Doing Business
         Report' of all countries of the World based on how investment-
         friendly the countries, its polices and infrastructure are for Foreign
         investors. The Annual Report consists of 10 components/parameters
         which included 'Enforcement of Contract' as well.
51.In the last around one decade as compared the Rank 142 in 2014,
         India's Rank in 'Ease of Doing Business' climbed to Rank 61 out of
         191 odd countries. But still when we compare our ranking on the
         indicator "Enforcement of Contracts" it shows that we are still at the
         Rank 163. While Prime Minster of India has made a call to make
         India a 5 Trillion US Dollar Economy, the same can be achieved
         not only by strengthening our dispute resolution infrastructure and
         also by ensuring fair, neutral, time-bound adjudication of disputes

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                  page 33 of 46
          not only before Commercial Courts in India but also before
         Arbitration Tribunal under
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
.
         One of the reason of inclusion of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7
         in the Act was to instill transparency and fairness in appointment of
         Arbitrators and bringing an end to the era of unilateral appointment
         of chosen Sole Arbitrators. In today's digitally connected World,
         unethical Arbitral Proceedings can't hidden on remain localised. If
         we wish to make Government of India's call for 'Resolve in
         India', a reality we have to work on Ethics, Neutrality and
         Efficiency of our Arbitration Infra. We will never be able to create
         Indian version of ICA (Paris), LCIA (London) and SIAC
         (Singapore) if we do not respect judgments of Hon'ble Supreme
         Court and UNCITRAL Model Laws on Arbitration on Ethical
         Arbitrations.
(IX) Ad-hoc Arbitrations by Unilaterally Appointed Sole
         Arbitrators weakening people's faith in Arbitration as an ADR.
52.While Ad-hoc Arbitrations by Tribunals appointed with concurrence
         of the parties or those appointed by Hon'ble High Courts under
Section 11
of the Act are working in a neutral and impartial manner
         but Arbitration proceedings carrying out by unilaterally appointed
         Ad-hoc Arbitrators are totally working in a one side manner without
         adhering to either the celebrated Principles of Natural Justice of
         being neutral and unbiased or sticking to Judicial Ethics as
         applicable to them in so far as they are performing adjudicatory
         function under Law promulgated by Parliament of India. More so
         when Awards passed by them have the strength of a decree of a Civil
         Court.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                 page 34 of 46
          (X) Justice B. N. Srikrishna Report on Arbitration stressed on
         strengthening 'Institutional Arbitration Centres' in India
53.A Committee was constituted by Govt. of India led by HMJ B. N.
         Srikrishna. It also included HMJ Indu Malhotra and HMJ P.S.
         Narsimhan (before they joined the Bench) as also other legal
         stalwarts namely Justice R.V. Ravindran Retired Judge, Hon'ble
         Supreme Court and Sh. K. K Venugopal, Attorney General of India,
         to analyze what is ailing Arbitration in India. One of the major
         suggestions made by Justice B. N. Srikrishna Report on
         Arbitration was to give impetus to Institutional Arbitration
         Centers which are incorporated under
Section 8
of the
         Companies Act, 2013 or registered under
Societies Act, 1860
. One
         of the reasons cited by the Report as to why for parties are not
         availing the services of Institutional Arbitration and prefer Adhoc
         Arbitration was that Adhoc Arbitration allows them to choose the
         Sole Arbitrator of their choice. It is this menace which is supposed
         to be corrected by
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7.
54.On account of non-abidance to these statutory binding provisions
         and adherance to the binding judgments of the Apex Court, quality
         of the ex-parte awards being doled by in-house Sole Arbitrators who
         are appointed unilaterally, the arbitration environment in the country
         is getting vitiated. It is being used by the NBFCs for extracting
         money with exorbitant interest from the borrowers. This is eroding
         society's faith in Arbitration as a mode of ADR as provided under
Section 89
CPC. Arbitration in India is more than 120 years vintage
         but still the failure to maintain the neutrality and fairness in the
         entire process, including appointment of arbitrator, is doing a lot of

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                  page 35 of 46
          disservice to the concept as a whole and is leading to financial
         anarchy in the Country.
55.During the course of arguments it is submitted on behalf of the
         execution petitioner that in India the term "Institutional
         Arbitration" stands defined in
Section 2(ca)
of The Act which
         reads as under:
"Arbitration Institution means an arbitral institution designated by the
                Supreme Court or a High Court under this Act."
56.The correct legal position on the above definition is that although
         the above definition was proposed by
Arbitration and Conciliation
         (Amendment) Act, 2019
i.e. Act no. 33 of 2019 but the same is yet
         to be notified and is as such not binding law in Arbitral arena.
         Moreover, the proposed amendment of the Act talks of constituted
         an 'Arbitration Council of India' which, in turn, will prepare a
         list of Arbitration Institutions on the basis of infrastructure, calibre
         of arbitrators, performance, compliance of time limits etc. As per
         proposed amendment, under
Section 11(3A)
of the Act, the
         designation of institutions by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
         High Courts is to be carried out only as per the proposal made by the
         'Arbitration Council of India'. This Court is apprised by Ld.
         Counsel for the plaintiff that the controlling
Ministry of Arbitration
         and Conciliation Act, 1996
under Allocation of Business Rules,
         1961 is Ministry of Law and Justice, Govt. of India. It is submitted
         that the Law Ministry, Govt. of India has already prepared and
         notified a Pan India "List of Arbitral Institutions" offering
         quality Arbitration and Mediation services and the same is
         available in public domain.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                              page 36 of 46
          (XI) Unilateral appointment of Arbitrator is Anti-thesis to
         "Nemo Judex in causa cua"- "No one can be a Judge in his own
         case".
57."Nemo Judex in causa cua"- "No one can be a Judge in his own
         case" is one of the most fundamental Principles of Natural Justice
         which is soul and fulcrum of any judicial or quasi-judicial process.
         As opined by Law Commission of India in its Reports, Parliament
         of India in the 2015
Amendment of Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
         1996
and repeatedly ruled by authoritatively judgments of Hon'ble
         Supreme Court, 'Neutrality of Arbitration Proceedings' cannot be
         allowed to be succumb or got highjacked by insistence of a large
         section of NBFCs and other Corporations to continue to violate the
         impartiality, probity and unbiasedness of arbitration proceedings in
         the country.
58.The unilateral appointment of arbitrators is germane to this vice and
         when the first step is taken in a wrong direction and is rendered non
         est, every next step and the culmination of the arbitral journey into
         an award is nothing but a zilch or nullity.
(XII) Whether CORE Judgment has over-ruled TRF Limited
         Judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court?
59.It is submitted by Ld. Counsel for the Execution Petitioner that the
         mandate of TRF Limited (Full Bench) and Perkins Eastman are
         over-ruled by Central Organisation for
Railway Electrification
         Vs. ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML(JV
)27, a Three-Judge Bench of the
         Supreme Court. In CORE Judgment the Apex Court allowed the
         appointment of Arbitral Tribunal from a panel maintained by
         Railways.
The Bench was of the view that since Contractor/opposite

27(2020) 14 SCC 712


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                  page 37 of 46
          party was allowed to choose two names out of a panel of 4 retired
         railway officers, Arbitral Tribunal,
Section 12(5)
of the Act is not
         violated and concerns of TRF Limited stands addressed.
60.This CORE Judgment came for scrutiny before Hon'ble Supreme
         Court in
Union of India Vs. Tantia Construction Limited SLP
(c)
         12670/2020 decided on 11.01.2021 by another Three-Judge Bench
         of the Apex Court led by HMJ R. F Nariman. It was found that
         CORE Judgment is in contradiction of TRF Limited and an order
         was passed requesting the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India to
         constitute a 'Larger Bench' for adjudicating on the correctness
         of the CORE judgment. The relevant para of abovementioned
         judgment is reproduced as under:
"Having heard Mr. K. M. Nataraj, learned ASG for some time, it is clear that
              on the facts of the case, the judgment of the High Court cannot be faulted with.
              Accordingly, the Special Leave Petition is dismissed. However, reliance has
              been placed upon a recent 3-Judge Bench decision of this court delivered on
              17.12.2019 in Central Organisation for
Railway Electrification Vs. ECI-
              SPIC-SMO-MCML(JV
) (2020) 14 SCC 712. We have perused the aforesaid
              judgment and prima facie disagree with it for the basic reason that once the
              appointing authority itself is incapacitated from referring the matter to
              arbitration, it does not then follow that notwithstanding this yet appointments
              may be valid depending on the facts of the case. We therefore request the
              Hon'ble Chief Justice to constitute a larger Bench to look into the
              correctness of this judgment. Pending application stands disposed of."
(Emphasis Supplied)
61.Even otherwise once a Three-Judge Full Bench of Hon'ble Supreme
         Court has already laid the law in TRF Limited as per well-
         established judicial norms, a co-equal Bench of 3-Judge of Hon'ble
         Supreme Court in CORE Judgment cannot set aside, dilute or vary
         the earlier laid law on the subject.
62.While discussing this aspect in a recent case of Hon'ble Delhi High
         Court titled as
Overnite Express Limited Vs. Delhi Metro Rail
         Corporation28
, pronounced on 02.08.2022, trashed the plea of
         DMRC that it had offered a panel of 5 retired judicial officers when
28 2022 SCC Online Del 2488


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                  page 38 of 46
           the plaintiff proposed a name of a retired High Court Judge as its
          nominee. A plea was raised by DMRC before the Hon'ble High
          Court that since neutrality and impartiality of retired Judicial
          officers cannot be questioned and reliance was placed on the CORE
          judgment, Hon'ble High Court while relying Voestalpine Judgment
          concluded that offering a panel of 5 names by one party to the
          opposite party is no longer a valid procedure. It was ruled:
"The procedure of forwarding a panel of five names to the other contracting
                party to choose its nominee Arbitrator is now held to be no longer a valid
                procedure.........
The respondent has no doubt given a panel of five retired District Judges, but
                it cannot be overlooked that it is a restrictive panel restricting the choice of
                the petitioner to pick up any one of those five which tantamounts to unilateral
                appointment of an Arbitrator by the Respondent, which may create a doubt
                about the Arbitrator being partial or biased. Though one may hasten to State
                and emphasise that the retired District Judges may be person of impeccable
                integrity, but the issue here is of a perceived bias which cannot be permitted.
                Hence, it is held that the procedure adopted by the respondent for appointment
                of Arbitrator from the panel cannot be sustained in the light of the
                observations of the Apex Court in
Voestalpine Schienen GMVH Vs. Delhi
                Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.
(2017) 4 SCC 665.
(Emphasis Supplied)
63.
In case title
Konodia Infratech Limited Vs. Dalmia Cement
          (Bharat) Limited29
, Hon'ble Delhi High Court dealt with the
          objection petition under
Section 34
of the Act wherein issue of
          "Unilateral Appointment of Sole Arbitrator" was raised for the first
          time. While upholding the arbitral award Hon'ble High Court cited
          following reasonings:
(a) That objector withdrew
Section 9
application from the High Court with
                   liberty to approach Sole Arbitrator under
Section 17
of the Act.
(b) That Objector filed a
Section 16
application challenging the composite
                   reference of dispute but not raising the unilateral appointment of Sole
                   Arbitrator.
(c) That the Objector himself filed counter-claim before the unilaterally
                   appointed Sole Arbitrator without protest.
(d) That the Objector give consent for explanation of time under Section
29 2021 Latest Caselaw 2975 Del


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 39 of 46
                    29
A of the Act
during the proceedings.
64.It was ruled by the Hon'ble High court that despite being aware of
         authoritative judgments of TRF Limited and Perkins Eastman the
         Objector did not raise any objection qua the unilateral appointment
         of the Arbitrator and constituted to participate in the proceedings.
65.The circumstances and unique facts in the cited case do not relate
         with the facts of the case in hand even remotely in so far as there
         was no participation on the part of Judgment Debtor unlike the cited
         case. As such this judgment is of no avail to the execution petitioner
         in this matter.
66.Post the passing of CORE Judgment, a section of arbitration
         litigants, specially Central/State Governments, Ministries and Public
         Sector Undertakings started projecting that they are no longer
         governed or covered by Three-Judge TRF Judgment Perkins
         Eastman Judgment and Voestalpine Judgment of Hon'ble
         Supreme Court and that now they are all free to appoint their
         arbitrators out of a panel which they maintain by picking and
         choosing names continued to them.
67.As mentioned supra, another Three-Judge Bench led by HMJ R.F.
         Nariman in Tantia Construction took cognizance of this situation
         and on 11.01.2021 i.e. within less than one month of passing of
         CORE Judgment expressed its disagreement over the reasoning and
         conclusions arrived at in CORE Judgment. The Bench expressly said
         that once the Appointing Authority itself is incapacitated how can
         such an Authority be permitted to appoint arbitrators in its own
         dispute. And the matter was referred to the Chief Justice of India for
         constituting a larger Bench to decide on the correctness of the
         CORE Judgment.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                    page 40 of 46
68.Evidently, constitution of a Five-Judge Bench to look into the
         correctness of Three-Judge CORE Judgment may take some time
         but in the interregnum the Law already laid by Three-Judge TRF
         Judgment in 2017 shall continue to be the binding law totally
         unaffected and unchanged by the observations made by co-equal
         Bench in Three-Judge CORE Judgment.
(XIII) Conclusion


         Conclusion A: Execution Court duly empowered under
Section 47
CPC to refuse Execution of Ex-Parte Awards passed by Unilaterally
         Appointed Arbitrators.
69.In the light of above discussion and appraisal of the facts of the case
         in the light of taking note of consistent judgments of Hon'ble
         Supreme Court, Delhi High Court and other High Courts covering
         aspect of powers of Execution Court under
Section 47
CPC it is
         found that the arbitral award in question is prima facie suffering
         from a substantive error which cause to the root of the matter in so
         far as it was passed ex-parte by a 'Unilaterally Appointed
         Arbitrator.'
         Conclusion B: Awards passed by Unilaterally Appointed Sole
         Arbitrators are nullity and Non-Executable.
70.Unilateral Appointment of Sole Arbitrator is non est and void ab
         initio. Awards passed by such a Tribunal is 'Non-Executable". The
         statutory provision of
Section 12(5)
read with Schedule 7 of the Act
         duly explained by full Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in TRF
         Judgment and other Supreme Court judgments namely Perkins
         Eastman, Bharat Broadband and several judgments of the
         Hon'ble High Court of Delhi it is found that as per legal position as

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                 page 41 of 46
          it exists as on date, the unilateral appointment of Sh. Bikash
         Vishwakarma as Sole Arbitrator was void ab initio, non-est and a
         nullity. The proceedings carried out by such unilaterally appointed
         arbitrator Ex-Parte and the awards sought to be executed is found to
         have been passed with inherent lack of jurisdiction. As such, this
         Court is of the firm view that the Award under Execution is
         rendered 'Non-Executable'.
(XIV) Petition seeking execution of Ex-Parte Award passed by a
         Unilaterally Appointed Arbitrator is like reaping benefits of
         one's own wrong-doing and is abuse of Court process.
         The above detailed discussion fairly brings to the fore one fact that
         'Unilateral Appointment of Arbitrators' by the NBFCs is nothing but
         a blatant violation and disregard of Law laid by Full Bench of
         Hon'ble Supreme Court and is akin to Contempt of Court. Filing a
         petition seeking execution of such Ex-Parte Awards obtained
         through such Unilateral Appointments is nothing but a classic
         example of abuse the process of Courts by Award Holders to extract
         money out of the hapless respondents who more often than do not
         have any clue about the very initiation, holding of proceeding and
         passing of such like Ex-Parte Arbitral Awards before the chosen Sole
         Arbitrators in an assembly line like fashion. Neither the letter of
         assignment of dispute to the arbitrator nor the declaration furnished
         by the Arbitrator or the Award sought to be executed through the
         petition in hand have reference to any of the above catena of
         landmark authoritative judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court and
         Hon'ble High Courts.
71.It is appalling to observe that the Execution Petitioners are
         determined to scorn and ignore with impunity the binding Law of

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                 page 42 of 46
          the Land and still gather courage to approach the Courts of Law
         with their unclean hands to seek and abuse the due process of law in
         reaping benefits of such ill-gotten Arbitral Awards.
72.In Halsbury's Laws of England, (4th Edn.,Vol. 9, Paragraph 38) ,
         there is a brief discussion of when "Abuse of the Process of the
         Court" may be a punishable contempt. It is said :
" Abuse of process in general. The Court has power to punish as
                  contempt any misuse of the court's process. Thus the forging or altering
                  of court documents and other deceits of like kind are punishable as
                  serious contempts. Similarly, deceiving the court or the court's officers
                  by deliberately suppressing a fact, or giving false facts, may be a
                  punishable contempt."
73.In case titled
S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead) by LRs Vs.
         Jaganath (Dead) LRs
and ors. AIR 1984 SC 853, Hon'ble
         Supreme Court observed :
"The Courts of Law are meant for imparting justice between the parties.
                 One who comes to the court , must come with clean hands. We are
                 constrained to say that more often then not, process of the court is being
                 abused . Property - grabbers tax-evaders, bank-loan-dodgers and other
                 unscrupulous persons from all walks of life find the court process a
                 convenient level to retain the illegal gains indefinitely. We have no
                 hesitation that a person whose case is based on falsehood has no right
                 to approach the court. He can be summarily thrown out at any stage of
                 litigation."
74.In case titled "
C.B. Aggarwal Vs. P. Krishna Kapoor
" AIR 1995
         Delhi 154 Hon'ble Delhi High Court observed:
"It is true that in a civilised society, legal process is the machinery for
                keeping order and doing justice. It can be used properly or it can be
                abused. It is used properly when it is invoked for vindication for men's
                right and enforcement of just claims. It is abused when it is diverted from
                its true course so as to serve extortion or oppression; or to exert
                pressure so as to achieve an improper end."
In case titled Curtis-Raleighquoted in Jennison v. Baker (1972) 1 All ER
                997 at p. 1006. it is said "The law should not be seen to sit by limply,
                while those who defy it go free, and those who seek its protection lose
                hope"
75.The Division Bench of Delhi High Court in case titled
Indian Steel
         & Wire Products Vs. B.I.F.R. (DB
), 2004 (110) DLT 186 held that
                "The sole purpose of filing the petition was to sabotage the
                proposal/scheme of TISCO which was accepted by the BIFR.
The court

HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                   page 43 of 46
                 held that the petitioner-company's false offer and undertaking has
                delayed the implementation of the scheme and the interest of workers and
                other creditors have suffered. The court held that the petitioner had not
                approached the court with clean hands and that such practice and
                tendency needed to be strongly discouraged and effectively curbed so
                that "in future, the petitioner and such like litigants should not gather
                the courage of abusing the process of law for ulterior motives and
                extraneous considerations. Such motivated petitions pollute the entire
                legal and judicial process which seriously affects the credibility of this
                system".
76.Plain reading of the above salutory judgments shows that such
         actions of the Execution Petitioner deserves to be resisted and
         treated as gross abuse of legal process. Such litigants deserves to be
         imposed exemplary costs as ruled in-
77.In Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund Vs. Kartick Das, (1994) 4 SCC,
         225 Hon'ble SC dealt with the issue and with intention to:
"Discourage speculative and vexatious litigation and judicial
                adventurism. "There is an increasing tendency on the part of the litigants
                to indulge in speculative and vexatious litigation and adventurism which
                the fora seem readily to oblige. We think such a tendency should be
                curbed. Having regard to the frivolous nature of the complaint, we think it
                is a fit case for award of costs, more so, when the appellant has suffered
                heavily. Therefore, we award costs of Rs.25,000/- in favour of the
                appellant."
78.In Chandra Shashi v. Anil Kumar Verma
, (1995) 1 SCC
         421,Hon'ble Supreme Court observed :
"The stream of administration of justice has to remain unpolluted so that
                purity of court's atmosphere may give vitality to all the organs of the
                State. Polluters of judicial firmament are, therefore, required to be well
                taken care of to maintain the sublimity of court's environment; so also to
                enable it to administer justice fairly and to the satisfaction of all
                concerned....
Anyone who takes recourse to fraud, deflects the course of judicial
                proceedings, or if anything is done with oblique motive, the same
                interferes with the administration of justice. Such persons are required
                to be properly dealt with, not only to punish them for the wrong done,
                but also to deter others from indulging in similar acts which shake the
                faith of people in the system of administration of justice..... To enable the
                courts to ward off unjustified interference in their working, those who
                indulge in immoral acts like perjury, prevarication and motivated
                falsehoods have to be appropriately dealt with, without which it would not


HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                     page 44 of 46
                 be possible for any court to administer justice in the true sense and to the
                satisfaction of those who approach it in the hope that truth would
                ultimately prevail. People would have faith in courts when they would find
                that 'Satyameva jayate' (truth alone triumphs) is an achievable aim there;
                or 'Yato Dharmstato Jaya' (it is virtue which ends in victory) is not only
                inscribed in emblem but really happens in the portals of courts.
                The legal position thus is that if the publication be with intent to deceive
                the court or one made with an intention to defraud, the same would be
                contempt, as it would interfere with administration of justice. It would, in
                any case, tend to interfere with the same. This would definitely be so if a
                fabricated document is filed with aforesaid mens rea.
79.In Kishore Samrite Vs. The State of UP
, (2013) 2 SCC 398
         Hon'ble Supreme Court expounded that:
"As and when the Courts found that a litigating party is abusing the Court
                process and had approached the Court with unclean hands without
                disclosing complete facts, they shall be burdened with exemplary and
                deterrent cost. In the cited case while observing that the petitioner have
                misused the judicial process, a cost of Rs.5 lacs was imposed."
80.It is pertinent to mention here that all the NBFCs are functioning in
         India under business licence from Ministry of Finance, Govt. of
         India or a dual licence from MoF as also RBI. It is expected of such
         NBFCs which has Pan India presence and are important player in
         financial infrastructure of developing Nation that they shall function
         within the sphere of procedure duly established by Law and shall
         never cross the Lakshman Rekha set by governing statutes, bye-laws
         and binding authoritative Judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court.
         Instead of aligning their Arbitration Agreements/Clauses and
         Arbitral Practices in consonance with
Section 12(5)
read with
         Schedule 7 of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
post its
         amendment in 2015, they continued to harp over their age-old law
         practices of having in-house Unilaterally Appointed Arbitrators. The
         NBFCs ought to have aligned their arbitral practices with the
         changing times as suggested by Justice B. N. Srikrishna Report on
         Arbitration dated 30.07.2017 and the 2015 and 2019 Amendments
         carried out in the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                                    page 45 of 46
81.As guided by the afore-discussed binding judgments of Hon'ble
         Supreme Court and Hon'ble Delhi High Court, the Ex-Parte Arbitral
         Award dated 27.10.2021, passed by Unilaterally Appointed Sole
         Arbitrator namely Sh. Rajesh Rai is declared 'Non-Executable'.
         Considering this petition seeking execution of a clandestinely
         obtained Ex-Parte Arbitral Award as an 'Abuse of Court Process',
         the Execution Petitioner is burdened with cost of Rs.25,000/- to be
         deposited with Shahdara Bar Association (SBA) within 4 weeks.
         SBA shall use such funds for organizing Orientation Courses for
         young Members of the Bar for making them efficient Commercial
         Court practitioners and for honing their Advocacy Skills as
         Litigation Lawyers so that Justice Dispensation System is
         strengthened and Citizens get access to quality and timely Justice.
82.The Execution Petition is accordingly dismissed.
83.Before parting with the Order, I would like to commend the able
         assistance provided by Ld. Counsel for DH Bank Sh. Sanjeev
         Pathak who not only submitted compilation of relevant judgments
         but also assisted the Court during appreciation on the legal position
         on the above issue.
84.Copy of the order be sent to the address of the JD and Shahdara Bar
         Association by the Court staff for information.
85.File be consigned to Record Room after due compliance.
(SURINDER S. RATHI)
                                                               District Judge
                                                        Commercial Court-03
                                                      Shahdara District, KKD
                                                         Delhi/22.11.2022.
HDFC Bank Limited Vs. Azad Kalam, Ex. No.121/2022                  page 46 of 46
