Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 36 of 2018
Citation: citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SK 9
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/87102978/

[Cites
32
, Cited by
2
]
Sikkim High Court
State Of Sikkim vs Girjaman Rai @ Kami And Ors on 9 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SK 9
Author:
Bhaskar Raj Pradhan
Bench:
Meenakshi M. Rai
,
B. R. Pradhan
1

                               Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
                       State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.




     THE HIGH COURT OF SIKKIM: GANGTOK
               (Criminal Appeal Jurisdiction)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 D.B.: THE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE MEENAKSHI MADAN RAI, JUDGE
       THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE BHASKAR RAJ PRADHAN, JUDGE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Criminal Appeal No. 36 of 2018


      State of Sikkim                                                  .... Appellant

             versus

1.    Girjaman Rai @ Kami,
      Son of Dhan Bahadur Rai,
      Resident of Lower Lingchum,
      West Sikkim.

2.    Suk Bahadur Gurung @ Maila,
      Son of Bir Bahadur Gurung,
      Resident of Lower Sardung,
      West Sikkim.

3.    Ran Maya Gurung (Subba)
      Wife of Suk Bahadur Gurung,
      Resident of Lower Sardung,
      West Sikkim                                  .... Respondents
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Appeal under
Section 378
of the Code of Criminal
                               Procedure, 1973.

Appearance:

      Mr. Karma Thinlay, Additional Public Prosecutor with Mr.
      Thupden Youngda, Additional Public Prosecutor with Mr.
      S. K. Chettri, Assistant Public Prosecutor for the State-
      Appellant.

      Mr. Manish Kumar Jain, Advocate for the Respondent
      Nos. 1 and 2.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                JUDGMENT
(09.05.2019)
Bhaskar Raj Pradhan, J
1.    The present Appeal by the State raises two important

issues relating to a criminal prosecution under the Protection
2
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
(POCSO Act,

2012
). The first issue raised is regarding the quality of the

victim's testimony. The second is regarding the quality of proof

required to determine the age of a victim.
2.   The State is aggrieved by the acquittal of the Respondents

in a Sessions Trial Case against them. The first and the second

Respondents were indicted for commission of gang penetrative

sexual assault and penetrative sexual assault thereby making

the victim (P.W.1) pregnant both amounting to aggravated

penetrative sexual assaults under
Section 5(g)
/
5(j)(ii)
as well as

for committing penetrative sexual assault under
Section 3(a)
of the (POCSO Act, 2012). In addition they also faced

indictments for rape, criminal intimidation and wrongful

confinement under Section 376-D/506/342 read with
Section

34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (
IPC
, 1860). The third

Respondent      was       charged          for      committing            aggravated

penetrative    sexual      assault       under
Section          5(g)
and   for

committing penetrative sexual assault as defined in
Section

3(b)
of the POCSO Act, 2012. In addition the third Respondent

was also indicted for abetting the commission of rape, criminal

intimidation    and      wrongful          confinement                under    Section

109/376-D/506/342 read with
Section 34
of the IPC, 1860.
3.   Mr. Karma Thinlay Namgyal, learned Additional Public

Prosecutor for the State-Appellant, during the hearing, with

regard to the first issue, submitted that the testimony of a
3
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
victim of sexual offence is vital and unless there are compelling

reasons which necessitated looking for corroboration, the

Court should act on the testimony of the victim of the sexual

assault alone to convict the Respondent. He relied upon the

judgment of the Supreme Court in re:
Acharaparambath

Pradeepan v. State of Kerala1
and contended that a child witness

undisputedly is competent to testify if he understands the

question put to him and gives rational answers. With reference

to the second issue he submitted that the learned Special

Judge ought to have considered the birth certificate of the

victim produced and exhibited by the prosecution to establish

the minority of the victim.
He hinged his case upon the

judgment of the Supreme Court in re: Murugan                               alias   Sattu v.

State of Tamil Nadu2 and submitted that the prosecution could

have relied upon the birth certificate to ascertain the age of the

victim. Relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in re:
Madamanchi              Ramappa      v.    Muthaluru          Bojjappa3
he     further

submitted that further proof of public document is not

necessary.
4.        Per contra Mr. Manish Kumar Jain, learned Advocate for

the Respondents submitted that the impugned judgment dated

27.02.2018 was a reasoned judgment of acquittal based on

scientific          evidence      confirming           the      innocence          of   the


1   (2006) 13 SCC 643
2   (2011) 6 SCC 111
3   AIR 1963 SC 1633
4
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
Respondents and thus call for no interference. He also

submitted that the prosecution had failed to prove the minority

of the victim as well. He relied upon the judgment of the

Division Bench of this Court in re:
Sancha Hang Limboo v. State

of Sikkim4
and contended that admissibility of a document is

one thing, while proof of its contents is an altogether different

aspect.
5.        We have been taken through the evidence produced

during the trial. We have examined the same in great detail.
6.        The prosecution case, briefly, was that the victim born to

casual labourers on 10.02.2000 hailed from a poor scheduled

caste family. The family lived in very poor economic condition.

They did not even have television at home. Therefore, the

victim         used       to    frequently         visit     the     second    and   third

Respondent's house to watch television. Four/five months

before the receipt of the First Information Report (FIR) (exhibit-
8) the victim had gone to their house to watch television. While

doing so the second Respondent arrived home. Later the first

Respondent also arrived there. He was quite drunk. After

dinner the third Respondent persuaded the victim to come and

sleep in the next room. The second and third Respondents

made the victim lie down on the mattress and removed her

clothes. Thereafter, the third Respondent inserted her finger

into her vagina and asked the first Respondent to rape her.
4   SLR (2018) Sikkim 1
5
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
The second Respondent also touched and fondled her breast

but did not rape her. The victim did not cry as the

Respondents warned her not to shout for help. After the

incident the victim came to her house and slept. She did not

disclose about the incident to anyone as she was scared after

being threatened by the Respondents. On 10.01.2016 the

victim had gone to the house of P.W.6 who saw the swollen

abdomen of the victim. The victim told P.W.6 about the

incident and how the three Respondents had committed sexual

assault on her. The next day i.e. 11.01.2016 a urine test was

conducted on the victim. The test confirmed her pregnancy

and the fact that the pregnancy was due to the sexual assault

on her. On 12.01.2016 the P.W.6 informed about it to the

father (P.W.7) of the victim who lodged the FIR on 13.01.2016.
7.   The learned Special Judge would come to the conclusion

that prosecution had failed to establish the offence against the

Respondents and therefore the benefit of doubt must go in

their favour.
8.   The learned Special Judge disbelieved the testimony of

the victim on the basis of the DNA profiling and analysis done

of the blood sample of the victim, her child and the first

Respondent.     The       learned        Special        Judge         noticed   that

prosecution had fixed the responsibility of the victim's

pregnancy on the first Respondent as it was alleged that the

victim had become pregnant due to the rape committed by
6
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
him. The learned Special Judge recorded that the DNA

profiling and analysis had come to a firm conclusion that the

victim was in fact the biological mother of the infant. However,

the first Respondent was not the biological father opined the

said report.
9.        The learned Special Judge also held that under the
POCSO Act, 2012
it is necessary for the prosecution to prove

that the victim was a minor at the time of the incident. The

prosecution had produced the birth certificate of the victim.

The learned Special Judge came to the conclusion that neither

the victim nor the father of the victim had deposed about her

date of birth. In fact the father of the victim had categorically

stated that he did not remember the date of birth of the victim.

The learned Special Judge also noticed that the date of birth in

the birth certificate was recorded as 10.02.2000 but the said

birth certificate was procured only on 02.04.2009. The

Registrar of Birth and Deaths was not examined to prove the

birth certificate and that the mandate of the law laid down by

the Supreme Court in
Mahadeo v. State of Maharashtra5
had

not been followed by the prosecution as the certificate of birth

from the school first attendant or the matriculation certificate

had also not been produced. The learned Special Judge thus

concluded that the prosecution had also failed to prove the

birth certificate.
In view of the anomaly appearing in the birth
5   (2013) 14 SCC 637
7
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
certificate itself the learned Special Judge opined that it would

be unsafe to rely upon it and conclude that the date of birth of

the victim was 10.02.2000 as the birth certificate was not

admissible in evidence. It was held that no presumption as to

the proof of the contents of the birth certificate could be drawn

as laid down under
Section 79
of the Indian Evidence Act,

1872.
10. The learned Special Judge examined whether the sole

testimony of the victim could be relied upon to secure the

conviction of the second and the third Respondents as well.

The victim had implicated them for aiding, abetting and

committing sexual assault on her. The learned Special Judge

held that if a person comes to the Court with "half cooked

truth" and does not reveal the correct facts and circumstances

it would be highly unsafe for the Court to rely on such a

testimony and punish the said Respondents for serious

offences under the
POCSO Act, 2012
. It was held that in such

circumstance it was necessary to look for corroboration. The

learned Special Judge examined the evidence of the father and

the mother (P.W.3) of the victim and held that the parents had

not supported the case of the prosecution and they had failed

to prove that the victim was sexually assaulted.
11.
In re:
Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka6
the Supreme

Court reviewed the law on the power of the Appellate Court in
6   (2007) 4 SCC 415
8
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
reversing a finding of acquittal and laid down the following

guiding principles:
"42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following
     general principles regarding powers of the appellate court while
     dealing with an appeal against an order of acquittal emerge:
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and
            reconsider the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is
            founded.
(2) The
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 puts no limitation,
            restriction or condition on exercise of such power and an
            appellate court on the evidence before it may reach its own
            conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling
            reasons", "good and sufficient grounds", "very strong
            circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring mistakes",
            etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an
            appellate court in an appeal against acquittal. Such
            phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of
            language" to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court
            to interfere with acquittal than to curtail the power of the
            court to review the evidence and to come to its own
            conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case
            of acquittal, there is double presumption in favour of the
            accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence is available to
            him under the fundamental principle of criminal
            jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be
            innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent court of
            law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the
            presumption of his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed
            and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the
           evidence on record, the appellate court should not disturb the
           finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."
12. The    Supreme         Court       has      consistently          followed   the

principles laid down in
Chandrappa
(supra).
In re: Sampat Babso
9
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
Kale and Another v. State of Maharashtra7
following the said

principles the Supreme Court, once again, held :
"7. With regard to the powers of an appellate court in an
                 appeal against acquittal, the law is well established that the
                 presumption of innocence which is attached to every accused
                 person gets strengthened when such an accused is acquitted
                 by the trial court and the High Court should not lightly
                 interfere with the decision of the trial court which has recorded
                 the evidence and observed the demeanour of witnesses.
                 ............."
13. The prosecution alleges that the victim was a child and

therefore the offences alleged were tried under the
POCSO Act,

2012
as well. As rightly held by the learned Special Judge in a

case punishable under the
POCSO Act, 2012
it is necessary for

the prosecution to prove that the victim was a minor below the

age of 18 years at the time of the incident.
14.
In re:
Ramappa
(supra) relied upon by the learned Counsel

for the State the Supreme Court held that the admissibility of

evidence is no doubt point of law, but once it is shown that the

evidence on which courts of fact have acted was admissible

and relevant, it is not open to a party feeling aggrieved by the

findings recorded by the courts of fact to contend before the

High Court in second appeal that the said evidence is not

sufficient to justify the findings of fact in question.
The

Supreme
Court further held
that it has been always recognised

that the sufficiency or adequacy of evidence to support a

finding of fact is a matter for decision of the court of facts and


7   2019 SCC OnLine SC 498
10
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
cannot be agitated in second appeal. In the said case the

certified copy of Changes Register had been exhibited during

the trial without any objection raised to mode of proof either in

Trial Court or in Appellate Court. It was in this context that

the Supreme Court held that the High Court was in error in

rejecting such document on the ground that it had not been

proved.
15. Date of birth is a question of fact which must be cogently

proved by leading evidence. The allegation of sexual assault

coupled with the proof of minority of the victim drags an

accused to the rigours of the
POCSO Act, 2012
which

mandates a reverse burden of proof. Therefore, it is absolutely

vital to prove the minority of the victim. The "best evidence

rule" must be necessarily followed while proving the contents

of a birth certificate.
16. On this aspect regarding determination of the age of a

victim in prosecutions under the
POCSO Act, 2012
it is

important to consider three judgments rendered by the

Division Bench of this Court.
17. This Court in re:
Mangala Mishra @ Dawa Tamang @ Jack v.

State of Sikkim8
examined whether the prosecution was able to

establish that the victim was a child, as defined under
Section

2(d)
of the POCSO Act, 2012.
This Court examined the said

birth certificate and held that it had not been established in

8   2018 SCC OnLine Sikk 215
11
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
terms of the required legal parameters.
Section 35
of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872 was examined and it was held that

the entries mentioned in the said section must be established

by necessary evidence. This Court held that it was essential to

show that a document was prepared by the public servant in

discharge of his official duty. This Court also examined
Section

74
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the judgment of the

Supreme Court in re:
Madan Mohan Singh v. Rajni Kant9
which

in turn examined various pronouncements of the Supreme

Court and culled out the parameters for consideration as

follows:
(i)     A document may be admissible, but as to whether the
                          entry contained therein has any probative value may
                          still be required to be examined in the facts and
                          circumstances of a particular case.
(ii)    In several cases the Supreme Court had held that even
                          if the entry was made in any official record by the
                          official concerned in the discharge of his official duty, it
                          may have weight but still may require corroboration by
                          the person on whose information the entry has been
                          made and as to the entry so made has been exhibited
                          and proved. The standard of proof required herein is the
                          same as in other civil and criminal cases.
(iii)   Similarly in several other cases the Supreme Court had
                          also held that such entries may be in any public
                          document i.e. school register, voters' list or family
                          register prepared under the Rules and Regulations, etc.
                          in force, and may be admissible under
Section 35
of the
                          Evidence Act.
(iv)    So far as the entries made in the official record by an
                          official or person authorised in performance of official
                          duties are concerned, they may be admissible under
Section 35
of the Evidence Act but the Court has a right
                          to examine their probative value. The authenticity of the
                          entries would depend on whose information such
                          entries stood recorded and what was his source of
                          information. The entries in school register/school leaving
                          certificate require to be proved in accordance with law
9   (2010) 9 SCC 209
12
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
and the standard of proof required in such cases
                  remained the same as in any other civil or criminal
                  cases.
(v)    For determining the age of a person, the best evidence is
                  of his/her parents, if it is supported by unimpeachable
                  documents. In case the date of birth depicted in the
                  school register/certificate stands belied by the
                  unimpeachable evidence of reliable persons and
                  contemporaneous documents like the date of birth
                  register of the Municipal Corporation, Government
                  hospital/nursing home, etc., the entry in the school
                  register is to be discarded.
(vi)   If a person wants to rely on a particular date of birth
                  and wants to press a document in service, he has to
                  prove its authenticity in terms of
Section 32(5)
or Section
                  50, 51, 59, 60 and 61, etc. of the
Evidence Act
by
                  examining a person having special means of knowledge,
                  authenticity of date, time, etc. mentioned therein.
18.
In re:
Mangala Misra
(supra) it was seen that the evidence

produced by the prosecution was contradictory and no register

of the Chief Registrar of Births and Deaths was furnished to

substantiate the entries made in the birth certificate. It was

also noticed that no witness was examined to prove the entries

therein. Hence, this Court concluded that the prosecution had

failed to establish that the victim was a child and rejected the

purported birth certificate as proof of age.
19.
In re:
Sancha Hang Limboo
(supra) this Court clarified that

the birth certificate may be admissible under
Section 35
of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but the Court is not barred from

taking evidence to test the authenticity of the entries made

therein. This Court held that admissibility of a document is

one thing, while proof of its contents is an altogether different

aspect.
This Court also held that a birth certificate is a public
13
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
document falling under
Section 74
of the Indian Evidence Act,

1872. It was noticed that objection as to the admissibility and

mode of proof of document was not taken at the trial before it

was received in evidence and marked as exhibit. Thus it was

held that the birth certificate cannot be questioned at the

appellate stage.
20.
In re:
Lakhi Ram Takbi v. State of Sikkim10
this Court held

that the seizure of the birth certificate had been established

and that it fulfilled the requirements of both
Section 35
and
Section 74
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. It was held that

since no doubt was raised about the authenticity of the

original birth certificate by way of examination of witnesses

before the learned Trial Court this question could not be

brought up before the Appellate Court since it was admitted

without formal proof. In the said case the Headmaster of the

School attended by the victim was examined as a prosecution

witness who produced the original register maintained and

exhibited the certified copy thereof. This Court noticed that the

defence had failed to cross-examine regarding proof of entries

therein and therefore, it was held that the certificate issued by

the Headmaster which indicated the date of birth of the victim

also was not demolished.
Considering the evidences produced

including the birth certificate, copy of the entries contained in

the school register and the evidence of the Headmaster of the
10   Crl. Appeal No. 15 of 2017
14
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
school this Court held that the prosecution had proved the

victim's minority.
21. In re: Murugan (supra) the Supreme Court examined

various documents i.e. the FIR, certificate of birth issued

under
Section 17
of the Registration of Births and Deaths Act,

1969 (the 1969 Act), the date of birth certificate issued by the

Headmaster of the school as well as the evidence of the

Radiologist and the test report opining that the victim's age

was about 18 years. The Supreme Court also examined the

oral evidences of various witnesses including the mother who

had deposed about the date of birth being 14 years of age and

the Headmistress of the school proving the certificate issued by

the school. It was noticed that the birth certificate issued by

the Municipality did not contain the name of the child. It was

in this background that the Supreme Court held that

documents made ante litem motam can be relied upon safely,

when such documents are admissible under
Section 35
of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872. It was noticed that although the

registration was made one month after the birth the names of

the parents and address were correctly mentioned and thus

there was no reason to doubt the veracity of the said

certificate. The Supreme Court also noticed that the school

certificate had been issued by the Headmaster on the basis of

the entry made in the school register which corroborates the

contents of the certificate of birth issued by the Municipality. It
15
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
was noticed that both those entries in the school register as

well as in the Municipality had come much before the criminal

prosecution started and those entries stood fully supported

and corroborated by the evidence of the mother of the victim

who had been cross-examined at length.
22. The common determinative factor which runs in the

judgments examined supra is the consideration of the evidence

produced to determine the age of the victim. The aim of the

Court of facts is to come to a firm conclusion about the

minority of the victim. Like all other facts in issue the

determination of the age of the victim must necessarily be

proved by cogent evidence needed in a criminal trial.
The

POCSO Act, 2012
does not diminish or dilute the
Indian

Evidence Act, 1872
.
23. The birth certificate is a certificate issued under the 1969

Act. The Registrar of Births & Deaths appointed under the

1969 Act is required to enter information of the birth given to

him either orally or otherwise in the register maintained. The

informant who gives the information of the birth of a child is

required to be provided free of charge an extract of the

prescribed particulars under his hand from the register

relating to such birth. The name of the informant is also to be

recorded in the register maintained under the 1969 Act. Proved

by its signatory i.e. the maker, the birth certificate would stand

proved.   The maker of the birth certificate would be able to
16
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
depose about the contents of the birth certificate based on the

information recorded in the register maintained under the

1969 Act. If the register is therefore, produced and proved it

would prove the authenticity of what is recorded in the birth

certificate. This would prove that the contents of the birth

certificate are the extract of the contents of the register

maintained under the 1969 Act. The contents of the register,

however, are entered from the information provided by the

informant as required under the 1969 Act. The truth about the

contents of the information recorded in the register however, is

yet another matter. Usually the informant would be the

parents or either of them.
Section 8
of the 1969 Act provides

for the duty of the persons specified therein to give or cause to

be given, either orally or in writing, according to the best of

their knowledge and belief, information to the Registrar of the

several particulars required to be entered in the forms

prescribed in respect of births.
Section 10
of the 1969 Act

imposes a duty upon certain persons to notify births. The

person specified therein would have special knowledge about

the birth of the child. The birth certificate issued under the

1969 Act is therefore an extract of the entries made in the

register issued under
Section 12
or 17 of the 1969 Act.
24. The birth of a child would be known to the parents and

therefore the evidence of the parents has been accepted as best

evidence if it is supported by unimpeachable documents.
17
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
Unfortunately in the present case the parents of the victim did

not depose about the date of birth of the victim. Neither did the

victim. The prosecution has not proved the birth certificate

through its maker i.e. the Registrar of Births & Deaths as well.

It was not even exhibited and proved by the parents of the

victim.
25. There were two seizure witnesses of the birth certificate.

P.W.2 and P.W.4 deposed that the birth certificate was seized

on 14.01.2016 from the possession of the father of the victim.

In cross-examination they admitted they did not know the date

of birth of the alleged victim. The seizure memo (exhibit-4)

which evidenced the seizure was proved by Mahendra Pradhan

(P.W.16), the Station House Officer (SHO) of the Gyalshing

Police Station, who had initially taken up the investigation of

the case as well as P.W.2 and P.W.4. The father of the victim

and the two seizure witnesses (P.W.2 and P.W.4) only proved

the seizure of the birth certificate of the victim from the father

but not the contents thereof.
26. The birth certificate is a public document and as per
Section 77
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 certified copies of

a public document may be produced in proof of its contents.
In

re:
Om Prakash Berlia v. Unit Trust of India11 the Bombay High
Court held that although secondary evidence is admissible of a

public document by way of it certified copy, the party who
11AIR   1983 Bombay 1
18
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
produced it is not relieved of his obligations to prove the

execution of document just as if the original has been

produced, unless the case was covered by
Section 90
of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the legislature had otherwise

expressly excepted it under the provisions of
Indian Evidence

Act, 1872
. It was also held that a certified copy of a public

document can be admitted as secondary evidence to prove only

what the document states. The Bombay High Court thus held

that the truth of what the document states must be separately

established.
27. Mere production of a birth certificate without even

authenticating the same by proving it through its maker is

however, not enough to prove the age of the victim. The age of

the victim must be proved by leading clinching evidence. The

cogency of the evidence led would ultimately help the Court in

determining the age of the victim.
28. The victim did not depose about her age or her date of

birth during her examination. In cross-examination she

admitted that she did not know her date of birth. The victim's

parents did not depose about the victim's age or her date of

birth. The father of the victim identified the birth certificate

after   he   was   declared       hostile.       However,           during   cross-

examination by the defence the father of the victim stated that

he did not know the date of birth of the victim. There is no

evidence of either the parents or the victim herself about her
19
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
age. The cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses by the

defence does not reflect that they had not raised any doubt

about the age of the victim.
29. The Learned Special Judge found it unsafe to rely upon

the birth certificate to come to a finding that the date of birth

of the victim is 10.02.2000 since the parents as well as the

victim did not know the victims age or her date of birth. The

finding of the learned Special Judge that the prosecution had

failed to prove the contents of the birth certificate cannot be

faulted.
30. The FIR was lodged by the father of the victim. It was

lodged on 13.01.2016 several months after the date of the

incident as asserted by the prosecution. It alleged that the first

and second Respondents lured and raped the victim few

months ago. The formal FIR (exhibit-9) was registered and

investigation taken up on the basis of said allegation which

made out commission of cognizable offences. However, the

victim's father during his deposition admitted that he did not

know who lodged the FIR and that he was not aware of its

contents. He also admitted that the contents of the written FIR

and the formal FIR were not read over and explained to him.

He deposed that he merely affixed his signature thereon as

asked by one Kharanand Sharma and that he did not know if

that person had any enmity with the Respondents. K. N.

Sharma (P.W.12), per contra, deposed that he had ultimately
20
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
scribed the report about the alleged sexual assault on the

victim by the first and second Respondents although he had

declined to do so on his first request. The evidence of the

father and K. N. Sharma (P.W.12) are not consistent regarding

the lodging of the FIR and the surrounding circumstances. The

hesitance of the father to stand by the FIR purportedly lodged

by him regarding the alleged heinous crime committed against

his own daughter must be noticed and renders the information

suspect.
31. The allegation against the Respondents made by the

victim was heinous but slightly different from the allegation

made in the FIR. The FIR had alleged that both the first and

the second respondent had lured and raped the victim.

According to the victim's testimony the second respondent had

not raped her. The allegation in her testimony was that the

third Respondent called the victim to her house to watch

television, grabbed one of her legs and asked the second

Respondent to grab the other after which she inserted her

finger inside the victim's vagina. The victim deposed that the

third Respondent, thereafter, asked the first Respondent to

rape the victim and the first Respondent raped her in front of

the other two Respondents. The victim did not depose about

the date, month or year when the alleged rape took place.
21
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
32. The victim did not disclose about commission of any

sexual intercourse, rape or otherwise by any other person. The

prosecution was certain it was only the first Respondent who

had raped the victim on that particular day due to which the

victim had become pregnant and ultimately delivered the

infant. Apparently, the victim also did not tell anyone about

the heinous act. The parents were completely unaware about

it. They even learnt about the victim's pregnancy few months

later. The mother of the victim deposed that she came to learn

about the victim's pregnancy just two three months prior to

the delivery of the victim's child. She did not depose that even

then the victim had confided to her about the heinous act of

rape and sexual assault allegedly committed on her. The

victim's mother merely accused that they were responsible for

her daughter's pregnancy. The father of the victim also did not

depose about the victim disclosing to him or to his wife about

the alleged incident. He merely deposed learning about the

victim's pregnancy from P.W.6 and the pregnancy test

conducted on her. In fact the prosecution had declared the

victim's father hostile and cross-examined him. On such cross-

examination the victim's father admitted having stated to the

police that P.W.6 had informed him about the second and

third Respondents having grabbed the victim and instigating

the first Respondent to rape her.             However, on being cross-

examined by the defence the victim's father admitted that the
22
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
victim did not inform him about the alleged incident and that

he had heard about it from P.W.6. He also admitted that P.W.6

had only told him about the victim's pregnancy and nothing

about the involvement of the Respondents in the alleged

heinous act. However, P.W.6 did not mention that the victim

had told her about the incident as alleged. P.W.6 deposed that

the victim, on finding out about her pregnancy after the test,

told her that the first Respondent was responsible for her

pregnancy. On the other hand the victim stated that she had

only informed P.W.6 about her pregnancy and nothing else.

The evidence of the father, P.W.6 and the victim on this aspect

also does not inspire confidence needed in a criminal

prosecution.
33. The pregnancy of the victim is sought to be proved by the

evidence of Dr. Tukki D. Bhutia (P.W.5) the Gynaecologist

posted at District Hospital, Gyalshing. She deposed that the

investigation of the victim's urine sample resulted in testing

positive for pregnancy. P.W.15 deposed that the victim was

staying in the short stay home where she was the in-charge

and on 26.04.2016 she had delivered a girl child at the District

Hospital, Namchi. However, in cross-examination she admitted

that she did not have any document to show either that the

victim was staying at her short stay home or that she had

delivered a girl child at District Hospital, Namchi. The victim

testified that she had recently delivered a female child at
23
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
District Hospital, Namchi. However, the victim's mother

strangely admitted during her cross-examination that she did

not know that the victim was pregnant and had delivered a

child. The victim's father too, strangely again, also admitted

that he was not aware that his daughter was actually pregnant

and had given birth to a daughter.
34. Bishal Rai (P.W.17) the then SDPO, Gyalshing, and the

final Investigating Officer testified that the victim had delivered

a baby girl on 26.04.2016. He also stated that to ascertain the

paternity of the new born baby, the blood sample of the victim,

her child and the first Respondent were collected by him and

sent for DNA analysis. He however, did not exhibit the blood

sample authentication forms purportedly taking blood samples

of the victim, her baby and the first Respondent. Dr. Soma Roy

(P.W.18), Scientist-B at CFSL, Kolkatta testified that she had

received one sealed cloth parcel containing blood sample for

DNA profiling to prove paternity on 18.07.2016. Dr. Soma Roy

(P.W.18) exhibited the said blood sample authentication forms

of the victim, her child and the first Respondent. The witnesses

to the said blood sample authentication forms were however,

not examined. Therefore, the factum of the blood samples

having been taken from the victim, her child and the first

Respondent stands not proved.
35. It is the case of the prosecution that DNA profiling was

done on the blood samples of the victim, her child and the first
24
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
Respondent. Dr. Soma Roy examined the blood samples sent

to her for forensic examination. The expert opinion is detailed.

It cogently records the result of examination of the blood

samples, the observations of the expert and the conclusions.

On the basis of the test conducted by Dr. Soma Roy she

concluded that the first Respondent was not the biological

father of the baby although she was the daughter of the victim.
36. In the absence of clear evidence to connect the taking of

the blood samples from the victim, her baby and the first

Respondent it is difficult to connect the result of the forensic

examination     to    the      present        prosecution.             However,     the

prosecution is bound by the evidence it leads. More so when it

renders the defence probable. It is the prosecution case that

the blood samples examined by the expert were of the victim,

her baby and the first Respondent. Dr. Soma Roy's conclusion

that the first Respondent was not the biological father of the

child   born   from      the     victim       completely          demolishes        the

substratum of the prosecution case. The prosecution as well as

the victim had categorically and clearly insisted that it was the

first Respondent and the first Respondent alone who had

committed rape on her. Neither the victim nor the Investigating

Officer disclosed about any other person having had sexual

intercourse with the victim around the time. If the evidence of

Dr. Soma Roy is to be believed then the father of the child born

to   the   victim    was     someone          else     other          than   the   first
25
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
Respondent. The victim admitted that during the same year

the alleged incident had occurred she had stayed at Ranipool

as a maid. She also admitted that a person not related to them

used to come to their house and stay. The victim's mother

testified that the victim had been given as a maid to a lady in

Ranipool and that she had returned one or one and half

months before they learnt about the pregnancy. The defence

version that the father of the child could be someone else has

been made probable by the prosecution evidence.
37. The prosecution has led no evidence to establish the

intention of the three Respondents to commit such a heinous

act. This gathers significance in the peculiar circumstances of

the present prosecution since the victim's mother admitted

that the victim used to often go to the house of the second and

third Respondents to watch television, eat food and also sleep

there. She admitted that the victim was treated like their own

sister by the second and third Respondents and that the victim

had never complained to her about any ill-treatment by them.

In cross-examination the victim also admitted of sharing very

good relationship with the second and third Respondents and

that she would often go to their house to watch television and

stay overnight. The victim did not attribute any reason for the

said Respondents to commit such a heinous act. In such

circumstances, it would be extremely difficult to hold them

guilty based on the sole testimony of the victim and as rightly
26
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
held by the learned Special Judge, corroboration must be

sought for. However, corroboration was wanting.
38. The allegation against the second Respondent by the

victim was only of holding the victim's leg on the instruction of

his wife, the third Respondent, who had held the other while

she inserted her finger into the victim's vagina. The allegation

therefore, was of one singular incident which involved all the

three   Respondents.      In     such       circumstances,         when     the

allegation against the first Respondent fails, it would be a

travesty of justice to rely upon the same sole testimony of the

victim to saddle the second Respondent for commission of

gang penetrative sexual assault for making the victim pregnant

as a consequence of sexual assault; for penetrative sexual

assault as well as for rape. Similarly the charge against the

third Respondent for commission of aggravated penetrative

sexual assault; for commission of penetrative sexual assault;

for abetting the commission of rape on the victim punishable;

and for wrongful confinement must also fail. In so far as the

charge of criminal intimidation against the Respondents is

concerned the victim has not even made an allegation to the

said effect. The said charge against all the Respondents also

cannot stand.
39. The presumption of innocence now fortified by the

Respondents     acquittal      has     not      been       dislodged   by   the

prosecution. The victim's testimony remains doubtful, the
27
Criminal Appeal No.36 of 2018
State of Sikkim v. Girjaman Rai @ Kami & Ors.
prosecution version incomplete. The absolute truth has not

      been placed before the Court. The father of the victim's new

      born child remains unidentified. A delicate balance is required

      to be maintained between the presumption that a victim would

      not ordinarily lie and a presumption of innocence of the

      accused. The prosecution's failure to investigate further and

      tell the Court about the father of the victim's child is a major

      inconsistency and lacunae which shakes the very foundation

      of their case. The victim's version required corroboration in the

      present case. However, the evidence led by the prosecution

      failed to corroborate the testimony of the victim. In fact the

      expert opinion contradicted the testimony of the victim and

      rendered it improbable. Therefore, following the principles laid

      down in
Chandrappa
(supra) and Sampat Babso Kale (supra) we

      without any hesitance hold that the judgment of acquittal

      passed by the learned Special Judge does not merit any

      interference.
40. The appeal preferred by the State is dismissed.
( Bhaskar Raj Pradhan )                            ( Meenakshi Madan Rai )
             Judge                                              Judge
                 09.05.2019                                         09.05.2019




      Approved for reporting: yes.
to/   Internet: yes.
