Title: Search
Court: High Court
Date: 3
RLW 1815
Citation: SCC 402;
Source: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/96522692/

[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Delhi High Court
Vikas vs State on 19 October, 2020
Author:
Jyoti Singh
Bench:
Jyoti Singh
$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%                                        Reserved on : 21.09.2020
                                         Pronounced on: 19.10.2020

+       Crl. M.C. 1615/2020 and Crl. M.A. 10300/2020

        VIKAS                                          ......Applicant
                           Through       Mr. Ashwin Vaish, Mr. Vinod
                                         Pandey and Mr. V. Thomas,
                                         Advocates

                               versus

        STATE                                             .....Respondent
                           Through       Ms. Meenakshi Dahiya, APP for
                                         State with SI Jitender Singh, PS
                                         Sangam Vihar.
                                         Ms. Tara Narula, Advocate for
                                         Complainant.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE JYOTI SINGH

                                JUDGEMENT
1.     Present petition has been filed assailing the order dated 04.03.2020
 passed by the Trial Court whereby the Petitioner's application for recall
 of the child victim 'A' who testified as PW-1 was dismissed.
2.     Briefly put the narrative of facts as averred in the petition are that
 on 25.12.2018 an FIR was registered under
Sections 376
,
342
IPC and
Section 6
of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
 (hereinafter referred to as '
POCSO Act
') for an alleged incident that
 occurred on 24.12.2018 between 3:00 pm to 4:00 pm. The allegations in
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                          Page 1 of 32
the FIR were that the child victim 'A' aged 6 years, after coming back
 from school was playing with her friend 'B' when a person called
 Chhotu Bhaiyya, who was residing in the house of 'B', took her to a
 room, in her Chachi‟s house and closed the room and disrobed himself.
 He then came near 'A' and disrobed her and committed sexual assault.
 Friend 'B' in the meantime knocked at the door and Chhotu Bhaiyya
 opened the door, upon which 'A' ran out of the room towards the upper
 floor. Chhotu Bhaiyya told 'A' to come down but 'A' went to her mother
 and narrated the incident, who in turn told her husband and they then
 went to the Police Station and lodged a complaint.
3.     As per the FIR inquiry was made by the police from 'A' and her
 statement was recorded in the presence of the mother. 'A' was then
 taken to the hospital where her counseling was done and thereafter the
 FIR was registered.
4.     Charge sheet was subsequently filed on 23.02.2019 and on
 28.05.2019 charges were framed under Sections 376 AB, 342
IPC
and
Section 6
read with
Section 5 (m)
of POCSO Act. Between 05.08.2019
 and 09.08.2019 deposition of PW-1 i.e. 'A' was recorded. On
 09.08.2019 counsel for the Petitioner filed an application alleging
 prejudice, as according to him he was prevented from effectively cross
 examining the witness by putting questions to her to test her memory and
 to bring out material omissions and contradictions. The application is
 still pending.
5.     On 03.09.2019 Petitioner preferred an application seeking recall of
 PW-1 on the ground that the counsel was not allowed to cross examine
 and confront PW-1 with her earlier statements. On 20.02.2020 testimony
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                       Page 2 of 32
of the mother being PW-3 was recorded. The application for recall was
 heard on 04.03.2020 and was rejected vide the impugned order. It is this
 order rejecting the application for recall which is the genesis of the
 present petition.
6.     Learned counsel for the Petitioner assails the impugned order by
 contending that the trial Court's refusal to recall PW-1 for effective cross
 examination under
Section 311
Cr.P.C. violates the provisions of the
 Section which provides that any Court may at any stage of an inquiry,
 trial or other proceeding under the
Cr.P.C
. summon or examine or recall
 and re-examine any person already examined if his evidence appears to
 be essential for the just decision of the case. He argues that the order
 impugned violates the law laid down in
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Shiv
 Kumar Yadav
, (2016) 2 SCC 402;
Shri Vimal Khanna v. State
, 2018
 SCC Online Del 11796 and Deva v. The State of Karnataka in Crl.
 Petition 201325/2019.
In
Vimal Khanna
(supra) the Court has held that
 denial of opportunity to cross examine the witnesses violates the
 Constitutional guarantee to an accused and vitiates the trial.
The
 judgment was followed in
Mohd. Gulzar v. The State (GNCTD
),
 2018,(4) JCC 2291 wherein after recording that the counsel for the
 accused was not present on three consecutive dates to cross examine the
 witness, the Court held that since the right of cross examination is a
 valuable right, the child's right under
Section 33 (5)
of POCSO Act has
 to be balanced with the aforesaid rights of the accused and thus
 permitted one more opportunity to the accused to cross examine the
 alleged victim.
It is argued that in Deva (supra) the Court was clearly of
 the view that the power to recall a witness at the instance of either party
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 3 of 32
to ensure justice is done, is greater than the provisions set out in
Section
 33
POCSO Act. The provisions of
Section 33
laid down a general
 principle which must guide the trial Court and is similar to
Section 309
Cr.P.C, being in the nature of laws to ensure speedy trial. However, by
 virtue of
Sections 4
and
5
of Cr.P.C,
Section 311
Cr.P.C shall prevail as
 no specific procedure is provided under
POCSO Act
for recall of a
 witness.
Section 42A
of POCSO Act clarifies that the Act is not in
 derogation of any other Law.
7.     Learned counsel contends that the intent behind enacting
Section
 33 (5)
is only to ensure that in a genuine case the child victim is not
 harassed, but cannot be used as a shield by the trial Court to deprive the
 accused of a right of proper cross examination and therefore a right of
 fair trial. The trial Court committed a manifest error in law in treating the
 contents of the statement of PW-1/victim recorded during investigation
 as a matter of record resultantly refusing to permit the counsel for the
 accused to confront the witness with the same. This was in clear
 violation of the effective right of cross examination and the observations
 of the Supreme Court in
Deepak Kumar Chaudhary v. State
2019 SCC
 Online Del 11321 wherein the Court has held that as per
Section 145
of
 the Indian Evidence Act a witness can be contradicted with his previous
 statement and that omission to mention a fact in the previous statement is
 a contradiction with which the witness needs to be confronted. Not
 allowing the accused to do so shall prejudice him in his trial and he will
 not be in a position to take advantage of the said contradiction.
Reliance
 is also placed for the said proposition on the judgment in the case of
V.K.
 Mishra & Anr. v. State of Uttarakhand
(2015) 9 SCC 588. Thus, the
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 4 of 32
trial Court according to the learned counsel abandoned its duty by
 wrongly presuming that the contents of the complaint and the statements
 recorded during investigation are a matter of record and in the process
 also over looked the fundamental principles of law of evidence that
 statement made to the police cannot be read as substantive evidence
 except as provided under Sections 145, 155 etc of the
Evidence Act
and
 that the FIR and the statements recorded under
Section 161
and
164
Cr.P.C are neither gospel truth nor substantive evidence, having been
 recorded behind the back of the accused or in case of FIR without oath.
 In such a situation the right of cross examination of the accused becomes
 very significant.
8.     Learned counsel also to substantiate the alleged prejudice caused to
 the Petitioner formulated certain questions which according to him were
 crucial and if allowed to put to the victim during cross examination will
 point to the innocence of the Petitioner and will have a significant
 bearing on the trial.
9.     Learned APP for the State vehemently opposed the present petition
 and argued that effective opportunity was given to the Petitioner to cross
 examine PW-1/victim. The application for recall of the six-year old child
 victim is antithetical to
section 33 (5)
of POCSO Act which mandates
 that the child should not be repeatedly called to testify in a Court. It is
 also argued that prior to the impugned order the Trial Court had
 disallowed certain questions which were being put to the victim during
 cross examination on 09.08.2019 but the said order was not challenged
 by the Petitioner and in the guise of the present application the Petitioner
 is trying to circuitously put the same questions, which is impermissible
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 5 of 32
in law. Emphasis has been laid by the learned APP on the age of the
 victim and the intent of the Legislature in drafting
Section 33 (5)
of the
 POCSO Act being to protect the child from victimization and harassment
 by repeated depositions in a Court by the accused.
10. Learned APP has relied on the following judgments:
(
i)     S. Sankara Varman vs. State
, 2016 SCC Online MAD
                5681,
(ii)    State vs. Rahul, ILR (2013) III DELHI 1861,
(
iii)   Sant Shri Asharamji Bapu vs. State of Rajasthan
, 2017 (3)
                RLW 1815 (Raj.),
(
iv)     State (NCT of Delhi) vs. Shiv Kumar Yadav
, (2016) 2 SCC
                402,
(v)     Tahsildar Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1959 Law Suit
                (SC) 91 and
(vi)    Jaswant Singh vs. State of Haryana (2000) 4 SCC 484.
11. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and examined the
 impugned order.
12.
Article 15
of the Constitution of India confers powers upon the
 State to make special provisions for children.
The Protection of Children
 from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
was enacted on 14.11.2012. The
 preamble to the
POCSO Act
is significant and relevant to examine the
 present controversy and is as follows:
"AND WHEREAS it is necessary for the proper development
        of the child that his or her right to privacy and
        confidentiality be protected and respected by every person
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                       Page 6 of 32
by all means and through all stages of a judicial process
        involving the child."
13.
Section 33
of POCSO Act has been enacted keeping in background
 the objects and reasons of the
POCSO Act
and as is evident from a
 reading of the provisions of the Section, the Legislature in its wisdom
 has provided a special procedure for recording the evidence of a child
 witness.
Section 33 (2)
provides that the questions to be put to the child
 witness shall be first communicated to the Special Court, who then
 would put these questions to the witness and
Section 33 (5)
specifically
 provides that the child is not to be called repeatedly to testify in Court.
 The mandate of law clearly is to ensure protection to a child witness
 from victimization and harassment by repeated appearances in Court.
14.
In the case of
Alakh Alok Srivastava vs. Union of India
, (2018) 17
 SCC 291 the Supreme Court issued several directions keeping in mind
 the purpose and spirit of the
POCSO Act
and the relevant portion of the
 judgment is as under:
"25.1 The High Courts shall ensure that the cases
      registered under the
POCSO Act
are tried and disposed of
      by the Special Courts and the Presiding officers of the said
      courts are sensitised in the matters of child protection and
      psychological response.
25.2 The Special Courts, as conceived, be established, if not
      already done, and be assigned by the responsibility to deal
      with the cases under the
POCSO Act
.
25.3 The instructions should be issued to the Special Courts
      to fast track the cases by not granting unnecessary
      adjournments and following the procedure
laid down in
the
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 7 of 32
POCSO Act
and thus complete the trial in a time-bound
      manner or within a specific time-frame under the Act.
25.4 The Chief Justices of the High Courts are requested to
      constitute a Committee of three Judges to regulate and
      monitor the progress of the trials under the
POCSO Act
.
      The High Courts where three judges are not available the
      Chief Justices of the said courts shall constitute one Judge
      Committee.
25.5 The Director General of Police or the Officer of
      equivalent rank of the States shall constitute a Special Task
      Force which shall ensure that the investigation is properly
      conducted and witnesses are produced on the dates fixed
      before the trial courts.
25.6 Adequate steps shall be taken by the High Courts to
      provide child-friendly atmosphere in the Special Courts
      keeping in view the provisions of the
POCSO Act
so that the
      spirit of the Act is observed."
15. Learned APP has rightly relied upon the judgment of the Supreme
 Court in
Shiv Kumar
(supra) where the Court held that recall is not a
 matter of course and discretion given to the Court has to be exercised
 judiciously to prevent failure of justice, keeping in mind that the plea of
 recall has to be bonafide and then to balance it carefully with other
 relevant considerations including uncalled hardship to witnesses and
 delay in trial. A mere plea that recall was necessary for ensuring fair trial
 is not enough unless there are tangible reasons to show how fairness of
 trial would suffer without a recall. The Court observed that fairness of
 trial should not only be from the point of view of the accused but also of
 the victim and the society. Relevant paras are as under:
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 8 of 32
"11. It is further well settled that fairness of trial has to be
      seen not only from the point of view of the accused, but also
      from the point of view of the victim and the society. In the
      name of fair trial, the system cannot be held to ransom. The
      accused is entitled to be represented by a counsel of his
      choice, to be provided all relevant documents, to cross-
      examine the prosecution witnesses and to lead evidence in
      his defence. The object of provision for recall is to reserve
      the power with the court to prevent any injustice in the
      conduct of the trial at any stage. The power available with
      the court to prevent injustice has to be exercised only if the
      court, for valid reasons, feels that injustice is caused to a
      party. Such a finding, with reasons, must be specifically
      recorded by the court before the power is exercised. It is not
      possible to lay down precise situations when such power
      can be exercised. The legislature in its wisdom has left the
      power undefined. Thus, the scope of the power has to be
      considered from case to case. The guidance for the purpose
      is available in several decisions relied upon by the parties.
      It will be sufficient to refer to only some of the decisions for
      the principles laid down which are relevant for this case.
12.
In Rajaram case [
Rajaram Prasad Yadav v. State of
      Bihar
, (2013) 14 SCC 461 : (2014) 4 SCC (Cri) 256] , the
      complainant was examined but he did not support the
      prosecution case. On account of subsequent events he
      changed his mind and applied for recall under
Section 311
CrPC which was declined by the trial court but allowed by
      the High Court. This Court held such a course to be
      impermissible, it was observed: (SCC pp. 468-69, paras 13-
14)
         "13. ... In order to appreciate the stand of the appellant
         it will be worthwhile to refer to
Section 311
CrPC, as
         well as
Section 138
of the Evidence Act. The same are
         extracted hereunder:
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                          Page 9 of 32
Section 311
, Code of Criminal Procedure
               „311. Power to summon material witness, or
               examine person present.--Any court may, at any
               stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under
               this Code, summon any person as a witness, or
               examine any person in attendance, though not
               summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine
               any person already examined; and the court shall
               summon and examine or recall and re-examine any
               such person if his evidence appears to it to be
               essential to the just decision of the case.‟
                   *                        *                  *
Section 138
, Evidence Act
               „138. Order of examinations.--Witnesses shall be
               first examined-in-chief then (if the adverse party so
               desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling
               him so desires) re-examined.
The examination and cross-examination must relate
               to relevant facts but the cross-examination need not
               be confined to the facts to which the witness testified
               on his examination-in-chief.
Direction of re-examination.--The re-examination
               shall be directed to the explanation of matters
               referred to in cross-examination; and if new matter
               is, by permission of the court, introduced in re-
               examination, the adverse party may further cross-
               examine upon that matter.‟
14. A conspicuous reading of
Section 311
CrPC would
         show that widest of the powers have been invested with
         the courts when it comes to the question of summoning a
         witness or to recall or re-examine any witness already
         examined. A reading of the provision shows that the
         expression „any‟ has been used as a prefix to „court‟,
         „inquiry‟, „trial‟, „other proceeding‟, „person as a
         witness‟, „person in attendance though not summoned as
         a witness‟, and „person already examined‟. By using the
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                          Page 10 of 32
said expression „any‟ as a prefix to the various
         expressions mentioned above, it is ultimately stated that
         all that was required to be satisfied by the court was only
         in relation to such evidence that appears to the court to
         be essential for the just decision of the case.
Section 138
of the Evidence Act, prescribed the order of examination
         of a witness in the court. The order of re-examination is
         also prescribed calling for such a witness so desired for
         such re-examination. Therefore, a reading of Section 311
         CrPC and Section 138 of the Evidence Act, insofar as it
         comes to the question of a criminal trial, the order of re-
examination at the desire of any person under Section
         138, will have to necessarily be in consonance with the
         prescription contained in
Section 311
CrPC. It is,
         therefore, imperative that the invocation of
Section 311
CrPC and its application in a particular case can be
         ordered by the court, only by bearing in mind the object
         and purport of the said provision, namely, for achieving a
         just decision of the case as noted by us earlier. The
         power vested under the said provision is made available
         to any court at any stage in any inquiry or trial or other
         proceeding initiated under the Code for the purpose of
         summoning any person as a witness or for examining any
         person in attendance, even though not summoned as
         witness or to recall or re-examine any person already
         examined. Insofar as recalling and re-examination of any
         person already examined is concerned, the court must
         necessarily consider and ensure that such recall and re-
         examination of any person, appears in the view of the
         court to be essential for the just decision of the case.
         Therefore, the paramount requirement is just decision
         and for that purpose the essentiality of a person to be
         recalled and re-examined has to be ascertained. To put it
         differently, while such a widest power is invested with the
         court, it is needless to state that exercise of such power
         should be made judicially and also with extreme care and
         caution."
(emphasis in original)
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 11 of 32
13. After referring to the earlier decisions on the point, the
      Court culled out the following principles to be borne in
      mind: (
Rajaram
case [
Rajaram Prasad Yadav v. State of
      Bihar
, (2013) 14 SCC 461 : (2014) 4 SCC (Cri) 256] , SCC
      pp. 473-74, para 17)
         "17.1. Whether the court is right in thinking that the new
         evidence is needed by it? Whether the evidence sought to
         be led in under Section 311 is noted by the court for a
         just decision of a case?
17.2. The exercise of the widest discretionary power
         under
Section 311
CrPC should ensure that the judgment
         should not be rendered on inchoate, inconclusive and
         speculative presentation of facts, as thereby the ends of
         justice would be defeated.
17.3. If evidence of any witness appears to the court to
         be essential to the just decision of the case, it is the
         power of the court to summon and examine or recall and
         re-examine any such person.
17.4. The exercise of power under
Section 311
CrPC
         should be resorted to only with the object of finding out
         the truth or obtaining proper proof for such facts, which
         will lead to a just and correct decision of the case.
         17.5. The exercise of the said power cannot be dubbed as
         filling in a lacuna in a prosecution case, unless the facts
         and circumstances of the case make it apparent that the
         exercise of power by the court would result in causing
         serious prejudice to the accused, resulting in
         miscarriage of justice.
17.6. The wide discretionary power should be exercised
         judiciously and not arbitrarily.
17.7. The court must satisfy itself that it was in every
         respect essential to examine such a witness or to recall
         him for further examination in order to arrive at a just
         decision of the case.
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 12 of 32
17.8. The object of
Section 311
CrPC simultaneously
          imposes a duty on the court to determine the truth and to
          render a just decision.
17.9. The court arrives at the conclusion that additional
          evidence is necessary, not because it would be
          impossible to pronounce the judgment without it, but
          because there would be a failure of justice without such
          evidence being considered.
17.10. Exigency of the situation, fair play and good sense
          should be the safeguard, while exercising the discretion.
          The court should bear in mind that no party in a trial can
          be foreclosed from correcting errors and that if proper
          evidence was not adduced or a relevant material was not
          brought on record due to any inadvertence, the court
          should be magnanimous in permitting such mistakes to
          be rectified.
17.11. The court should be conscious of the position that
          after all the trial is basically for the prisoners and the
          court should afford an opportunity to them in the fairest
          manner possible. In that parity of reasoning, it would be
          safe to err in favour of the accused getting an
          opportunity rather than protecting the prosecution
          against possible prejudice at the cost of the accused. The
          court should bear in mind that improper or capricious
          exercise of such a discretionary power, may lead to
          undesirable results.
17.12. The additional evidence must not be received as a
          disguise or to change the nature of the case against any
          of the party.
17.13. The power must be exercised keeping in mind that
          the evidence that is likely to be tendered, would be
          germane to the issue involved and also ensure that an
          opportunity of rebuttal is given to the other party.
          17.14. The power under
Section 311
CrPC must
          therefore, be invoked by the court only in order to meet
          the ends of justice for strong and valid reasons and the
          same must be exercised with care, caution and
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 13 of 32
circumspection. The court should bear in mind that fair
          trial entails the interest of the accused, the victim and the
          society and, therefore, the grant of fair and proper
          opportunities to the persons concerned, must be ensured
          being a constitutional goal, as well as a human right."
14.
In Hoffman              Andreas           case [
Hoffman
      Andreas v. Inspector of Customs
, (2000) 10 SCC 430 : 2001
      SCC (Cri) 1488] , the counsel who was conducting the case
      was ill and died during the progress of the trial. The new
      counsel sought recall on the ground that the witnesses could
      not be cross-examined on account of the illness of the
      counsel. This prayer was allowed in peculiar circumstances
      with the observation that normally a closed trial could not
      be reopened but illness and death of the counsel was in the
      facts and circumstances considered to be a valid ground for
      recall of witnesses. It was observed: (SCC p. 432, para 6)
         "6. Normally, at this late stage, we would be disinclined
         to open up a closed trial once again. But we are
         persuaded to consider it in this case on account of the
         unfortunate development that took place during trial i.e.
         the passing away of the defence counsel midway of the
         trial. The counsel who was engaged for defending the
         appellant had cross-examined the witnesses but he could
         not complete the trial because of his death. When the
         new counsel took up the matter he would certainly be
         under the disadvantage that he could not ascertain from
         the erstwhile counsel as to the scheme of the defence
         strategy which the predeceased advocate had in mind or
         as to why he had not put further questions on certain
         aspects. In such circumstances, if the new counsel
         thought to have the material witnesses further examined
         the Court could adopt latitude and a liberal view in the
         interest of justice, particularly when the Court has
         unbridled powers in the matter as enshrined in Section
         311 of the Code. After all the trial is basically for the
         prisoners and courts should afford the opportunity to
         them in the fairest manner possible."
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                           Page 14 of 32
16. Relevant would be in this regard to rely on a passage from the
 judgment of High Court of Madras in
S. Sankara Varman vs. State
represented by the Inspector of Police W-18, M.K.B. Nagar Police
 Station, M.K.B. Nagar, Chennai, 2016 SCC Online Mad 5681 as
 follows:
"23.
The POCSO Act
is a special act which mandates
          that a child victim should not be called repeatedly to
          testify in the Court. Thus, in the considered opinion of
          this Court, the Trial Court was very correct in placing
          reliance upon
Section 33(5)
of the POCSO Act and
          dismissing the petition of the accused in respect of recall
          of the girl victim (P.W.1) on the ground that he failed to
          avail of the opportunity to cross-examine her on
          05.02.2014, when she was examined in chief and even
          subsequently, on 23.02.2016, when she was recalled at
          his request. One has to suffer the consequences of one's
          conscious actions."
17.
In
Sant Shri Asharamji Bapu v. State of Rajasthan
, (2017) 3
RLW 1815 (Raj.) the Rajasthan High Court while examining the
provisions of
Section 311
Cr.P.C and the nature of power of the Court
under the said provision observed as under:
"40. A cumulative reading of Section 311 Cr. P.C. and upon
      construing true nature of power with which a criminal
      Court is endowed therein, as adumbrated in all the judicial
      precedents, it has come to the fore that Section is bifurcated
      into two parts. In the first part, Legislature has used the
      word "may" so as to confer discretion on the Court for
      resorting to such power whereas in juxtaposition to it, the
      second part uses "shall", indicating its mandatory nature to
      confer power on a criminal Court enabling it at any stage of
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 15 of 32
the trial to take any of the aforementioned steps with certain
      riders. Thus, the power under second part of Section 311
      Cr. P.C. is of wide amplitude and dimension but with
      caution/restriction to exercise the same when new evidence
      is essential to the just decision of the case. This being the
      position, power under second part of Section 311 Cr. P.C.
      cannot be exercised in a routine manner by a criminal
      Court for ordering retrial or filling lacuna and gaps in the
      evidence tendered either by the prosecution or by accused.
      If these parameters and yardsticks are objectively applied in
      the facts and circumstances of the present case, then without
      any reservation or demur, in my opinion, learned trial
      Court has not at all scuttled the path to secure ends of
      justice. My this view also find support from a decision of
      Supreme Court in case of
Rajaram Prasad Yadav v. State of
      Bihar
(2013) 14 SCC 461. Speaking for the Bench, F.M.I.
      Kalifulla, J. explained the proposition as follows:
"It is, therefore, imperative that the invocation of Section
          311 Cr. P.C. and its application in a particular case can
          be ordered by the Court, only by bearing in mind the
          object and purport of the said provision, namely, for
          achieving a just decision of the case as noted by us
          earlier. The power vested under the said provision is
          made available to any Court at any stage in any inquiry
          or trial or other proceeding initiated under the Code for
          the purpose of summoning any person as a witness or for
          examining any person in attendance, even though not
          summoned as witness or to recall or re-examine any
          person already examined. Insofar as recalling and re-
          examination of any person already examined, the Court
          must necessarily consider and ensure that such recall
          and re-examination of any person, appears in the view of
          the Court to be essential for the just decision of the
          case."
41. As such, upon analysis of ambit and scope of Section
      311 Cr. P.C., adumbrated by the authoritative legal
      precedents, in the backdrop of peculiar facts and
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                          Page 16 of 32
circumstances of the instant case, I am afraid, the impugned
      order cannot be categorized as infirm or perverse. The
      learned trial Court has taken pain to examine all the pros
      and cons while declining prayer of the accused-petitioner in
      the light of trite law on the subject and criminal delinquency
      of the petitioner. Therefore, viewed from any angle, learned
      trial Court has not committed any manifest error of law in
      passing the impugned order warranting interference in
      exercise of inherent jurisdiction of this Court. In totality,
      indisputably, instant one is not a case wherein learned trial
      Court has abused the process of any Court or otherwise
      committed any patent error which has resulted in
      miscarriage of justice.
The upshot of above discussion is that the instant petition
      fails and the same is hereby dismissed."
18. Relevant in this regard is also a judgment of Madhya Pradesh High
 Court in
Irfan @ Imran @ Chhotu vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh
,
 2016 SCC Online MP 10624, wherein it was held as under:-
"5. The impugned order has been challenged on behalf of
      learned counsel for the petitioners mainly on the grounds
      that the trial Court had dismissed their application mainly
      on the ground that the petitioners had ample opportunity to
      cross-examine aforesaid two witnesses and they were
      indeed extensively cross-examined and the Act seeks to
      protect the victims of the sexual offences from undue
      harassment under the garb of cross-examination. However,
      it has no where observed in the impugned order that further
      cross-examination on the points raised by the petitioners is
      not necessary for just decision of the case.
6.
In the case of
A.G. v. Shiv Kumar Yadav
, (2016) 2 SCC
      402 : AIR 2015 SC 3501, the Supreme Court has held that
      where the accused had appointed a counsel of his choice,
      and the earlier counsel was given due opportunity and had
      duly conducted cross-examination, accused persons were
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 17 of 32
under no handicap. No finding could be recorded that the
      counsel appointed by the accused earlier were incompetent,
      particularly behind the back of such counsel. Expeditious
      trial in a heinous offence as is involved in the present case,
      is in the interests of justice. The Court has to keep in mind
      not only the need for giving fair opportunity to the accused
      but also the need for ensuring that the victim of the crime is
      not unduly harassed. Mere change in counsel cannot be
      ground to recall witnesses.
7.
In the backdrop of aforesaid legal position as enunciated
      by the Supreme Court in the case of
Shiv Kumar
(supra), the
      provisions of the
Protection of Children from Sexual
      Offences Act, 2012
may also be profitably referred to as
      both the witnesses sought to be recalled for further cross-
      examination after having once already undergone grueling
      cross-examination, are child witnesses. Sub-
sections 2
to
7
of
section 33
of the Act read as hereunder:
Section 33
. Procedure and powers of Special Court
            (2) The Special Public Prosecutor, or as the case may
            be, the counsel appearing for the accused shall, while
            recording the examination-in-chief, cross-examination
            or re-examination of the child, communicate the
            questions to be put to the child to the Special Court
            which shall in turn put those questions to the child.
            (3) The Special Court may, if it considers necessary,
            permit frequent breaks for the child during the trial.
            (4) The Special Court shall create a child-friendly
            atmosphere by allowing a family member, a guardian,
            a friend or a relative, in whom the child has trust or
            confidence, to be present in the court.
(5) The Special Court shall ensure that the child is not
            called repeatedly to testify in the court.
            (6) The Special Court shall not permit aggressive
            questioning or character assassination of the child and
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 18 of 32
ensure that dignity of the child is maintained at all
            times during the trial.
(7) The Special Court shall ensure that the identity of
            the child is not disclosed at any time during the course
            of investigation or trial:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
            Special Court may permit such disclosure, if in its
            opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the child.
            Explanation.-- For the purposes of this sub-section, the
            identity of the child shall include the identity of the
            child's family, school, relatives, neighbourhood or any
            other information by which the identity of the child may
            be revealed.
8. It is clear from aforesaid provisions that the legislature
      seeks to protect a child witness who is victim of an offence
      under the Act and Courts are duty-bound to ensure that the
      child witness who is victim of an offence under the Act is not
      repeatedly called to the Court to prevent harassment."
19. In the background of these judgments I may now examine the
 impugned order passed by the trial Court. The trial Court has recorded a
 finding that PW-1 was cross examined at length by the counsel for the
 Petitioner and an effective and fair opportunity of cross examination of
 the victim was given to the defence. It observed that the victim aged 7
 years was cross examined effectively by the counsel for the accused on
 09.08.2019, on which date she was examined from 11:30 am to 01:10
 pm and thereafter again from 2:05 pm to 03:49 pm and thus cross
 examined at length. It also observed that the order passed earlier, by
 which certain questions were disallowed during cross examination of the
 victim, was not challenged by the accused and under the guise of the
 application for recall, the Petitioner could not be permitted to do what
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 19 of 32
was disallowed by the predecessor court. Trial Court records that the
 cross examination conducted by the Petitioner reveals that all relevant
 and legal questions were allowed to be put to PW-1 by the defence.
 Certain questions were disallowed as they were not age appropriate. The
 victim being barely 7 years of age, it was the responsibility of the Court
 to see that the child victim of sexual abuse was not harassed or confused
 by posing questions which she was unable to understand due to her
 tender age and were otherwise not material to the defence of the accused.
 Trial Court has also given a finding that the accused is not prejudiced
 due to the questions that were disallowed. Counsel was allowed to bring
 out the contradictions/omissions in the testimony of the child victim with
 her statement recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C and
Section 164
Cr.P.C. Having so observed and found as a matter of record that enough
 opportunity was given for cross examination including confrontation of
 the victim with the earlier statements as also that the child had been
 extensively cross examined, the trial Court keeping in mind the
 provisions of
Section 33 (5)
of POCSO Act and the intent behind the
 enactment of the Section, exercised its discretion and rejected the
 application.
20. This Court does not find any infirmity with the said observations
 and finding, once ample opportunity has been given to the Petitioner to
 cross examine the child victim. In fact having perused the evidence, I
 find that the record substantiates the stand of the learned APP that the
 defence counsel indeed extensively cross examined PW-1. Thus this
 Court does not find any reason to permit the Petitioner to recall the child
 witness who is barely 7 years of age. I am fortified in my view by a
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 20 of 32
judgment of a Coordinate Bench in
Jaidev vs. State
in Crl M.C.
 4412/2019 and
Bimla Devi vs. GNCTD
, 2017 SCC Online Del 11425.
21. In so far as the judgments relied upon by the counsel for the
 Petitioner are concerned suffice would be to state that there cannot be a
 debate on the proposition enunciated in the said judgments that the
 power of the Court to recall a witness is discretionary and there is no
 gain saying that in the interest of a fair trial as and when necessary the
 Court may permit recall of a witness. However, the discretion under
Section 311
Cr.P.C would have to be balanced with the provisions of
Section 33 (5)
of POCSO Act, in the interest of the child witness so that
 she does not have to relive the trauma by subjecting her to appearing in
 Courts for repeated testimonies and volley of questions at the hand of the
 accused. Counsel for the Petitioner has been unable to point out any law
 that mandates the trial Court to recall a child victim for cross
 examination in a trial under
POCSO Act
, where the defence has
 extensively cross examined the child victim. The judgments relied upon
 are on the general provisions of
Section 311
Cr.PC and peculiar to the
 facts of the cases therein.
22. At this stage it is also important to examine the exact nature of
 relief sought by the Petitioner in his application under
Section 311
Cr.P.C. Paras 2 & 3 of the application are as follows:-
"2. The applicant was denied the right to confront PW-1
        with her previous statements such as complaint/FIR,
        statement under
section 161
and
164
of CrPC. The same is
        a right which flows from
section 145
,
155(3)
of the Indian
        Evidence Act and denial of the same by this Hon‟ble Court
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 21 of 32
has created an apprehension that the accused is not
        receiving a fair trial.
3. This Hon‟ble Court did not permit the counsel for the
        applicant to ask questions which would squarely fall
        within the scope of section 146(1) of the IEA. The counsel
        was prevented from testing the memory of the witness on
        the possible understanding that fact stated in the
        examination-in-chief are the gospel truth. It is humble
        submitted that it is well settle principle of law that scope of
        cross-examination is not limited to the examination-in-
        chief and to expose falsity and tutoring of child witness,
        the counsel is well within his right to test witness-memory
        and his/her veracity by putting them from which already
        have been stated in examination-in-chief. This right was
        denied. As a result several others questions on similar
        lines within the parameters of aforesaid sections could not
        be asked."
23. Keeping this in the background it is suffice to state that the exact
 issue had come up for consideration before the Supreme Court in
 Tahsildar Singh (supra). The controversy in the said case can be
 reflected by extracting para 6 of the judgment as under:-
"6. Learned counsel for the appellants raised before us the
        following points: (1)(a)
Section 162
of the Code of
        Criminal Procedure by its own operation attracts the
        provisions of
Section 145
of the Evidence Act and under
        the latter section, the whole vista of cross-examination on
        the basis of the previous statement in writing made by the
        witnesses before the police is open to the accused; to
        illustrate the contention: a witness can be asked whether
        he made a particular statement before the police officer; if
        he says "yes", the said assertion can be contradicted by
        putting to him an earlier statement which does not contain
        such a statement. (1)(b). The word "contradiction" is of
        such wide connotation that it takes in all material
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                           Page 22 of 32
omissions and a court can decide whether there is one
        such omission as to amount to contradiction only after the
        question is put, answered and the relevant statement or
        part of it is marked, and, therefore, no attempt should be
        made to evolve a workable principle, but the question must
        be left at large to be decided by the Judge concerned on
        the facts of each case. (2) The High Court erred in holding
        that only two questions were intended to be put in cross-
        examination to the prosecution witnesses whereas the
        advocate for the accused intended to put to the witnesses
        many other omissions to establish that there was
        development in the prosecution case from time to time but
        refrained from doing so in obedience to the considered
        order made by the learned Sessions Judge. (3) Even if only
        two questions were illegally disallowed, as it was not
        possible to predicate the possible effect of the cross-
        examination of the witnesses on the basis of their answers
        to the said questions on their reliability, it should be held
        that the accused had no opportunity to have an effective
        cross-examination of the witnesses and therefore they had
        no fair trial. (4) The learned Judges committed an
        illegality in testing the credibility of the witnesses other
        than the witness who gave the first information report by
        the contents of the said report."
24. After considering at length the provisions of
Section 162
Cr.P.C. as
 also the historic retrospective of the Section, the Supreme Court
 observed as follows:-
"16. The object of the main section as the history of its
        legislation shows and the decided cases indicate is to
        impose a general bar against the use of statement made
        before the police and the enacting clause in clear terms
        says that no statement made by any person to a police
        officer or any record thereof, or any part of such statement
        or record, be used for any purpose. The words are clear
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 23 of 32
and unambiguous. The proviso engrafts an exception on
        the general prohibition and that is, the said statement in
        writing may be used to contradict a witness in the manner
        provided by
Section 145
of the Evidence Act. We have
        already noticed from the history of the section that the
        enacting clause was mainly intended to protect the
        interests of accused. At the state of investigation,
        statements of witnesses are taken in a haphazard manner.
        The police officer in the course of his investigation finds
        himself more often in the midst of an excited crowd and
        babel of voices raised all round. In such an atmosphere,
        unlike that in a court of law, he is expected to hear the
        statements of witnesses and record separately the
        statement of each one of them. Generally he records only a
        summary of the laments which appear to him to be
        relevant. These statements are, therefore only a summary
        of what a witness says and very often perfunctory. Indeed,
        in view of the aforesaid facts, there is a statutory
        prohibition against police officers taking the signature of
        the person making the statement, indicating thereby that
        the statement is not intended to be binding on the witness
        or an assurance by him that it is a correct statement.
17. At the same time, it being the earliest record of the
        statement of a witness soon after the incident, any
        contradiction found therein would be of immense help to
        an accused to discredit the testimony of a witness making
        the statement. The section was, therefore, conceived in an
        attempt to find a happy via media, namely, while it enacts
        an absolute bar against the statement made before a police
        officer being used for any purpose whatsoever, it enables
        the accused to rely upon it for a limited purpose of
        contradicting a witness in the manner provided by
Section
        145
of the Evidence Act by drawing his attention to parts
        of the statement intended for contradiction. It cannot be
        used for corroboration of a prosecution or a defence
        witness or even a court witness. Nor can it be used for
        contradicting a defence or a court witness. Shortly stated,
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 24 of 32
there is a general bar against its use subject to a limited
        exception in the interest of the accused, and the exception
        cannot obviously be used to cross the bar.
18. If the provisions of the section are construed in the
        aforesaid background, much of the difficulty raised
        disappears. Looking at the express words used in the
        section, two sets of words stand out prominently which
        afford the key to the intention of the legislature. They are:
"statement in writing", and "to contradict". "Statement"
in its dictionary meaning is the act of stating or reciting.
        Prima facie a statement cannot take in an omission. A
        statement cannot include that which is not stated. But very
        often to make a statement sensible or self-consistent, it
        becomes necessary to imply words which are not actually
        in the statement. Though something is not expressly stated,
        it is necessarily implied from what is directly or expressly
        stated..."
19. "Contradict"        according       to      the Oxford
        Dictionary means to affirm to the contrary.
Section 145
of
        the Evidence Act indicates the manner in which
        contradiction is brought out. The cross-examining counsel
        shall put the part or parts of the statement which affirms
        the contrary to what is stated in evidence. This indicates
        that there is something in writing which can be set against
        another statement made in evidence. If the statement
        before the police officer -- in the sense we have indicated
-- and the statement in the evidence before the court are
        so inconsistent or irreconcilable with each other that both
        of them cannot coexist, it may be said that one contradicts
        the other.
*                        *                        *
22. As Section 162 of the Code Criminal Procedure
        enables the prosecution in the re-examination to rely upon
        any part of the statement used by the defence to contradict
        a witness, it is contended that the construction of the
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 25 of 32
section accepted by us would lead to an anomaly, namely,
        that the accused cannot ask the witness a single question,
        which does not amount to contradiction whereas the
        prosecution, taking advantage of a single contradiction
        relied upon by the accused, can re-examine the witness in
        regard to any matter referred to in his cross-examination,
        whether it amounts to a contradiction or not. I do not think
        there is any anomaly in the situation.
Section 145
of the
        Evidence Act deals with cross-examination in respect of a
        previous statement made by the witness. One of the modes
        of cross-examination is by contradicting the witness by
        referring him to those parts of the writing which are
        inconsistent with his present evidence. Section 162, while
        confining the right to the accused to cross-examine the
        witness in the said manner, enables the prosecution to re-
        examine the witness to explain the matters referred to in
        the cross-examination. This enables the prosecution to
        explain the alleged contradiction by pointing out that if a
        part of the statement used to contradict be read in the
        context of any other part, it would give a different
        meaning; and if so read, it would explain away the alleged
        contradiction. We think that the word "cross-examination
        „in the last line of the first proviso to
Section 162
of the
        Code of Criminal Procedure cannot be understood to
        mean the entire gamut of cross-examination without
        reference to the limited scope of the proviso, but should be
        confined only to the cross-examination by contradiction
        allowed by the said proviso.
*                          *                         *
25. From the foregoing discussion the following
        propositions emerge: (1) A statement in writing made by a
        witness before a police officer in the course of
        investigation can be used only to contradict his statement
        in the witness box and for no other purpose; (2) statements
        not reduced to writing by the police officer cannot be used
        for contradiction; (3) though a particular statement is not
        expressly recorded, a statement that can be deemed to be
        part of that expressly recorded can be used for
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 26 of 32
contradiction, not because it is an omission strictly so-
        called but because it is deemed to form part of the
        recorded statement; (4) such a fiction is permissible by
        construction only in the following three cases: (i) when a
        recital is necessarily implied from the recital or recitals
        found in the statement; illustration: in the recorded
        statement before the police the witness states that he saw A
        stabbing B at a particular point of time, but in the witness
        box he says that he saw A and C stabbing B at the same
        point of time; in the statement before the police the word
        "only" can be implied i.e. the witness saw A only stabbing
        B; (ii) a negative aspect of a positive recital in a
        statement: illustration in the recorded statement before the
        police the witness says that a dark man stabbed B, but in
        the witness box he says that a fair man stabbed B; the
        earlier statement must be deemed to contain the recital not
        only that the culprit was a dark complexioned man but
        also that he was not of fair complexion; and (iii) when the
        statement before the police and that before the court
        cannot stand together: illustration: the witness says in the
        recorded statement before the police that A after stabbing
        B ran away by a northern lane, but in the court he says
        that immediately after stabbing he ran away towards the
        southern lane; as he could not have run away immediately
        after the stabbing i.e. at the same point of time, towards
        the northern lane as well as towards the southern lane, if
        one statement is true, the other must necessarily be false.
26. The aforesaid examples are not intended to be
        exhaustive but only illustrative. The same instance may fall
        under one or more heads. It is for the trial Judge to decide
        in each case, after comparing the part or parts of the
        statement recorded by the police with that made in the
        witness box, to give a ruling, having regard to the
        aforesaid principles, whether the recital intended to be
        used for contradiction satisfies the requirements of law.
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 27 of 32
27. The next point is what are the omissions in the
        statement before the police which the learned Sessions
        Judge did not allow the accused to put to the witnesses for
        contradicting their present version. The learned counsel
        for the appellants contends that the accused intended to
        put to the witnesses the following omissions, but they did
        not do so as the learned Sessions Judge disallowed the two
        questions put to PW 30 and made a considered order
        giving his reasons for doing so, and that the learned
        counsel thought it proper not to put the same questions or
        other questions in regard to omissions to PW 30 or to the
        other witnesses that followed him. The said omissions to
        are: (1) The warning by the members of the gang on their
        arrival to the audience at the music party not to stir from
        their places; (2) the presence of a gas lantern; (3) the
        chase of Bharat Singh by the assailants; (4) the scrutiny of
        the dead bodies by the gang; and (5) the return of the gang
        in front of the house of Bankey. The learned counsel for
        the respondent contests this fact and argues that only two
        omissions, namely, the presence of a gas lantern and the
        scrutiny of the dead bodies by the gang, were put in the
        cross-examination of PW 30 and no other omissions were
        put to him or any other witness, and that indeed the order
        of the learned Sessions Judge did not preclude him from
        putting all the omissions to the witnesses and taking the
        decision of the Judge on the question of their admissibility.
        He further contends that even before the learned Judges of
        the High Court, the advocate for the appellants only made
        a grievance of his not having been allowed to put the
        aforesaid two omissions and did not argue that he intended
        to rely upon other omissions but did not do so as he
        thought that the learned Sessions Judge would disallow
        them pursuant to his previous order. Before the High
        Court an application was filed for summoning eight
        eyewitnesses on the ground that the learned Sessions
        Judge did not allow the counsel for defence to put the
        omissions amounting to material contradiction to them,
        but no mention was made in that application of the number
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 28 of 32
of omissions which the accused intended to put to the
        eyewitnesses if they were summoned. That application was
        filed on 1-5-1957, but no attempt was made to get a
        decision on that application before the arguments were
        heard. Presumably, the court as well as the parties thought
        that the application could more conveniently be disposed
        of after hearing the arguments. On 30-7-1957 i.e. after the
        appellants were fully heard, that application was
        dismissed and the detailed reasons for dismissing it were
        given in the judgment, which was delivered on 11-9-1957.
        The judgment of the learned Judges of the High Court
        clearly indicates that what was argued before then was
        that two omissions sought to be put to PW 30 were
        disallowed and therefore the accused did not put the said
        omissions to the other witnesses. It was not contended on
        behalf of the accused that other omissions were intended to
        be used for contradiction, but were not put to the witnesses
        as the advocate thought that in view of the order of the
        learned Sessions Judge they would not be allowed
        automatically. The learned Judges held that the said two
        omissions amounted to material contradiction and that the
        learned Sessions Judge was wrong in disallowing them,
        but they ignored those two circumstances and based their
        findings on matters of greater certainly. If really the
        Judges had made a mistake in appreciating the arguments
        of the learned counsel for the appellants in the context of
        omissions, one would expect the accused to mention the
        said fact prominently in their application for special leave.
        Even if they omitted to mention that fact in the application
        for special leave, they could have filed an affidavit sworn
        to by the advocate, who appeared for them before the
        learned Judges of the High Court, mentioning the fact that
        in spite of the argument specifically directed to the other
        omissions the learned Judges by mistake or oversight
        failed to notice that argument. The learned counsel who
        argued before us did not argue before the High Court,
        and, therefore, obviously he is not in a position to assert
        that the Judges committed a mistake in omitting to
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 29 of 32
consider the argument advanced before them. But he made
        strenuous attempts before us to persuade us to hold that
        there must have been a mistake. He would say that the
        learned counsel had in fact relied upon all the aforesaid
        omissions in support of his contention that there was
        development of the case of the prosecution from time to
        time and therefore he must have also relied upon the said
        omissions in the context of the statements made under
Section 162
of the Code of Criminal Procedure; on the
        other hand, the fact that the learned Judges considered all
        the alleged omissions in connection with the said
        contention and only considered two omissions in regard to
        the contention based on Section 162 of the Code is
        indicative of the fact that the learned counsel, for reasons
        best known to him, did not think fit to rely upon all the
        alleged omissions. The deposition of PW 30 also shows
        that only two omissions in the statement before the police
        viz. the existence of a gas-lantern and the scrutiny of the
        dead bodies by the gang, were put to him in cross-
        examination and the learned Sessions Judge disallowed
        those questions on the ground that the learned counsel was
        not able to show any law entitling him to put the said
        questions. Though the witness was examined at some
        length, no other alleged omissions in the statement before
        the police were sought to be put to him. It would be seen
        from the short order made by the learned Sessions Judge
        at the time each one of the two questions were put, that the
        learned Sessions Judge did not give a general ruling that
        no omissions in a statement before the police could be put
        to a witness. The rulings were given, having regard to the
        nature of the omissions relied upon. But after the entire
        evidence of PW 30 was closed, the learned Sessions Judge
        gave a considered order. Even in that order, he did not
        rule out all omissions as inadmissible, but clearly
        expressed the view that if what was stated in the witness
        box was irreconcilable with what was omitted to be stated
        in the statement, it could go in as material contradiction.
        Even after this order, it was open to the appellants to bring
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 30 of 32
out all such omissions, but no attempt was made by them
        to do so. These circumstances also support the impression
        of the learned Judges of the High Court that what was
        argued before them was only in respect of the two
        specified omissions put to PW 30 in his cross-examination.
        We, therefore, hold that only two omissions relating to the
        existence of the gas-lantern and the scrutiny of the faces of
        the deceased by the appellants were put to PW 30 and
        were intended to be put to the other witnesses, but were
        not so done on the basis of the ruling given by the court."
25. In the light of the aforesaid judgement I may state at the cost of
 repetition that no doubt
Section 311
Cr.P.C. gives the power to the Court
 to recall any witness to serve the ends of justice, however, the said
 Section in my view would be subject to
Section 33 (5)
of POCSO Act on
 the principle of generalia specialibus non-derogant. As held by the Trial
 Court and rightly so, the child victim was extensively examined for
 several hours and any recall at this stage would fall foul of the provisions
 of
Section 33 (5)
and the intent behind enacting the Section. It is equally
 true that Courts have to balance the conflicting rights and claims and do
 substantial justice by permitting the Accused to cross-examine in a given
 case but the Court cannot lose site of the facts of the present case which
 are different inasmuch as even after extensive cross-examination the
 counsel for the Petitioner did not elicit which according to him he now
 wants to ask in cross-examination.
26. At this stage I may again usefully allude to the judgement of the
 Supreme Court in
Shiv Kumar Yadav
(supra) relied upon by both sides.
 Court held that where the accused had appointed a counsel of his choice,
 who was given due opportunity and had duly conducted the cross-
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                         Page 31 of 32
examination, the accused persons were under no handicap. No finding
 could be recorded that the counsel appointed were incompetent.
 Likewise in the present case it is not the case of the Petitioner that the
 counsel appointed by him was not available or was incompetent or
 disabled in any manner from carrying out effective cross-examination.
 Record in fact speaks to the contrary and is pointer to an extensive cross-
 examination of PW-1 by the Petitioner.
27. For all the aforesaid reasons the Petitioner cannot succeed and the
 petition is dismissed being devoid of merits. Pending application is also
 dismissed.
JYOTI SINGH, J

OCTOBER 19th , 2020
sr/yo
Crl. M.C. 1615/2020                                        Page 32 of 32
